TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING: 1I /I 2 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l357)

..,......,.........,...I......

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1
1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) , . . . . ,
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) , . . , . . . , . , , . ,
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . I . . + . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . . . , . . . . . , . . . . a . . + , . . a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.1357.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

RED AND FIFTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

eld in New York on Sunday, II June 1967, at 10.30 pm.
President: Mr. Mans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Wepresentative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. addressed to the President of the
Security Eouncil (S/791 0)

fieesent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed
to the President of the Security Council concerning an
item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the
territory of the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria
which they have seized as the result of an aggression”’
(S/7967)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1357)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Repres-

entatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

1. The .PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of IsraeI,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

3. Complaint

of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Repres-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Korzy (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J.
M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. AI-Shaheen (Kuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them.

entative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Pprmanent Repres-

entative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: ‘Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

2. The PRESIDENT: In response to the request of the
representative of Syria contained in document S/7973, and
in accordance with the Council’s understanding that a11
members would hold themselves available should developments necessitate an urgent meeting, I consulted the
members of the Council and convened this meeting on
short notice.

Adoption of the agenda
The ugerzdn was adopted.

3. The Security Council will now continue its discussion
of the four items inscribed on its agenda. But before I call
upon the first speaker on my list, I wish to call attention to
the fact that supplemental information received by the
Secretary-General since our last meeting is contained in
document S/7930/Add.3 dated 11 June, which has been
circulated to the Council.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peaceand security” (S/7907)

4. Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I would
ask the Secretary-General to make a statement, since he has
received additional information.
1

therefore, is unavoidably limited to their observation on I1
June, that is, today.

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have received three
messages from General Bull this evening which are not to be
found in the supplemental information
paper which is
before the Council and which you have just mentioned, Mr.
President, namely, document S/7930/Add.3. All three of
them relate to the question of the Israel tank column
moving out of Rabid. I had sent to General Bull and to the
Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission
at Damascus three cables seeking urgent information on this
matter.

10; The key point in connexion with the observanceof
the cease-fire is the question of whether the Israel troops
were in Rand and environs before 1630 hours GMT on IO
June, or whether they have advanced to that sector after
the time fixed for the cease-fire to go into effect, T.hat is
the end of my report.
11. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the representative
of Syria, I call on the representative of Mali on a point of
order.

6. The three messages from General Bull are as follows.
The first message, received from General Bull at 1906 hours
New York time today, reads:

12. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): After
first apologizing to the representative of Syria, I should like
to refer to, chapter VIII, rule 41 of the provisional rules of
procedure and to express my surprise at the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report, on which we are entitled to base
ourselves when we participate in the Council’s debates,has
not yet been circulated in French. My delegation insists, in
conformity with chapter VIII, rule 41, of the provi!sional
rules of procedure, that the Secretary-General’s report
should be circulated in French as soon as possible; I s:hould
be grateful to the Secretariat if that could be done,

“We are waiting for a report from Damascus and will
inform you immediately upon receipt.”
7. The second message, received from General Bull at
2032 hours New York time today, reads:
“Hereby report just received from Damascus:
“ ‘1. Approximately 0950 hours GMT today, 11 June,
United Nations military observer teams UN.203, UN-l 50,
UN-77, UN-147, UN-85 and UN-142 were proceeding
from Sheikh Me&me’-the
maps have been distributed to
the members of the Council, and the name of this village
is given on the map-‘and Naqoua towards Rabid’-those
names are also given on the map-‘with
a view to
establishing mobile observation posts in the Kuneitra
area. At Rabid the road was blocked by the Israel Defence
Force. The United Nations military observers of all these
teams reported that the Israel forces included numerous
tanks.’

13. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated fvom Frtwch):
While I fully appreciate the Secretariat’s difficulties iin the
present circumstances, I associate myself, for obvious
reasons, with the request of the representative of Mali. I
would take the liberty of adding that a translation into
French, or into language intelligible to an ordinary diplo.
mat who has missed some hours of sleep, is all the more
necessary because the Secretary-General’s paper
(S/7930/Add.3, English text) contains a certsin number of
expressions which require some explanation, or even
perhaps translation, I need not labour the point; you will
find them. For example, on the first page there are terms
such as “sitreps”, “TCC”, “IDF”, “lmg”, “smg”, and so
forth.

“ ‘2. At 1539 hours GMT, United Nations military
observer teams 203 and 150 reported that they could
observe two or three tanks in front of Joukada village.‘This village is also shown on the map, where it is spelled
it is in a south-westerly direction from
“Joukhadar”;
Rabid. The message continues:-‘They
also reported that
on a ridge in front of this village a column of tanks was
heading in an easterly direction and afterwards turning in
a southerly direction,’ ”

14. On this occasion I should like to have my remarks
interpreted.
15, The PRESIDENT: A point of order has been raised by
the representative of Mali and supported by the repre
sentative of France with reference to rule 41.

8. The third message, received from General Bull at 2036
hours New York time, is as follows:

16. I would also refer the representative to rule 46, which
reads as follows:

“By telephone on 11 June, 2330 hours GMT,
Mr, Sasson”-of the Israel Foreign Office-“informed
me
that he had received a message from New York containing
a complaint of Syrian sources concerning troop movements around Rabid. This allegation he said had been
checked with all forces and with the front commander.
The front was quiet. He said that there was no advance
anywhere on the front. This allegation was completely
baseless.”

“All resolutions and other important documents shall
forthwith be made available in the official languages.”
17. Furthermore, in accordance with rule 26: iLTl~e
Secretary-General shall be responsible for the preparation
of documents required by the Security Council . . ,” I
should like to ask the Secretary-General when it will be
possible to have the documents in question in the official
languages.

9. I have no other information on this matter at this time,
but it should be kept in mind that the United Nations
observers were not in that area on 10 June, and could not
proceed there until the morning of 11 June. Their report,

18. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In the absenceof mY
indication of a possible Security Council meeting this
afternoon, I had prepared this report, in the form of
2

supplemental information, some time this afternoon. It was
sent to the appropriate department for processing, transIation and distribution. Early this afternoon, I was under
the impression that both the English and the French texts
of this document would be available some time in the
course of this evening. As soon as I heard that: the Security
Council was to meet at 10.30 I checked with the translation
department and was informed that the French translation
would be ready at about midnight. So j am still under the
impression that the French version of my report will be
available within the next hour or so.
19. The PRESIDENT: With the agreement of the representatives of Mali and France, we shall proceed with our
discussion.
20. The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, on whom I now call.
21. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, I wish to thank
you and the members of the Council for having responded
to our appeal to hold this urgent emergency meeting of the
Security Council. I must say that in view of the fact that
today is Sunday, which is a day of rest, the inconvenience
that this meeting is causing to the members of the Council
and to you is undoubtedly great. But perhaps an excuse can
be found in the fact that the situation we are facing is
becoming graver and graver every day, and is deteriorating
to an extent which I am sure will not be accepted by the
Security Council.

She&h Meskine and Joukada to the South. Thus, we are
witnessing another step in the systematic Israel invasion in
order to occupy more land in Syria.
25. I do not want to take much of the Council’s time in
reviewing what we have witnessed so far, but allow me to
remind the members of the Council that when we asked for
emergency meetings-this is the third such emergency
meeting-we submitted facts to the Council about the
systematic invasion of Syria, the occupation of Kuneitra
and the bombing of Damascus. All those facts were denied
time and again by the Israel representative and then all of
them were confirmed by reports which were received from
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organjzation and
from the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission. I
would not be at all surprised if the Israel representative
were to say today “I deny categorically the allegations of
the Syrian representative”. In case that is done, the answer
is already before the Security Council. Israel forces, in
violation of the cease-fire which has been called for in three
resolutions so far adopted by the Security Council, have
advanced from Rabid, which was also occupied after the
cease-fire, to the south and east, as reproduced on the map
which is before members.
26. The choice of today, Sunday, for this further step in
the Israel conquest is quite significant. Since this afternoon
I have been trying to contact members of the United
Nations Secretariat who are in charge of this aspect of the
problem and also you, Mr.President, and we have been
faced with the fact that communication with General Odd
Bull in Jerusalem was difficult due to the fact that it has to
go through Geneva, and the Geneva communication office
is closed on Sunday.

22. Mr. President, I liave been in contact with you and
with the Under-Secretary during the day, following upon
information which I received directly from Damascus. The
fact of the matter, as I stated in my letter to you of 11
June, is the following; I shall read paragraphs 1 and 2 of
that letter:

27. It appears from the report of the Secretary-General
that there is still difficulty-at least that is what I gather
from reading the report of the Secretary-General, which we
received as we were on our way here (it of course could not
have been issued before). Communication with General Bull
is difficult because, secondly, the Israel authorities are not
providing all facilities for the observers to perform their
tasks and their duties.

“At 3 o’clock p.m. today, we received a telephone call
from our Minister for Foreign Affairs in Damascus,
informing us that a column of Israel armoured cars and
tanks supported by military helicopters and other forces
has moved, at 18 hours local time, eastward and
southward from Rabid, which was occupied yesterday
three hours and seventeen minutes after the cease-fire,
and occupied new sites and localities where fighting did
not take place previously,

28. I also wish to note in this connexion that this new
advance is important in this respect: If one looks at the
map, one sees that this drive is aimed at the Yarmuk River
and the headwaters of the Yarmuk. On previous occasions
during meetings of this Council, I have explained the
problem of the waters and how the Israelis have systematically tried to occupy all the parts where the headwaters
of the Jordan are. The Yarmuk is one of the largest, if not
the largest, tributary of the Jordan River.

“The United Nations observers were immediately informed of this new violation and an investigation was
requested. Accordingly they attempted to reach the areas
where these violations took place, but the Israel forces of
occupation prevented them from discharging their duties
and even from approaching the areas involved.”

29. As I said, the situation is graver than seems to have
been realized so far. What we described as an invasion is
being proved each day to be a systematic invasion in
accordance with plans that have been fully drawn up.

[S/7973. /
23. The report submitted by the Secretary-General con-

firms that one Syrian liaison officer who was accompanying
‘one of the United Nations military observer teams from
Damascus was taken prisoner, and that after their intervention with the Israel authorities, that officer wasreleased.

30. In view of those developments which I have placed
before the Council and in view especially of the contempt
of the Israel authorities for the United Nations, the
Security Council and its resolutions, particularly the last
three resolutions concerning a cease-fire-which have been

24. From the map distributed by the Secretary-General,
the places where Israel forces have been seen are Naqoua,
3

violated-l
think that it is time, and high time, for the
Security Council to take some action.

operating. I think this is confirmed also by General Bull ia
his dispatches.

3 1. The Israel authorities are treating the Security Council
with contempt, and I believe that this situation should not
be accepted or tolerated. Therefore, action is demanded.
The action should first aim at stopping this invasion from
proceeding further than it already has, especially in view of
Security Council resolution 235 (1967) calling for the
cessation of all military activities. Secondly, it is time for
the Council to condemn violations of the cease-fire. If those
violations have been proved, to be silent about them and to
condone them can only be interpreted as an acceptance of
them. This is a situation that challenges the Security
Council as the organ charged with the task of safeguarding
peace and security whenever peace and security are
threatened. Therefore, if a violation is proved beyond any
doubt-and I think I have presented to the Council so far a
sufficient number of violations to warrant the condemnation of the Israel authorities-I think the Council should
proceed without any further delay to prevent a further
aggravation of the situation by condemning those who are
violating the cease-fire. Thirdly, if these violations are
established, and they are established, the violator should be
called back to his place. To put it more clearly, the
violator should undo his violation by withdrawing to the
points from which his conquest started.

38. A number of Syrian liaison officers were apprehended
yesterday and today, and I am glad to confirm that they
have been released. Indication of that is also to be found h
General Bull’s report.
39. My Government has given full facilities to the United
Nations observers to reach the truce line, and the requested
number of United Nations observer teams is stationed along
the line and is deployed in accordance with instructions
from the Chief of Staff of UNTSQ.
40. Those are the facts available to me and they point out
that the cease-fire is fully respected, that it is in force and
that, on the side of Israel, everything is done to Ikeep the
cease-fire in good working order and to facilitate the work
of the United Nations observers and the Chief of Staff in
ensuring that the cease-fire is fully observed and respected.
41. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Rcpublics) (translated from Russiaiz): Mr. President, today the
Security Council is again holding an emergency meeting, at
the request of the representative of Syria, in connexion
with a further flagrant violation by Tel-Aviv of the Security
Council’s resolutions and the agreement on the cessationof
military activities.

32. I believe that at this time we should avoid discussion
that is not directly related to the points that I have raised
with regard to the action demanded by the Council, and
should face up to the grave situation in order to prevent
further deterioration.

42. Ambassador Tomeh, the representative of Syria, has
provided us with additional information on the aggressor’s
preparations for penetrating deep into Syrian territory. He
has drawn attention to the fact that Israel t,anks are
advancing in the area of the Syrian town of Joukada.

33. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, to whom I now give the floor.

43. The Soviet delegation is obliged once again to make a
most vigorous protest against Israel’s treacherous a.ggressive
acts against the Syrian Arab Republic, Tel-Aviv’s criminal
acts are evidence not of an accidental violation of the
Security Council’s decisions but of a systematic and
premeditated violation. The Israel interventionists are acting more and more arrogantly, and are revealing more and
more frankly the aggressive nature of Tel-Aviv’s po;licies.

34. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I am glad to oblige the representative of Syria and to supply the information which is
available to me on the matters raised by him and in the
report
submitted
by the Secretary-General
[S/793O/Add. 3/.
35. With respect to military movements in the Rafid area,
I can state now that there was a movement of some military
vehicles, but that movement took place within the truce
lines. There was no advance beyond the truce lines
established by the cease-fire yesterday, 10 June, at 1630
hours GMT. My Government is in constant touch with
General Bull and has suggested to him, even at this hour
again, to send observers 10 the spot, in case they are not
there, and to verify that our forces are respecting the line
which was established yesterday at the hour when the
cease-fire went into effect.

44. Thus, as we have already emphasized, ruling circlesin
Israel are making a scandalous mockery of th: United
Nations and of the Security Council and its decM.ons.The
Council cannel: remain inactive, and it has no right to do so.
It must call the high-handed aggressor to order and force
him to ceasehis military activities forthwith.
45. The Secretary-General’s report [S/793O/Add.3] UNtains irrefutable evidence that Israel has made eve’ry effort
to prevent the United Nations observers on the spot from
discharging their functions and thereby providing the
Security Council with information on what is actually
happening. This in itself-and particularly the Israel authorities’ refusal to grant the United Nations observersfreedon)
of movement-shows that Israel is continuing its aggression
against the Syrian Arab Republic.

36. Furthermore, I want to point out that there is no
firing and no fighting whatsoever anywhere along the front
line, and that the cease-fire is being scrupulously observed.
37. Moreover, I wish to draw the attention of the Council
to some other matters connected with the situation with
which we are dealing. The Kuneitra control centre was
reopened with the co-operation of Israel authorities, United
Nations observers are in Kuneitra and the Centre is

46. From what the Secretary-General has just told usit is
clear that the United Nations observers have witnessed
movements by tank columns in the area in question. But, as
4

wasto be expected, Tel-Aviv-replying this time without a
moment’s delay-denied the fact that there had been any
further violation of the Security Council’s decision by
Israel’s occupation forces. This means that the Tel-Aviv
adventurers are continuing deliberately to misinform and
deceivethis important body.

South-East Asia? There too it is not only the towns which
are burning, but masses of completely innocent people are
being burnt to death as well. And that piratical war has
been going on for more than a year.
51. The Soviet Union brands the Israel aggressors with
anger and indignation. Tel-Aviv ‘s adventurism and demagogy are condemned by all peace-loving peoples. The
shameful gamble of the Israel representative, who is trying
by the most nefarious means and with the support of
Washington and certain other accomplices to ensure that
the Israel army can seize as much as possible of the
territory of the Arab States, has revealed the true intentions
of Tel-Aviv’s rulers for all the world to see.

47. Can this cynical defiance, this outrageous lie, be
tolerated? How long will this arrant perfidy and this
violation of the Security Council’s decisions continue?
How long will the representatives of those who are
protecting the international adventurers in Tel-Aviv continue their efforts here to sabotage and paralyse the work
of the Security Council, which is not in a position to take
the proper decision? Is not this situation alarming for the
members of the Council and for you, Sir, as you preside
over the Council at. the present time?

52. It was precisely for this reason that the Soviet
Government found it impossible to maintain diplomatic
relations with Israel, an aggressor country whose leaders
have a place waiting for them in the dock of the
international
tribunal. We should like to express the
conviction that all peoples and everyone to whom peace on
earth is dear, will support the joint statement by the
socialist countries on Israel’s aggression, will support the
actions of the Soviet State and will, by their combined
efforts, restrain the aggressor and all the instigators of war.

48. As members of the Council will recall, yesterday the
Council was discussing the question of the bombing of
Qamascus, the capital of Syria, by Israel aircraft; it
discussedthe fact that Israel’s armed forces were advancing
into Syrian territory and had occupied a considerable part
of that country’s territory, including the town of Kuneitra.
Members of the Council will also remember how the
representative of Tel-Aviv tried to deny certain indisputable
facts, how he shamelessly prevaricated and deliberately
tried to mislead the Security Council, and how-obviously
on instructions from Tel-Aviv rather than on his own
initiative, although he has plenty of ttmt-he tried to gain
time for the forces of aggression to carry out their criminal
plans. This deceit was exposed in the Council. The reports
submitted to the Council by the Secretary-General confirmed the fact of the bombing attacks on Damascus, and
also the fact that Israel’s armed hordes had penetrated deep
into Syrian territory. Yet today the Israel representative is
still trying to resort to the same devices; with the same
effrontery he is still denying that Israel’s armed forces have
violated the Security Council’s decisions and are preparing
to commit further violations.

53. The Soviet delegation calls upon the Security Council
to take decisive and immediate steps to ensure Israel’s
compliance with the resolutions which the Council has
adopted. Israel’s military activities and provocations must
be stopped forthwith. The aggressor must be condemned by
the Security Council.
54. The Soviet delegation is obliged to remind the Council
once again today that the Soviet Government requested the
Security Council to consider the question of the cessation
of military action by Israel and the withdrawal of the Israel
forces from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the
result of an aggression.

49. From several reports in the international Press it is
clear that Tel-Aviv is openly defying the United Nations
and the Security Council. Insults are being hurled at the
United Nations from that quarter, The Tel-Aviv adventurers
are no longer even troubling to conceal their expansionist
territorial claims; they are issuing ultimatums and cynically
declaring that Israel’s troops will not withdraw from the
Arab territory which they have seized as a result of their
aggression.General Moshe Dayan, of whom we have already
spoken here, is himself publicly boasting that the map of
the Near East will be redrawn and that the State of Israel
will have new frontiers. Moshe Dayan has said: “I cannot
remember one single problem that has been settled by
diplomacy or through the United Nations”.

55. It is our duty once again to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the draft resolution dated
8 June 1967 [S/79Sl/Rev.l]
which the Soviet delegation
has submitted for the Council’s consideration. We would
remind the Council that this draft resolution draws attention, inter alia, to the fact that Israel is not halting its
aggression and is thus defying the United Nations and all
peace-loving States. In the Soviet Union’s draft resolution it
is proposed that Israel’s aggressive activities and its violations of the Security Council’s resolutions, of the United
Nations Charter and of United Nations principles should be
vigorously condemned, The draft contains a demand that
Israel should immediately halt its military activities against
neighbouring Arab States and should remove all its troops
from the territory of those States and withdraw them
behind the armistice lines.

50. The extremists in Tel-Aviv are obviously following in
the criminal footsteps of their protectors. Imitating the
methods of other aggressors, their armed hordes are
resorting to means of mass destruction; they are using
napalm against the Arab States and bombing their capitals.
Doesthis not remind us that those who are encouraging and
helping the Israel aggressors are also savagely bombing the
capital and peaceful towns of another sovereign State in

56. The events of the past few days, including the events
occurring at this very moment, confirm the timeliness,
urgency and importance of the Soviet Union’s proposal. In
this connexion, we should like to emphasize that the
representatives of Bulgaria, India, Mali and the Arab
countries have in the Council already declared that the
5

Security Council cannot allow Israel to enjoy the fruits of
aggression. The demand that Israel should immediately and
unconditionally
withdraw its troops from the territory it
has seized from the United Arab Republic, Syria and
Jordan assumes special significance in the light of Tel-Aviv’s
outrageous aggressive and expansionist claims.

63. Now, it is at the moment in that part of the world, I
imagine, about dawn. It would be difficult, I suppose, to
expect any further report before we conclude our meeting
tonight; it would be difficult to expect the United Nations
observers to give us any further account while we are still
meeting.

57. The Soviet delegation takes the view that the Security
Council must do its duty in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. It must take the most vigorous measures
today, without any delay or procrastination, to safeguard
the independence, sovereignty and lawful rights of the Arab
States which are the victims of Israel’s aggression.

64. Therefore, I suggest that what we can do, what we
should do, and what we must do is to make absolutely
clear, tonight, now, that we insist that there should be no
breach whatsoever of the cease-fire. We should make it
perfectly clear-we have done this before, but I think we
should restate it-that if there were any breach, WI: in the
I Security Council would take the most serious and grave
58. We urgently call upon the members of the Council to i view of any such breach of any kind, and that we would
do their duty with full awareness of their responsibility at I not tolerate any advance beyond the points which wereset
this grave hour. In view of the situation which has : down in the arrangements, which were made by General
developed, the Security Council cannot simply adjourn this
Bull on our behalf. I think we should make that absolutely
meeting today without taking the necessary action to
clear and that that communication
should go to those
protect Syria,
concerned immediately.
59. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I think it is clear
to all of us that tonight we meet to deal with a specific and
limited problem. I am sure that we are all very conscious
that we have ahead of us tasks of enormous magnitude,
very great difficulty and indeed danger too. But I believe
that we would all recognize that we cannot hope to make
progress in dealing with those vast problems here and now.

65. 1 should like to take this opportunity of joining the
representative of France and others in expressing admiration for the work which is being done by General Bull in
circumstances of confusion and danger, and the speedwith
which he and the representative of the United Nations 011
the spot have acted, and the determined attempt they have
made, day and night, to bring to this Council the facts of
the situation. I would hope that all of us sharein a senseof
pride that the representatives of the United Nations have
not only achieved a cease-fire, but have quickly taken steps
to ensure that it is carried out.

60. Indeed, as I understand the statement of the Ambassador of Syria, he is directing our attention to a specific
report which has reached him from his Government today
and on which he wishes us to take immediate action; and as
I understand his request, he wishes us to deal with this, and
this alone, tonight. We shall have to turn our attention
tomorrow, or whenever we meet again, to other questions
of far greater consequence, but we need tonight to deal,
and deal as promptly as possible, with a specific demand.
And I believe it would be well that we should limit our
attention to the request which has been put to us.

66. I believe that we should have no difficulty in dealing
with this single and specific and highly important matter.
And subject to your views, Mr. President, and tho!;e of the
Council, I believe that if we were permitted a short
suspension, this is an occasion when we could unanimously
and by consensus come to conclusions which would be
absolutely clear and absolutely definite, and which could be
communicated-this
seems to me very important--to General Bull and to the parties immediately concerned, as
dawn nears on the approaches to Mount Carmel.

61. I would go on to say that I do not for one moment
doubt the importance of the matter which has been
brought to us tonight. We have worked for a week for a
cease-fire. We hope that we have achieved it. Anything
which jeopardized that cease-fire would be a matter of the
utmost gravity. I for one-and I am sure I speak for all
members of this Council-would be prepared to come here
at any time of the day or night, to take action to ensure
that what we have done is not frustrated or flouted.

67. I would not wish, of course, to prevent other speeches
if they are to be made, but I think that action is most
important. I believe that if we agree on a short suspension,
we might be able to take immediately the action which is
clearly required, and to communicate it at once to all
concerned. That is my suggestion.

62. Now we come to the actual report which has been
made to us, which could, I entirely agree, be most serious.
If the suggestion were that under cover of the cease-fire and
following the cease-fire agreement there had been an
advance to Sheik11 Meskine and Dara and the Yarmuk, this
would be a question which would require immediate and
drastic action by the Security Council. But at the same time
we must note what the representative of Israel has told us,
that there has been no advance beyond the cease-fire line.
And we must also note that the Secretary-General, through
his observers on the spot, has told us what he can tell us at
the moment, which does not go farther than the report we
have in front of us.

68. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
Kingdom has suggested a short suspension, but has not
made any formal motion.
69. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (transluted from French): The
Council has been meeting here day after day, and ni@lt
after night to discuss the serious situation now prevailing in
the Middle East. Yet, in spite of all these meetin,@, which
are being followed by the whole world, it is apparent that
the Council is not reaching any decision. In my delegation’s
view, this means that the Council is failing in its (duty, in a
manner unworthy of such an important body. Unhappily,
some occult force seems to be frustrating any attemPt to
6

reach a decision here. I am bound to state, with regret, that
this attitude on the part of the Council, at the moment of
such gravity and in the light of the deteriorating situation in
the Middle East, is not only shameful but unworthy of this
United Nations organ. For too long now we have been
offering the sorry spectacle of a body which is not
impotent, as some would have it, but is guilty of tacit
complicity in efforts to undermine the prestige of the
Council and of the United Nations.
70. As the hours and the days go by, Israel, taking
advantage of the surprise factor which has worked in its
favour since the outbreak of hostilities, is continuing its
advance into foreign territory. If the Council is waiting
until Israel has established itself by force in the territories
that it is conquering, so that negotiations can take place
between Israel and the occupied countries, then I understand the situation and that explains or might explain the
Council’s unpardonable inertia.
71. As for those who insist at all costs and against all
comers on maintaining their support for Israel, I wish to
tell them that they are not serving the cause of peace or
helping Israel by preventing the Council from taking a
decision regarding the proven violation of the cease-fire
decreed by the Security Council and accepted by the
parties to the conflict.
72. Is it really supposed that, if Israel were now to occupy
by force the territories into which it is advancing, it would
remain there indefinitely? Is it really supposed that Israel
would stay indefinitely in the territories which it is
occupying? Surely not. Everyone here knows that the
peoples over whose lands the Israel forces are advancing
today, whatever their present decisions and promises, will
never be able to accept this occupation by Israel as final.
And if the Council were to fail now to take the necessary
decision, it would be encouraging this state of affairs. Those
who think that it is possible to allow Israel to occupy
territories, and to give it a chance of remaining there are
living in a world of illusions. Not only are they living in a
world of illusions: they are accepting the fact that an
atmosphere of continuous war-and I emphasize the word
“continuous’‘-can easily be created in the Middle East.
73. It is time for the Council to come to a decision on the
basis of the reports provided by the Secretary-General. By
failing to make up its mind until now, on the spurious
pretext that there is insufficient evidence, the Council, I am
sorry to say, is making itself a laughing-stock, because it is
perfectly clear from the Secretary-General’s reports that
Israel has violated the cease-fire.
74. My delegation demands that Israel should be condemned for its aggression and for its violation of the cease-tire.
Only by so doing will the Council be able to save its
prestige and that of the Organization. Let it be clearly
understood that the delegation of the Republic of Mali will
not associate itself with any-1 repeat, “any’‘-resolution
which attempts to place aggressor and victim on the same
footing,
75. At this moment the war is continuing in the Middle
East. Israel is continuing to move its troops forward into

Syrian territory and the Council remains bound and gagged.
It is truly heart-rending to see the Council, at this grave
hour, reduced to the position it is now taking. It is tragic
that the Council, at this grave hour, is unable to come to
any decision, despite the evidence contained in the various
reports which the Secretary-General has made available to
US.

76. I have already s&id that the Council is guilty of
complicity, and I am unfortunately compelled to say it
again. We are accomplices in a de facto situation. We are
accomplices, and if the war continues in the Middle East we
shall have been an accessory before the fact. The Council
has the power to take a decision that would stop the war,
restore peace and cause troops to be withdrawn to their
original bases. Instead, ‘however, since the beginning of the
discussions, the Council has taken no notice of the fact that
Israel’s troops are occupying parts of Syria and Syrian
towns, in spite of the cease-fire, and in spite of three
relevant Council resolutions. We are going round in circles.
There are meetings and more meetings and no decisions.
The evidence is there.
77. My delegation is distressed about this situation and is
not at all anxious to have on its conscience the responsibility which we are now assuming and which will be
fraught with serious consequences because it means permanent, continuous war in the Middle East.
78. We have heard many arguments. We have been told
that there is no evidence because the information made
available came either from Syria or from Israel. But the
Secretary-General’s latest report contains such specific
items of information regarding the cease-fire violation that,
as I said the other day, the Council should already have ,
taken a decision regarding them. But nothing was done, and
I am wondering what the Council is waiting for. Why are we
waiting? We ccme and sit here and listen to each other
making speeches, the world listens to us, the world watches
us, and all this time the war goes on, innocent people lose
their lives, civilians, women and children are killed and
foreign territory is occupied.
79. What is the Council’s role to be, then? I must confess,
this is all very lamentable, and still more lamentable are the
underlying reasons why the Council comes to no decision. I
am sorry to say it, but the situation is really deplorable.
80. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The Security
Council is meeting for the third successive time at an
exceptional hour to consider the same question, namely,
the flagrant and persistent violation by Israel of the
Council’s call for a cease-fire. I already stated two days ago
that this treacherous behaviour of the Tel-Aviv authorities
is a clear defiance of the Security Council and the United
Nations, The persistent aggression is a serious manifestation
of their contempt for the Charter and for all moral values.
81. Need I remind you, Mr. President, that yesterday and
the day before the Tel-Aviv representative constantly and
categorically denied facts which only a few hours later were
substantiated by the impartial observers. While they
claimed that Kuneitra was not occupied by the Israel
forces, the factual report of the Secretary-General dis-

-

proved that unfounded claim, Thus they have throughout
the debate deceived and maliciously misinformed the
Council. It is evident, therefore, that they cannot be trusted
nor can their statements before the Council be believed.
But this is not strange nor should it cause any surprise, for
they were based on deceit and cannot thrive except on
deceit.

some of them-perhaps the great majority-had hoped that
it would not be necessary to hold another emergency
meeting of the Security Council as we have had to do this
evening. Some members also supposed that, as a result of iis
act of aggression, Israel had already occupied so much Arab
territory-more than it could hold-that it would not want
to occupy more and violate the cease-fire, It seems,
however, that those who did so misunderstood the char.
acter of the aggressor and international adventurer with
whom the Council has to deal at this moment. In order to
understand the character and nature of this international
adventurer, one cannot simply base oneself on appe,arances,
and on what is visible on the surface-these two and a half
million people and the relatively small territory they
inhabit; it is necessary to take into account their nature,
their appetites, their actions, which are those of a determined aggressor; consequently it is a mistake to take things
at face value, and merely to see this relatively sr~nll
territory and the relatively small population based on it if
one wishes to have a clear idea of what is at the root of this
limitless violence.

82. I wish to state that it is not Israel alone that bears the
responsibility for these violations and for this shameful
conduct. It is, in fact, the United States Government which
bears the largest responsibility, for it has constantly aided,
abetted, and encouraged this spoiled child of ours.
83. I also mentioned yesterday that the Council was
paralysed and could not take any action against the
violation by Israel because of the delaying tactics of the
United States, May 1 be allowed to read from an article by
James Reston appearing in The New Yorlc Times of today.
“For the moment, all the principals are covering their
objectives with hypocrisy. Israel’s objective is perfectly
clear. It is not trying to kill people, but it is determined
to smash every enemy machine that flies or rolls or fires
shells near its territory. For this it needed time-not
much, but some-and it is talking at the United Nations
endlessly, because every argument means a few more
Syrian tanks or planes destroyed.

88. It is important to remember that the rulers of this
State, who have become the vanguard of imperialism, sceln
able to enjoy impunity because they are furthering the
policies of certain imperialist circles in the MiddJe East.
These well-known policies, as has long been clear, find
expression in the attempts made by imperialist circles in
certain Western countries, particularly in the United States
of America, to halt the national liberation movement
among the Arab peoples, or at least to hold it in check, f~
strike at the national independence of the newly liberated
Arab countries, and to stamp out progressive developmenl
in the Arab countries. All this is reflected in certain drafl
resolutions which the United States submitted a few days
ago and on which we will have an opportunity to express
our views when we discuss them, as I have already slid.

“The United States, likewise, is asking for a detailed
and verified report on ‘the facts’ in the Israel-Syrian war,
which it knows will give the Israelis time to knock out the
Syrian guns and bring the last of the Arab States into line
by threatening the capital of Damascus.”
These two paragraphs are self-explanatory. The antagonistic
policy of the United States toward the Arab nations was
not confined to assistance provided to Israel prior to and
during the treacherous aggression against the Arab countries
but is continuing vigorously,

89. Today, at this meeting of the Security Council, WC’
have before us a complaint from the Permanent Reprep
sentative of the Syrian Arab Republic [S/7973] who
informs us that Israel tank columns have already violated
the cease-fire and are moving in a number of directions,
especially towards the east, in order to occupy new
territories and bring about new faits accomplis.

84. It is ironic that the Tel-Aviv representative mentioned
in a melodramatic statement that they were only two
million people surrounded by several millions of Arabs. But
did he forget, or evidently he does not want to admit, that
behind those so-called poor two million people stand both
the United States and the United Kingdom with all their
military might and material wealth-and should I add, with
their active participation in combat?

90. We have just heard the representative of Israel &I?’
these facts. However, in spite of the limited information
available, owing to the difficulties encountered by the
United Nations representatives in the region, what the
Secretary-General has placed before us today shows that
every effort has been made in the area by Israel to prevent
the truth from becoming known. We have been told, for
example, that the Syrian representatives of the Mixed
Armistice Commission have been arrested and that considerable difficulties are still being encountered in obtaining
their release. Why? Simply because these representatives
were on the spot and could have reported immediately,
with all the necessary competence and knowledge, on what
was occurring and could have shown the United Nations
representatives there what violations had been committed
by the Israel forces. The Israel authorities were doubtte%
very anxious that the Syrian representatives should not be
there, since they have facilitated the work of ti!ose who

85. It is a strange logic indeed which was revealed yesterday
in the debate by Mr. Rafael when he referred to the Israel
air raid on Cairo after the cease-fire call, disclaiming its
occurrence on the grounds that it was mentioned only once
in the Council. Yet I wish to say that to mention the truth
once is sufficient. On the other hand, no matter how many
times falsehood is repeated, it does not turn into truth.
86. To conclude my brief intervention, I state again, and
more vehemently, that the moment of truth has come, and
it is indeed high time for the Council to take immediate
action in the discharge of its primary responsibility by
condemning Israel and calling on it to respect the cease-fire,
87,

Mr.

French):

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
The members of the Security Council, or at least
8

were trying to ascertain the facts. Why tolerate them there,
when they could have seriously hindered the plans of the
aggressors?

remember, the representative of Israel told us: “They are
meeting at this very moment. They are going to fix a time,
but right now-there is no question of occupation. There
are just some details to be arranged.”

91, It is further indicated that it is difficult for the United
Nations machinery to function because facilities for doing
so are refused to it, and we can s,eethis from the difficulties
encountered by the representative of the Secretary-General
in giving us the information we need. Even with this
fragmentary information, however, we can see that what
the Council has been told by the Permanent Representative
of Syria is the truth, since we learn that Israel’s columns are
already on the move and are to be found at the points
indicated by the Permanent Representative of Syria.

97. Later we were told that the occupation had taken
pIace in three hours; today’s occupation was announced by
our colleagues from Israel. How could a large area have
been occupied in three hours, since the representative of
Israel, speaking here, claimed that no land had been
occupied? It is strange. This is an action carried out not
only in violation of the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the question but also in violation of the Charter
and of the most elementary principles of honesty in
international relations.

92. It is true that, in submitting his report, the SecretaryGeneral explained that it was impossible to know exactly
when the columns in question were at the points indicated,
But movements have been observed. What is still more
significant is the fact that these columns started to move
towards these points after the Security Council had called
for an immediate cease-fire.

98. Once again, we have to note here the attitude of some
representatives who are always complaining that they have
no information and do not know what is happening,
pretending to be unaware that there is an aggressor who
must be condemned; they just want to make it a question
of censuring those who have violated the cease-fire. But as
we have already pointed out several times, the person who
violates a cease-fire is the one who refuses to stop firing
after having started the firing himself. Those who defend
themselves because they are under attack by those who
started the firing and continue it are not violators. A man
defending himself cannot be a violator. A violator is an
aggressor who enters someone else’s house and starts
plundering it; in the present case, of course, it is taking
place on an international scale.

93. The representative of Israel told us, several times, that
it was not true that Israel’s troops had occupied certain
positions in spite of the declaration of a cease-fire. He
denied that Kuneitra and other places had been occupied
just when the United Nations had proclaimed a cease-fire.
We asked a question: were Israel troops on Syrian soil or
were they not? The question had to be asked several times
before an answer was obtained from the representative of
Israel. He said: “We are clefending ourselves-we are acting
in self-defence.” The nature of this self-defence is such that
the Israelis have been defending themselves in the air space
over Damascus. No doubt it is from Damascus that villages
in Israel are being bombed. These acts of self-defence were
carried out from Syrian territory and against Syrian
territory, and not from Israel territory.

99. With what is supposed to be supreme impartiality,
certain Powers are endeavouring here to place the victim
and the aggressor on an equal footing. This policy really is
astonishing. On the basis of such reasoning, one can always
th!ow the blame on those who are defending themselves
and using weapons to do so, instead of on those who are
the aggressors and are using weapons to commit aggression.
When blame is apportioned in such a biased and inequitable
way, you do not stop the aggressor and you invite him to
commit further aggression in the future. Under those
conditions, al1 international morality or international law
becomes impossible. To see this, you need only read the
text of the resolutions that have been submitted. It is no
accident in the circumstances that some Governments have
taken measures-as I pointed out the other day-to manifest
their opposition with all their strength, through measures in
keeping with the events which are taking place, first and
foremost by breaking off their relations with Israel, as the
Government of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has done.

94. I should like to point out, however, not only that the
Security Council resolutions calling for an immediate
cease-fire are applicable at once, and must be implemented,
but that the United Nations Charter says: “The Members of
the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the
present Charter.”
95. In this Council, we have heard it stated several times
by Israel spokesmen and the Israel authorities, including the
Permanent Representative of Israel, that they had accepted
the cease-fire. They laid down a small condition: not only
must they be allowed to engage in self-defence, but these
acts must also constitute an advance into the territory of
the victims of the aggression, That is all. It is just a question
Of advancing into the victim’s territory, the territory of the
victim of aggression. What does this self-defence consist in?
In military occupation which can be exploited and in
advancing with the help of the surprise element created by
sudden aggression. This has been repeated several times,

100. At this juncture, it is vitally important that the
Security Council should take immediate action: first, it
must condemn the aggressiori, for otherwise further acts of
aggression, large or small, will be committed by those who
launched the attack, Secondly, the occupation forces which
have established themselves by means of aggression must be
withdrawn, Thirdly, there must be a restoration of alI the
necessary facilities for the functioning of international
organs, particularly the United Nations, thus making it
possible to verify what has occurred in the region and to
ensure compliance with the agreements which have been
reached.

96 Then we were the witnesses of a comedy here. We
were told that Mr. Dayan, who is in charge of the military
operations, had invited the Secretary-General’s representative, General Bull, to fix a cease-fire time. If you
9

helping us to obtain a picture of the situation in the areal
and I hope that further reports will provide matiarial to us
on which we can base forthright and unequivocal decisions.
If necessary, as I have suggested before, the capability 0F
UNTSO should be strengthened, and I should like to hEar
the views of the Secretary-General on that point.

101. For our part, we fully realize that, to achieve
anything and to avoid the possibility of any further
cease-fire violations, the troops must be withdrawn. As long
as the occupation forces are there, there will always be a
possibility of violation, and not only a possibility but, I am
sure, actual cease-fire violations. We certainly agree with
some of the proposals that have been made for verifying
what has occurred and taking immediate measures, in the
case of this particular violation which has just been
reported by the Permanent Representative of Syria, for an
investigation, perhaps, and for a decision taken now,
immediately, on the basis of the data made available or
subsequently to be made available by the SecretaryGeneral.

107. If we proceed to urge upon the parties that anL
breach of the cease-fire is totally unacceptable, 1 hope+*e
may also indicate our firm desires on two other pomls
which seem to me of capital importance and to whiC]l tie
Secretary-General has also directed his attention: first, that
complete freedom of movement be granted to United
Nations observers by the parties concerned and second, that
the United Nations headquarters in Jerusalem be restored at
once to the Chief of Staff of UNTSO.

102. We are not opposed to a suspension of the
meeting if the Council feels that this would be desirable so
that we can ascertain what has happened and take
immediate measures, as the United Kingdom representative
has proposed. But we also feel that as long as the
occupation forces remain where they are-as long as the
occupation forces are in Syria, the United Arab Republic
and Jordan-there
will always be the possibility of violations; not only the possibility but a high probability of
violations which will not allow a stable peace to be
established in the region, and war will always be smouldering there.

108. In conclusion, I should like to associate the canadh
delegation with the well-deserved expression of appreciation addressed by the Secretary-General to General Bull
for the initiative and skill which he has shown in getting the
cease-fire arrangements into operation under what are
admittedly difficult conditions.
109. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from! FretC@:
The basic question that we have to discuss this evening is
that of the incident which has been brought to our notice
by the representative of Syria. To this question, the
Secretary-General, in United Nations Pres:; Release
SG/SM/745, has replied more by a question ithan by a
statement, the question being whether Israel’s troops
arrived at Rabid before or after 4.30 p.m. on 10 June. I am
in no way criticizing the Secretary-General for the reply he
has given us, since he could not have replied otherwise;
however, I wonder whether it would not be possible to ask
General Bull to try to find out more and to investigate this
matter, which is extremely serious, for the Council abviously cannot tolerate violations of the cease-fire.

103. We ther’efore consider that the Security Council
should take the necessary steps to bring about the
withdrawal of the troops and to enable the international
organs which should be in the area to operate and to
supervise the agreements which have been concluded, or
which should be concluded. We therefore consider that
measures could be taken immediately, but it is important
that, this very evening or tomorrow, the Council should
also take up the other questions which are on its agenda
and come to decisions on those questions, too.
104. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): This meeting has been
called at the urgent request of the Permanent Representative of Syria, who has outlined the nature of his
Government’s complaints and concerns at this time in clear
and moderate terms. The Permanent Representative of
Israel has also shown restraint in his comments in reply. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to both representatives
for the way in which they presented their remarks to this
Council on the specific matters which led to the summoning of the Council in another emergency meeting
tonight.

110. Having said that, I would add-and I imagine that
some of my colleagues share my view-that our work is
rendered difficult by two factors. Firstly, we do not know,
or at any rate we know very little as yet, about the
positions that were held respectively by the two parties at
the time of the cease-fire. Now there is no doubt at all that
this information is needed, because our efforts to settle the
incident we are dealing with this evening must not causeus
to lose sight of the precautions which must be taken in the
days to come.
111. Secondly, the United Nations observers-General
Bull’s observers-who alone are qualifie’d to determine
whether the cease-fire has been violated, do not yet possess
all the necessary facilities for observing, travelling about
and communicating, as indeed the Secretary-General told us
in his report, and on this point I endorse the remarks of njy’
colleague the representative of Canada.

105. The representative of Syria asked us this evening to
direct our attention to certain specific complaints which he
made. I believe that we should heed that request, which
was, in sum; to prevent any further aggravation of the
situation. It must be quite clear to all members of the
Council that troop movements into areas not occupied by
those troops before the cease-fire is a very grave matter
which, if proved satisfactorily by impartial witnesses, would
have to be condemned by the Council.

112. Can we therefore ask, as General Bull requests, that
his work should be facilitated to the greatest possible
extent in order to avoid further incidents which mi$t
prove serious? In this connexion, it seems to me most
desirable, in particular, that we should endorse the llrgeot
request made by the Secretary-General in document

106. It is essential in dealing with this question that we
base our action firmly on impartial reports of the United
Nations military
observers. These reports are already
10

S/7930/Add.3, circulated this evening, that Government
House should be handed back to General Bull’s observers.
113. Lastly, I should also like to say that we support the
Secretary-General’s requests that General Bull’s good
offices should be made available to facilitate exchanges of
prisoners.
114. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I am
becoming more and more convinced that if we are to have
an effective cease-fire on the ground-a cease-fire which
both Syria and Israel have agreed to-we will first have to
agree upon a cease-fire of words in this Council.
115, The representative of Syria, in presenting his complaint that an Israel tank column had moved to new
positions, asked the members of the Council to confine
themselves to this particular issue and to act upon it
urgently. In the spirit of his request, I shall confine my
remarks to what he has said. With reference to the
accusations that have been made against my Government I
would point out that I have already spoken about them at
length, and I shall, by reference, again incorporate them
into these remarks.
116. I wish to say specifically and clearly at the outset
that it is the view of my Government that there should be
no forward movement of troops beyond the positions held
at the effective time of the cease-fire agreed upon with
Genera1 Bull, that is 1630 hours GMT, 10 June.
117. We have before us the contention of the Syrian
Government, through its Ambassador, Mr. Tomeh, that
such movements have taken place. The representative of
Israel, Ambassador Rafael, has denied any movements
beyond the positions held at the time of the cease-fire and
affirmed his Government’s intentions to respect the situation prevailing at that time,
118. The United Nations observers have reported tank
units in Rabid and a column in movement nearby. The
Secretary-General has informed the Council that the key
question is whether these were taking place in areas
controlled by Israel as of the time of the cease-fire, and that
he is urgently seeking clarification.
119. We concur that it is urgent to get more information.
However, the Council need not wait to make it clear, in
whatever form may be most appropriate, that any forward
movement of troops beyond positions held at 1630 hours
GMT on 10 June is simply not acceptable, and that if any
such movements have been made, the units must be
returned to the positions prevailing at that time.
120. It is also clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral, as has been mentioned by some of our colleagues-Ambassador Seydoux and Ambassador Ignatieffthat United Nations observers have experienced difficulties
in their efforts to assure observance of the cease-fire, and
that the United Nations is still experiencing communication
difficulties. This is also apparent from the SecretaryGeneral’s reports. Obviously, freedom of movement and
adequate communications are necessary so that the Council
may be fully and accurately informed of the situation and

so that the work of the observers may be effective. Both
Governments should co-operate fully in this task and
appropriate instructions should be issued to all military
commanders at all levels to have this done. And they should
be issued immediately, so that the United Nations can
perform its very necessary work, work which both parties
have entrusted to the United Nations, that is the implementation of the cease-fire.
121. We have this urgent business to do. It seems to me
that we can do it, and we ought to do it unanimously. What
we have approved in General Bull’s arrangement contemplates that there should be no further troop rnovements. We ought to say so and we ought to say so in plain
and unmistakable terms. By doing so, we would be
rendering a contribution in the situation. As our colIeague
Lord Caradon and others also have said, this does not mean
that we shall not have to deal with other grave questions,
We are at the beginning of our efforts to resolve this
conflict. But let me say this: it is not to be assumed that
the United Nations has not already made a substantial
contribution in this situation. Under United Nations auspices a cease-fire has been arranged, and a cease-fire on
several fronts. We do have problems in connexion with the
cease-fire, one of which has urgently been called to our
attention tonight, and in the exercise of our responsibilities
we ought to act quickly and expeditiously to deal with that
particular problem. My Government is prepared to do so.
122. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. As the Security Council
table has already been filled as a result of invitations
extended to four representatives, the representative of
Jordan has very kindly indicated his willingness to withdraw temporarily from his seat at the Council table while
the representative of Saudi Arabia makes his intervention, I
appreciate this gesture of the representative of Jordan and I
invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement a
123. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I believe, with all
due respect to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the Council, that time is being wasted here while aggression
is proceeding against the Arab world. Let no one for a
moment think that, ,because the Arab world is constituted
of States, it is not one in purpose and does not have the
same goals. I will elaborate on this statement lest you think
that I am just engaging in diatribe.
124. I cautioned the Security Council last fall; I said
incidents would recur and aggression would proceed. I do
not have to repeat word for word what I said. The record
speaks for itself. However, I must make it clear that Saudi
Arabia considers the establishment of the State of Israel as
a new crusade. The Crusade that started in the eleventh
century was beaten off after a lot of suffering and
tribulation. The motivation was religious. Peter the Hermit
was the propagandist of those days. Pope Urban II said,
“Why are you killing each other? “, to the vassals of those
days. “Go and wrest the Holy Sepulchre from the infidel.”
125. Religion has lost its grip in the twentieth century.
Christian theologians say “God is dead”. There has to be
another motivation. The motivation of the West was to play

up something new. The West is having a new crusade by
proxy through the establishment of the Zionist State
amongst us, Remember that the late Herzl was a European
and not an orieAtaI Jew. The whole incursion in the Arab
world is a Western incursion. And we here deal with
incidents. This is a major aggression, but it is a link in the
long chain of aggressions, a series of aggressions.

Europeans have been brainwashed by Zionism, “These
barbarians, those Arabs”-two
ladies were exchangillg
views-“they want to kill those helpless”-how helpless
they were-“Israelis. Isn’t that a shame? ” And then they
looked at her and said, “Why don’t you comment? ” She
said, “Do I look like a barbarian? I am an Arab.” “,I&ame
on you,” they said.

126. I do not have to go into the religious argument or the
historical argument or the humanitarian
argument. I
covered those last fall during my three interventions. But I
must say that Jerusalem is holy and Bethlehem is holy to
Christianity and Islam, perhaps more so than to Judaism. It
was in Bethlehem that the Prince of Peace was born. It was
in Jerusalem that the Prince of Peace was crucified. And the
information media in the Western world used these opiates:
Oecumenical Councils, rapprochement between Jews and
Christians so that a Zionist State, a European State should
be established in our midst. Remember that Jerusalem is
holy to the whole Christian world and it is not less holy to
the Moslem world. After Mecca and Medina comes
Jerusalem. Do you for a moment believe that the Moslem
world, consisting of 600 million persons, would agree to go
to the Mosque of Omar through Zionist-held territory? No,
sir. They will become emotional in the Moslem world, and
then the population will have to be met with arms. The
seeds of the third world war are being sown now. Why?
Because by proxy the Western world is having a new
incursion, sowing a new colonialism in our midst.

130. Why did I mention those two incidents? To show
the mood of the West against our people, who gave them
the alphabet. During the Crusades the West wasmade up of
barbarians, real barbarians then. Richard the Lion-Hearted
was imprisoned twice by Saladin the Chivalrous, And twice
he was released on condition that he would not fight
against the Arabs, and twice the Lion-Hearted was.treacherous.
13 1. What have we done to you since the Crusades?What
have we done, Lord Caradon? You know our land. What
have we done to the British or to the French or to the
Americans? Why don’t you leave LIS alone?
132. On the religious argument-well,
there arc 900
million or a billion Christians. Why don’t they say,
“Jerusalem and the Holy Land should be ours”. There arc
600 million Moslems. If this is a religious argument, why
don’t they say, “The Holy Land should be ours”, No,
because the Western world has been worshipping Mammon,
and you cannot worship Mammon and God at the same
time. God is dead, erstwhile Christian theologians are saying
that there is no more God. You Western Powers,,whom do
you think you are fooling at this table? Showing your
teeth, smiling at us in the corridors: “When you SCIJthe lion
bare his fangs, do not think he is smiling at you.”

127. With all due respect, these meetings which you have
been holding, even in my absence, are tantamount to
filibustering while the Holy Land is being torn by strife and
by war. Why does not the West leave us alone? What have
we done to the West? When Hitler occupied France, the
illustrious
General de Gaulle did not accept the fait
accompli.

133. Do not devour us. They are devouring us:, they are
killing us there. You want me to act with decorum, to
exchange legal niceties with you, Legal niceties on what?
Based on what? The poor Secretary-General comes here
and says that General Odd Bull says this and that. At dbis
Greenwich Time he was here and there. But this is not the
question. The fact is that this is an incursion in the lnidst of
our land.

128. I have just come from Europe. I know what the
information media have done in Europe. I am not going to
talk theoretically and in abstract terms. I was in Geneva
only last week. There was an American and another
gentleman of the Jewish faith; he might not have been a
Zionist, I do not know. They saluted me, and I saluted
them. The American said: “Have you finished chopping off
those bastards, the Arabs.” They did not know I was an
Arab. They thought Arabs were barbarians, The other
gentleman said, “They shall be a door-mat under our feet.”
I restrained myself. I did not want to make a scene. Then
the American, who was a Vice-President of one of the
biggest banks in this country, turned to me. and said: “What
do you think of this struggle? ” I said, “‘Well, start chopping
me off. I am an Arab.” He said, “Oh, don’t get emotional.”
I said, “No, t won’t get emotional. You are cold-blooded,
the descendant of ancestors who chopped down the red
Indians in cold blood. No, I won’t.” To the other
gentleman, I said, “I thought you were civilized. Door-mats
are to be purchased in department stores; they are not
human beings. Where is your humanity? You said you
suffered at the hands of the Nazis.”

134. We have no quarrels with the Jews as such. We have
told you that time and again. They are our brothers. I said
they are not our cousins but our brothers. However, the
Zionists were Jews of Europe, most of them converted into
Judaism in southern Russia. And we are quibbling here,
quibbling. On what? On cease-fire. Like Nero singing while
Rome was burning, This is tantamount to filibustering:
incursion into our homeland.
135. Again, I must not speak in abstract terms. Why
should I speak in abstract terms when we have the facts,
from none other than Mr. Rusk, who briefed various
legislators the other day. I read it, It could not have been
invented. There were two Senators, one of them from Ezew
Jersey. I think his name is Senator Case.He said: Mr. Rusk
is happy about all that has happened. Mr. Morton of
Kentucky said: It is a victory for the West. And then there
is none other than the upstart Mr. Robert Kennedy; the
upstart, the son of the whiskey merchant. He said: “0~
commitment to Israel is clear and must be clear.” I allI

129. None other than my erstwhile Iraqi colleague,
Mrs. Afnan, was sitting in a bus in Switzerland, which is
supposed to be neutral. This shows you how even the
12

quoting him. The Senator praised Israel as the “tiny
outpost of Western culture”.

142. What happened to South West Africa is happening to
the Arab world. When it suits the national or the economic
interests of the Western Powers, they go to the Congo and
chop the men of the Congo. But nobody goes to Rhodesia,
nobody goes to the Arab world, nobody stops the Zionists.
It suits them. Divide and rule. They say: Oh, those Arabs.
Faisal might be on good terms with Nasser. We saw how
Hussein was on good terms with Nasser. Of course, they
would be on good terms. They are Arabs. Blood is thicker
than water. They say: Oh, we have oil interests. Let us keep
with them on oiI. But this policy will boomerang; it will
backfire; it will not get anybody anywhere. It will create
anarchy. It will create riot. It will destroy us. It will destroy
Western interests, all kinds of interests.

136. Why should we have Western culture in our midst?
Are we trying to establish by force of arms Arab culture in
your midst? He wants Western culture just because his
money was made in whiskey or on the stock exchange, or
by pools. Mr. Roosevelt appointed him.
137. I have to say that. They are slaying our men-the
upstarts, the Rockefellers and the Kennedys and the
legislators who support the Zionists. Who do they think
they are? Just because they have money, can they get away
with murder? They are not murdering themselves, but they
are murdering us by proxy. I knew the father of Governor Rockefeller. I met him here. He was a gentleman. But
how did the grandfather make his money? And they talk
about our Cadillacs and our palaces. What about their trust
funds, their ranches in Venezuela, their money scattered all
over the world, in Switzerland? Let them clean their
mouth before they talk about us, the upstarts. Just because
you are affluent here, just because you have power, you can
get away with murder. Yes, you are getting away with
murder. Chop up-as this American of the Bankers Trust
said; I am mentioning the Bank where he came from-chop
up 100 million Arabs; let them be door-mats.

143. The Secretary-General scurried to the Middle East,
Why? I am sure I am not giving him away. He did not
scurry to Viet-Nam; he went to his country. Because he
knows the Zionists are like a cancer in the body politic of
every Western Power. They might engulf the whole world in
a third world war. That is why the Secretary-General
scurried to Egypt. He did not scurry to Viet-Nam, although
he has been warning us about Viet-Nam. I am not speaking
for the Secretary-General. Why? Because he knows what
the Rothschilds do; they gave &I million. I laughed. I read
all the London papers before I came here. It was 21 million
or $2 million, but not a penny goes to the Arab refugees.
And here in Madison Square Garden something was going
on. I came late here and on the way I saw a commotion. I
said, “what is that? ” They said it .wasfor Israel. I happened
to be there. And the Arabs? Their land is being occupied.
There is a cease-fire and we are quibbling as to whether
they are ten miles inside or seventeen, or about Greenwich
Time or New York Time. This is something which is
ludicrous.

138. And we are quibbling here about a cease-fire, with
diatribes. Baroody lost his temper. No, Sir, I am cool and
collected. This is my way of presenting the case to the
Security Council-not v&i the legal niceties.
139, And then when it suits certain Western Powers, they
say that .the territorial integrity of the Middle East should be
respected. And they show off might with fleets and planes
over the Mediterranean. Poor Mediterranean. They are there
in the Mediterranean sky and in the Mediterranean waters.
Poor Mussolini, when he said mare nostrum. Poor
Mussolini. It is not Italian, it is not Arabic any more; it is
not French any more. The Mediterranean is an American
sea where the Sixth Fleet parades and Americans flex their
muscles.

144. I come to the substance of what is before us, and if I
have hurt any of my colleagues around this table, I
apologize, because there is nothing personal in this. There is
something here that goes to the core of the Arab world.
There is nothing personal about it. I am a monarchist,
everybody knows that, and here is a communist,
Mr, Fedorenko. Is it not paradoxical that a communist-oh,
they say, of course, he is currying favour with the Arab
world, the Russians are doing that. Here it says in a draft
resolution of 8 June 1967 of the Soviet Union:

140. Do you think it is easy for me to say this? I love this
country. I love its people. But they are sheep, like all
people everywhere: brain-washed, machines, vote-buying.
Mr. Kennedy wants to interfere with our institutions. It is
all here in The New York Times. This is only a sample.
Every day legislators are criticizing us, calling us slavetraders.

“2. Demands that Israel should immediately halt its
military activities against neighbouring Arab States and
should remove all its troops from the territory of those
States and withdraw them behind the armistice lines and
respect the status of the demilitarized zones, as prescribed
in the General Armistice Agreements.” [S/7951/Rev.l.l

141. What about their white slaves? What about their
narcotics? What about their promiscuity? Let them have
their mini-skirts and hot dogs. We do not want that kind of
civilization. They can have their mini-skirts and hot dogs.
This is what Kennedy said in The New York Times, that
they are introducing civilization to us, the Arabs, who have
had 6,000 years of history. What we need is not the veil,
but bikinis-the other extreme-and hot dogs. Well, they
can have them. This is their civilization and culture, because
they have computers and gadgets, and they have bath tubs,
running water and plumbing. This is their culture. The
culture is of the spirit, Sir. I am talking to the President
too.

145. Mr. Fedorenko is currying favour with the Arabs
because he is being just to the Arabs. I wasin Europe, mind
you, in Western Europe, Not Eastern Europe, and I opened
my ears wide. I am not going to say what countries of
Western Europe I was in lest it become embarrassing. And I
was told on high authority that if the Israelis had met with
any reverse the integrity of Israel would have been
preserved by intervention of Western naval forces and
aircraft. This was made plain to me. In other words, YOU
had better, Arabs, be beaten, because if ever Israel meets
13

that they are the chosen people of God. But that type of
God discriminates. What type of God is this that
discriminates? What is better then than to say that God is
dead altogether, as some of them say today?

with reverses, we will beat you after the Western intervention. They said no, no, you stay quiet. But the Arabs are
under-developed-and
there is nothing wrong with being
under-developed. I think at one time they were highly
developed, they had guns, they were corrupt with power
when they were an empire, otherwise they would not have
dissolved. We had our heyday; we know what empire is
from our history; there is nothing which is happening to the
world today that has not happened to others before in the
trappings of power. No, nobody will touch Israel if she is
the victor but if she is defeated, then they crush us.

150. I have a lot to say but I will not keep this Council
any longer. I think its energy has been taxed, with all due
respect to every member of it, as human beingis. To
everyone sitting around this table, without exception, I
would like to sound a warning, and I think I am entitled to
sound that warning because I have been seized with this
Palestine question since I was fourteen, in 1920. I slhould
know a little about the temperament and the mood of the
Arab world; I am part of it, and I am trying to be objective
and altogether put aside my subjectivity as an Arab. H[atred
and rancour will be intensified if this draft resolution of the
Soviet Union is not adopted and the Zionists do not go
back to where they were.

146. Time and again I have said we never had a quarrel
with the Jew, there was no anti-Judaism amongst us.
Incidentally, there is no such thing as anti-Semitism. This is
a misnomer. We are the majority of the Semites in the
world today, the Arabs are. There is anti-.Tudaism, which is
deplorable. It started in Central Europe during relatively
modern times. We deplored it because, after all, we do not
consider a Jew as a barbarian, as some of the Zionists call us
barbarians.

151. The fruits of victory will be bitter indeed, and :might
also create so much anarchy before, perhaps, the Iworld
comes to an end-anarchy which we would deplore, which
the Jews who are not Zionists would deplore. As I saild, the
Jews who were in Yemen were Arabs. The Arabs, to the
Chaldees, were the Semites-not the Jews who came:,such
as the Khazars, who were converted ten centuries ago. They
claim they descended from Abraham. We are the
descendants of Abraham; Abraham is lost in the myth of
history. It is all in the Bible; we do not have to recite the
Bible here. I think I quoted chapter and verse many times
here in the United Nations.

147. This is a dark cloud in our clear sky of the Arab East.
We have seen many dark clouds before. It will be dissipated.
But it is a shame that in the era of the United Nations it
should be dissipated by force of arms.
148. What are you going to do, Mr. President, with the
honourable members of the Council, with all due respect to
you? Are you going to adopt this draft resolution of the
Soviet Union, the communist State? I remember, I am an
old-timer here in the United Nations, that anyone who
talked to a communist became a fellow-traveller and a
bedfellow; you were stigmatized. But now things are
different. The Soviet Union comes with a resolution which
tries to help matters. No, the source is communist. Well, I
am a monarchist, but I must say that his resolution is
logical, it is humanitarian, and it sets everything as it was,
with no deceit and duplicity. The trouble with the Arabs is,
inasmuch as they are human as others, that they did not
khow how to deceive or engage in duplicity, because they
talked too much. They were saying, “We will do this”; it
was all in the Arab hyperbole, while the others had the
European system of discipline. And the victor in any war
should be ashamed of himself. You cannot crush the one
who is defeated. You can kill him but you cannot crush his
spirit if he survives, and the bitterness and the rancour
which I deplore and which I have been fighting in the
United Nations for twenty years in the Third Committee-this is what pains me-will come with a resurgence in
the Arab world. Because, after all, the Arabs are human.
There is the rancour, the vengeance. If the Zionists, who are
European, said that they wanted to cry on the wall, why
should not the Arabs cry for not 2,000 years but 4,000
years if the world survives a holocaust?

152. There is the historical argument of “I was there.”
Therefore, why should not the Red Indians take
Manhattan? They were here. They will return the $24 they
paid for it, with compound interest. What those western
Zionists have done to us is exactly what the Americans did
to those Red Indians. They live in reservations, and the
Arab refugees live in tents. What is the difference? Of
course, here the standard of living is higher. The poor Arab
refugees are given only 7 cents a day to live on; I pay 10
cents to buy The New York Times, which has a monopoly
on the news now--and 7 cents for the refugee.
153. We are quibbling here. Where is conscience? Where is
Christianity? Where is charity? Or is it a ritual only?
These are Christian countries, the Western countries. Where
is Micah in Judaism-to walk humbly with thy Lord?
Where is it? It is in the Bible only; it is not being practised.
154. Democracy? We have been told about democracy SO
much. I witnessed it. It has been reduced to a husk; the
kernel has been devoured by abuse.
155. Do not sell us your wares, West. We will not sell YOU
our ideals. Leave us alone. For heaven’s sake, leave Asia
alone; leave Africa alone. We will trade with you; we will
have cultural exchanges with you; we will live like human
beings with you. But do not come and extend this crusade
into our midst. I thought the crusade wassomething Iof the
past. Now it is another crusade, by proxy.

149. I am sure that the Soviet Union did not enter with
perhaps a stronger hand because they wanted to preserve
the peace, because the Zionists would have plunged the
West into a third world war everywhere. You remember
what happened in Argentina. The Zionists abducted
Eichman. No doubt Eichman was a criminal. Everybody
saluted them. Argentina said that this was illegal. Who is
Argentina? Who is the Arab world? The Zionists claim

156. Do not expect the Moslem world-and we have
Christians in my part of the world, remember-to have to
14

pass through Zionist territory in order to go to Jerusalem?
Is it a monopoly of one faith? Where is the pride of the
Western world? Mammon: Do not worship two gods-a god
and Mammon. Worship one and leave the other; you cannot
worship them both.

162. The Deputy High Commissioner of India told me
how the British came with their trains-I do not remember
the locality, but there was a Gandhiist, may he rest in
peace, and they laid him out across the rails, and the
captain said to the engineer: “Go; proceed.” He did not
budge. They became angry at the captain, The Deputy High
Commissioner of India told me that story in the thirties in
London,

157. I am unorthodox in this intervention, for I think you
must be tired of repeating to one another longitudes and

latitudes, Greenwich time and New York time. It gets us
nowhere. I am not talking over your heads here, gentlemen;
I am talking to your conscience; not to your legal sense,but
rather to your sentiment, if it can be aroused. There is
nothing wrong with sentiment. Do you want us to live in
peace with you? Treat us like worthy human beings who
have a history, who have a background, and forget that we
are Arabs. We are human beings. Treat the Africans, the
small States, honourably. Do not prevaricate and rationalize
and find excuses, as you have done in the Fifth Special
Session of the General Assembly. God has given us minds
like you have. This is not our era; it is the era of the United
States, of the Soviet Union, and of emerging China. We
have had our heyday; we do not want to have the heyday in
power. But you are repeating the pattern of power which
brought
empires down. Rut, this time, with nuclear
weapons, you will bring down the whole of mankind.

163. Finally the captain went stark mad and they had to
send him to an asylum. The British soldiers rebelled. They
whom the gods wish to destroy they first make strong. Do
not take pride in your strength, you Western super-Powers.
The ancient Greeks had a word for it: those whom the gods
wish to destroy they first make strong. Do not get drunk
with your affluence and your might. Smile, laugh, you
American friends. We boil inside and you take it with a
smile. If thou seest the fangs of a lion prominent, do not
for a moment think that the lion is smiling.
164. The PRESIDENT: I will ask the representative of
Jordan to resume his place and I wish to thank him once
again for his gesture.
165. May I point out to all members participating in this
debate that we have convened here tonight to discuss a
concrete problem which is considered very urgent by the
representative of Syria. In order to expedite our work, I
would ask all representatives as far as possible to concentrate on the problem raised by the representative of
Syria.

158. Leave us alone; we have had enough suffering. We
have produced prophets whom you heed only in your
places of worship because we have suffered a lot. Do not
increase our suffering. Do two world wars mean anything to
you? We have had two world wars in our lifetime. Do you
want a third world war? ‘When it suits a country, it
rationalizes a war; when it does not suit it, it finds all
manner of excuses not to raise a finger, as is the case now.

166. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): It gives me great
pleasure to associate myself with what the representatives
of the United Kingdom and Canada had to say about
General Bull. Some of us who have had some experience of
fundtioning
in similar circumst,ances can specially
appreciate his difficulties. We commend his sense of
dedication and his untiring efforts to restore peace. In
making his task less difficult, the Council should insist on
providing him with all the facilities that he has asked for,
particularly the restoration of his headquarters in Government House in Jerusalem.

I59. Our American friends-P am not saying they should
or should not have, but they have gone to VietNam. Why?
It suits them.
160. Now it does not suit them, it seems to me, to tell the
Zionists: “Go back to where you were”, as our Soviet
colleague is asking them to do. Why should the Americans
go to Viet-Nam? To fight against communism? Whom do
they think they are fooling? They are sitting here with
communists; we are sitting here with communists. It is to
their national interest to do so. But their interest in the
Middle East is to divide and rule.

167. I think that perhaps the Council is functioning at a
disadvantage in having to meet night and day. It seems to
me that we are apt to become bemused and the clear issues
of persistent defiance of our resolutions and the stopping of
further fighting have become obscured by arguments on
single specific charges as they are raised at each meeting.

1G 1. That policy has backfired; it has boomeranged. !
have been telling you time and again, the United States has
gone into Viet-Nam, saying, “We want to stop communism.” But the Asian countries are no longer fooled.
There are national interests there. The United States is
afraid of Chinese expansion. But if the western Zionists go
into our midst, the United States says, “You Arabs, we
warn you, we are going to guarantee your territorial
integrity”,
and, “You, Israel, we want to guarantee your
territorial integrity.” And then they whisper into Israel’s
ear, “DO not worry; we have our naval forces and aircraft in
the area.” And the Israelis say, “Oh, we can do it alone.”
They did it alone; I do not know how they did it alone. I
do not think it is an honour for one to develop the
implements of war. Where is Gandhi? If he were here living
with us today, what would he have said?

168. Are we to forget that we ordered the parties to stop
fighting at 2000 hours GMT on 7 June? That was accepted
by all the parties concerned by 8 June. But it was not
observed. Last night we discussed violations of that
deadline: the Israel bombing of the Damascus area and the
advance of Israel forces deep into Syrian territory, including the occupation of Kuneitra.
169. We were informed yesterday of an Israel-Syrian
agreement to stop fighting by 1630 hours GMT on 10 June,
as arranged by General Bull. Today we are discussing a
violation of this latest deadline with regard to the cease-fire,
and we will probably proceed to issue another order to
15

Executive Branch of the Government making the foreign
policy of the country. The country’s policies are certainly
the subject of legitimate debate in the Council, but what
are impermissible are comments and characteriz,ations of
public and private figures in our life. That is not compatible, in my opinion, with the spirit and langua.ge of the
Charter.

cease-fire at a new time to be fixed. Meanwhile, Israel
forces are not onIy in Rafid, but their tanks have also been
seen south of the town and some are heading eastward.
170. Are we to meet again tomorrow to order another
cease-fire? Are we to offer a series of cease-fires as Israel
forces advance?

175. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): It is true that we are meeting
on this occasion to consider one specific matter raised by
the representative of Syria, and under normal circumstances
the Council should address itself to that specific complaint.
It is also true, however, that the sequence of the meetings
to consider one specific complaint on each occasion is
becoming habitual. Therefore the Council should, in the
opinion of my delegation, consider taking such action or
such steps as would ensure that the cease-fire orders and
resolutions already adopted are respected. Normally, having
arranged a cease-fire and the cease-fire having been accepted
by the parties concerned, the Council should now proceed
to the more important questions regarding the re-establish.
ment of peace in the area, beginning principally with the
withdrawal of forces to the positions they occupied before
the hostilities broke out. This is clear. If, however, this is to
be prevented by an endless succession of incidents generating an equally endless succession of meetings of the
Security Council at all hours of the day and night, then we
would never get to the substantial issues.

171. It is crystal clear what Israel wants. That has been
stated categorically by the Minister of Defence, General
Dayan. He wants to maintain his positions in the Suez area,
in the Gulf of Aqaba, in Jerusalem, on the west bank of the
Jordan and the heights on the Syrian borders so as to
bargain from a position of strength. Israel’s short-term aims
have been succinctly stated by Mr, James Reston in The
New York Times article which the representative of the
United Arab Republic read out a little while ago,
172. What is the Council to do in these circumstances?
Certainly we should meet our Syrian colleague’s demands
that no further deterioration should be allowed to take
place and no more Syrian territory should be occupied. But
I submit that we shall have to take more far-reaching steps,
the most important
of which would be to order an
immediate withdrawal of all forces to the positions they
occupied on 4 June 1967. Unless we take that step
immediately, we shall be faced every day with situations
like the ones we have had to deal with in the last few days.
In view of this portent, I shall repeat again what I said in
my statement last Friday:

176. A cease-fire, as we understand it, must mean that the
guns must be silenced and that the troop movements must
be halted wherever they are. Any attempt to gain legal and
geographical advantages from the current situation must
therefore be deplored. We are very pleased to learn that the
Syrian members of the Mixed Armistice Commission have
now been released, and we trust that they will in the future
be enabled either by identifying themselves or through any
other means to join in the work of the United Nations
organ which is working under very difficult conditions.

“First, the Council should reinforce its call for ceasefire and immediately order withdrawal of all armed forces
to positions they occupied before the outbreak of
hostilities. Second, it would be necessary to reactivate
and strengthen the United Nations machinery in the area
to enforce the cease-fire and secure withdrawal on the
lines proposed by the Secretary-General in his report of
26 May [S/7906/.
Third, the Council should consider
whether the Secretary-General should not be requested to
depute a personal representative to the area to help in
reducing tension and restoring peaceful conditions. The
special representative should also ensure the safety and
security of the civilian Arab population in the areas
overrun by Israel. Fourth, when withdrawals have been
completed and the aggression has been vacated the
Council should consider earnestly the steps to be taken to
stab&e peace in the area. Solutions to be worked out
would have to be within the framework of the sovereignty of the States concerned and the just and immemorial rights of the Arab people.” [1352nd meeting,
para. 102. /

177. I have one last point. In the course of the debate this
evening, a new phrase has gradually come into circulation,
that is the phrase “cease-fire line”. Lest it be accepted
merely by default, let me say, for my delegation at least,
that we do not understand that there is a cease-fire line.
There are the armistice lines. There is the cease-fire order
which means that troops should stay where they are and
that any movement, north, south, east or west, except such
movement as to return from the scene of battle to one’s
own home ground, is a violation of the cease-fire.
178. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom I now give the floor.

173. I would earnestly urge the Council to ponder again
over this four-point programme carefully and consider the
desirability of taking a decision on these lines,

179. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I have listened with great
interest and attention to all the interventions; that 1~~
been made so far. It does seem to me that there is a point
which needs further clarification, I say this bec,ause during
the discussion I was convinced that there was some
confusion which ought to be clarified.

174. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
hour is late and I want to be very brief. Several times in the
course of this debate I have pointed out that under the
Charter of the United Nations it is not permissible to
intervene in the domestic affairs of any country. That
certainly encompasses comments upon personalities in our
country who are in public life but who are not in the

180. Let me start with our complaint which wascontained
in my letter to you [S/7973/, Mr. President, and which w
formulated by the supplementary information received bJ
16

the Secretary-General, document S/7930/Add.3; in paragraph 6 of that document, our complaint has been formulated as follows:

of the Council is now directed, in paragraph 7 it states that
Syrian liaison officers, working with the United Nations
military observers, had been taken, but later were released,
Since we are co-operating with the United Nations in
carrying out its functions and objectives in accordance with
the cease-fire resolution, we urge that no such violations
occur again.

“At 1800 hours local time a column of Israel tanks and
supporting elements including airplanes and helicopters
moved out of Rafid eastward and southward in the
direction of Naoua and other localities where no fighting
had heretofore taken place,”

186. My last point is this. In the second oral report of the
Secretary-General to the Council on 11 June (Press release
SG/SM/745] reference is made to the following point: “At
Rabid the road was blocked by the Israel Defence Force.”
Now, when we know that Rafid is deep inside Syrian
territory, what is described here as the “Israel Defence
Force” is not at all a defence force;it is an aggressiveforce
in the territory of a Member State. Therefore, although the
Tel-Aviv authorities refer to their forces as the “Israel
Defence Force”, it is clear from this that these forces are
aggressive, since they are present on the territory of a
Member State as the result of conquest and invasion.

181, Now while I am making my remarks, I respectfully
request the members of the Security Council to look at the
map, starting with Rabid, and to keep our complaint in
mind. Confusion has arisen regarding the decision to be
taken by the Council on the question of our complaint that
a column of Israel tanks and supporting elements including
airplanes and helicopters moved out of R&d eastward and
southward in the direction of Naoua. I must immediately
say that, since I am going to refer to the question by the
Secretary-General, 1 do not mean in any way to imply any
questiolling of the Secretary-General, but, the question put
by him in his second oral report to the Council [Press
Release SG/SM/74Sj states:
,.. ~-..

187. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. Perhaps, if the representative of Jordan agrees, he could have the same
arrangement. I would ask the representative of Saudi Arabia
then to take the place reserved for him at the Council table.

“The key point in connexion with observance of the
cease-fire is the question of whether the Israel troops
were in Rafid and environs before 1630 hours GMT on 10
June, or whether they have advanced to that sector after
the time fixed for the cease-fire to go into effect.”

188. I now invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

182. There are two questions involved here. The first
question is the occupation of Rabid. Was it before or after
the cease-fire? The second question, which is the subject of
my complaint today, is the advance of a column of Israel
tanks and supporting elements out of Rabid eastward and
southward. Now when that complaint was submitted to
Mr. Sasson, he said that there was no advance anywhere on
the front, that the allegation was completely baseless.Then
we heard from Mr. Rafael when he made his statement
tonight that the movement was within the truce line. But I
am very grateful to the representative of Nigeria, because he
really put the dots on the i’s-as it is said in French:
Weftrc
les points stir les i’-when he said that the troops
should be halted wherever they are after the cease-fire. Our
contention is that Israel tanks and a column of armoured
cars, as formulated in the document submitted by the
Secretary-General, moved out of Rabid. We contend that
that is a violation of the cease-fire.

189. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): If I have asked for
the floor, it is to exercise the right of reply, given me by the
courtesy of the Council, to none other than my good friend
Ambassador Goldberg. I wish I had been here to know
exactly what he said before. It was reported to me after I
stepped outside, and I checked it with three different
sources, that he took exception to my having touched upon
the character or the pronouncements or the declarations-of course I am paraphrasing-of those who are not
responsible for shaping the policy of the United States
Government.. In other words, it would be like interfering in
the domestic affairs of another State Member, and I
understand that he took exception to what he thought I
had said.
190. I should like to draw the kind attention of my friend,
Mr. Goldberg, to the fact that there are congressional
committees and senatorial committees that, to a large
extent, influence and shape the policy of the United States
Government. There is the Foreign Relations Committee,
the Budgetary Committee-all kinds of committees. I know
a little about the structure of the United States Government, having lived here long enough. But we must not lose
sight of the fact that this is a democratic country that uses
the information media for influencirlg the voters. SO, by
virtue of the system and the media that they use, the
Senators and the Congressmen, although they may not be
members OF the Government, do influence the voters to
support the Government:

183. This is the second complaint. This should not
prejudice in any way the complaint which we put forward
yesterday, that Rafik was occupied after the cease-fire.
184. But again I say that the question now is the matter of
the troops that went out of Rafid in an eastward and
southward direction toward Naoua and other localities
where no fighting had previously taken place. I hope that
this should be quite clear in the minds of the members of
the Security Coudcil when they pronounce themselves on
the complaint which I submitted tonight.

191. Then, Mr. Rusk and the two Senators, Mr. Case and
Mr, Morse. Mr. Rusk, of course is a man of great experience, He is circumspect. He does not have to say, “Thank
God for Mr. Case and Mr. Morse”, to tell us what is going

185. Before finishing my remarks, there are two other
Points I should like to raise. First, in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/7930/,4&3/,
to which the attention
17

on inside Mr. Rusk’s head. They let the cat out of the bag.
Here they do let many cats out of many bags in this
country, fortunately for us. But we have no power. We can
only adduce what others say and bring to the attention of
none other than our good friend Mr. Goldberg what goes
on, instead of keeping it to ourselves. And we do know
what is going on.

representative of Nigeria, we also have, of course, every
right to speak on all questions related to compliance with
our resolutions concerning the cease-fire. But we should try
to concentrate on those points tonight.
197. I call on the representative of Israel.
198. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I shall be very brief and
confine myself to the matter for which the Council was
convened. In any case, the representative of Saudi Arabia
has fully briefed all of us on all questions of religion, race
and theology, and other irrelevancies. I shall deal now with
the matter for which the Council was called into Iurgent
session.

192. I meant no harm. But I must say, we ourselves are
greatly hurt, We do not wish others to be hurt, but we are
greatly hurt, the Arab people. I reflect the mood of the
Arab people. We know that most Western countries are not
with us. How do we know it? I have been living in the
West, on and off, for forty years. 1 have two ears and I have
eyes. I listen, and I scan not only the papers, but the
pronouncements and parliamentary proceedings. I have
been reading all the proceedings in Parliament and Congress, and I am quoting what I come across.

199. Before dealing with that specific question, I just want
to clarify one point for the benefit of the representative of
Bulgaria. I may have misunderstood him. He spoke about
the United Nations personnel that were apprehended or
arrested and later released. I want to make it c1ea.rthat
these were Syrian officers attached to the Mixed Armistice
Commission, acting as liaison officers or representatives of
the Mixed Armistice Commission. In any case, these Syrian
officers have been released and the problem does not exist
any more.

193. But I did not mean to assassinate the character of
anyone. However, what I said is true. You might say, well,
we should play the game here, But I am tired of playing the
game, this kind of game which is getting us nowhere. I want
the American people to know that I have replied to Senator
Kennedy, or to Mr. Rockefeller for that matter. It shows
you this is your system. Leave us alone.

200. I just want to bring to the attention of the C:ouncil
the following fact-that we have not found any confir.
mation in any of the dispatches of General Bull that Israel
forces have advanced beyond the front line established
yesterday at the time the cease-fire came into effect. ‘Thatjs
clearly borne out in Press Release SG/SM/745, becausein
the last two paragraphs it is stated:

194.
Here
[indicating
photograph],
this is
Mr. Rockefeller. I showed this to my King. That is a
synagogue. He is a Christian, but he puts on the skull cap,
he puts on the garb. Mr. Robert Kennedy goes to the
synagogue facing Mr. Fedorenko’s mission-just to catch
votes. Votes, And we should keep silent. They are no more
Jews than you and I, Mr. Goldberg, are Buddhists. They are
Christians. This is in the papers, and these are responsible
people. Both of them might become President of the
United States, Both of them are potential candidates for
the Presidency of the United States, one a Republican and
one a Democrat. And this is what the Arab world has to
contend with. And the Zionists-they support them here. I
think that the Zionists are clever-not the Zionists, the
Jews. Sut the Arabs are clever, too. They know this. They
know they are vote-catchers. But at whose expense? At our
expense.

“It should be kept in mind that the United Nations
observers were not in that area on 10 June and could not
proceed there until the morning of 11 June. Their report,
therefore, is unavoidably limited to their obscrvat.ion on
11 June
“The key point in connexion with observance of the
cease-fire is the question of whether the Israel troops
were in Rafid and environs before 1630 hours GMT on 10
June, or whether they have advanced to that sector after
the time fixed for the cease-fire to go into effect.”

19.5. If the American Government is playing a game with
us, we have no quarrel. We used to say in the Arab world:
“God in Heaven and the Americans on earth.” That wasin
my youth when they had ideals. Now, what has supplemented those ideals? Mammon, business. ,And we, ourselves, are being contaminated by business. Everything is
business and money, the mighty dollar or the mighty rial or
whatever currency one uses-1 do not know about the
ruble.

201. I have stated that our forces have not advanced and
have no intention of advancing; they will strictly abide by
their obligations under the cease-fire. We requested General
Bull, immediately when these reports became known, or
the request of the Syrian representative became known, to
dispatch observers to the scene or should go himself, if
possible, and investigate whether IsraeI forces had advanced
or were advancing in this area. General Bull informed our
representative that he would investigate the matter in the
early hours of the morning-I
think that might be very
soon-and therefore he could not pass any final judgement
on the allegation that Israel forces had advanced beyond
the front line. Therefore, I must say that at this time and
hour there is no confirmation whatsoever for the allegation
that Israel forces have advanced beyond the front line
established at 1630 hours GMT on 10 June,

196. The PRESIDENT: I must appeal to all members, The
hour is very, very late. A concrete matter has been brought
before this Council. I would ask everyone participating in
this debate to concentrate on the case brought before the
Council tonight by the representative of Syria. He requested an urgent meeting in order to discuss the grave
situation concerning the tank column and to take the
necessary action with a view to putting an end to this
quickly deteriorating situation. As was rightly said by the

202. I think that we should also take cognizance of the
fact that there is no firing or fighting anywhere along the
18

front line, in no sector whatsoever of the front line. Again,
I say that we are scrupulously respecting the cease-fire, and
all our forces have been so instructed.
203. We are co-operating with General Bull. We are trying
to facilitate his work. I have, already mentioned that
observer teams are operating along the front line, and we
would certainly try our best to make available to General
Bull any other facilities he may wish to obtain.
204. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I have only one
point which I wish to make, very shortly. 1 wish to express
my gratitude to the representative of Nigeria for raising an
important point. I think that when 1 was speaking earlier 1
referred to the cease-fire line. If I did so, 1 did so
inadvertently. I entirely agree with the important point
which he has put to us. It is well, I think, to refer back to
the actual words of the agreement reached by General Bull,
I refer to the record of yesterday’s meeting; the actual
words of General Bull were: “(1). I proposed a cease-fire
together with no further movement of troops to be
effective at 1630 hours GMT, 10 June,” [13.5&h meeting,
para, 25.1 That is the proposal which he made to both
parties, and it wasaccepted by both parties.
205. I am very glad that I can confirm that, and if
previously I used the word “cease-fire line”, 1 wasmistaken,
206. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
First of all, my delegation would like to associate itself with
the expressions of appreciation of the work done by the
Secretary-General and General Bull in the last few days in
fulfilment
of the tasks which this Council entrusted to
them.
207. The Council has adopted three cease-fire resolutions.
The most recent one, resolution 235 (1967), relating
specifically to the problems on the SyrianIsrael front, was
adopted more than two days ago, on 9 June. Thus the
Security Council acted unanimously in the discharge of its
primary responsibility. Both parties accepted the Council’s
request, and 1630 hours GMT on 10 June was fixed as the
time of the cease-fire,
208. The prestige of this Council, and consequently of the
United Nations itself, would be jeopardized if this body
shirked its obligation to supervise and maintain a cease-fire
which it has itself requested in order to put an end to the
hostilities. Neither world public opinion, nor our own
consciences, nor yet the responsibilities which we bear at
this hour, can remain unaffected if we hesitate in this
matter, for to do so would be to aid and abet a violation. In
our opinion, what we must do in order to discharge the
important
and solemn task of judging the behaviour of
sovereign States Members of the United Nations is to
assemble as much documentation as possible and whatever
evidence can help us to form conclusive and definitive
opinions,
209. As my delegation seesit, there are three problems the
solution of which brooks no delay, First of all, we consider
it imperative that the Government of Israel should return
Government House in Jerusalem to General Bull. Apart
from the great difficulty which we have had in obtaining

information in the last few days, we feel that if the
situation continues a few days longer, not only our right to
be informed but also the actual prestige of the United
Nations will be at stake.
210. Secondly, I should like to point out that the report
of the Secretary-General 1;5/793O/Add.3/ clearly mentions
the discussions which have taken place in Jerusalem
concerning the exchange of prisoners and which have had
the Secretary-General’s full support. My delegation, together with the delegations of Brazil and Ethiopia, submitted a draft resolution on this matter [S/7968/, for we
wished to ensure the strict application of humanitarian
principles in the treatment of prisoners of war and of the
civilians who are suffering the consequences of this conflict.
Because of the important and urgent problems confronting
the Council we have not pressed this draft resolution, but
we feel bound to make it known that we whole-heartedly
welcome the Secretary-General’s idea and give it our
support.
211. Thirdly, we have the problem which the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has put before us this
evening, and which is the main reason for this meeting: the
claim that the cease-fire has been violated today by Israel
troops. There is no question that it is absolutely imperative-and 1 stress this point, as I did at the beginning of my
statement-that the Council should take all the necessary
steps to ensure the observance of the cease-fire and that
severe sanctions should be applied to the party responsible
for any violation. As far as the actual facts are concerned,
my delegation fully endorses the last sentence in the report
which the Secretary-General read to us this evening to the
effect, namely that, before we come to any decision, it is
vital to ascertain whether, at 1630 hours GMT on 10 June,
Israel troops did or did not occupy the locality of Rafid.
212. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom I now give the floor,
213. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. Rafael, in his answer, tried
again to confuse and mislead the Council. My complaint
refers to a violation that took place on 11 June, and my
letter [S/7973] is dated 11 June. The second oral report of
the Secretary-Genera.l[Press Release SG/SM/745] states:
“Second message received from General Bull at 2032
hours New York time:
“ ‘Hereby report just received from Damascus: 1.
approximately 0950 hours GMT today, 11 June, United
Nations military observer teams UN-203 q . . ”
Then it goes on to say:
“ ‘2. At 1539 hours GMT, United Nations military
observer teams 203 and 150 reported that they could
observe two or three tanks in front of Joukada village.’ ”
And then-and this is the important sentence-it says:
“ ‘They also reported that on a ridge in front of this
village a column of tanks was heading in an easterly
direction
and afterwards turning in a southerly
direction’.”

t

I wished to bring to the attention
Council that statement of 11 June.

of the members of the

214. The PRESIDENT:
I have no further speakers on my
list at present. I am wondering whether it is the wish of the
members to have a short suspension of the meeting as
earlier suggested by Lord Caradon, the representative of the
United Kingdom, or whether the members wish to adjourn
until tomorrow.

221. We wish to protest most vigorously against these
hypocritical, deceitful and cynical statements and lectures
by a Member of this Organization.
222. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Unless there is
objection, I would formally move for a short suspension of
the meeting so that we can bring our proceedings to a
conclusion as rapidly as possible.
223. The PRESIDENT: A motion has been made under
rule 33, paragraph 1, of our provisional rules of procedure,
to suspend the meeting, I assume for about a quarter of an
hour, I will put the motion to a vote without debate.

215. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I should have
thought it was most important that we should not adjourn
until tomorrow and that we should complete our business
tonight. I believe that it should be possible, with a very
short adjournment-since
I believe the purposes of the
Council are quite clear-to come to a conclusion tonight,
and I believe that it would be wrong to postpone our
decision until tomorrow.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The motion was adopted unanimously.
The meeting was suspended at 2.20 a.m. and resumed at

216. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should
like to reply to the question which you have just asked
about whether we should adjourn the meeting.

3 a.m.
224. The PRESIDENT: On the basis of consultations I
should like, if the Council agrees, to submit the folla8wing
draft resolution for adoption by the Council without
debate. It reads as follows:

217. In my view, it was completely unwarranted and at
variance with the proper procedure to raise the question of
adjourning the meeting. We have met here to take a
decision and we have no right, as members of the Council,
to disperse without doing so. We have listened patiently to
everyone, but we did not come here to listen to certain
representatives lecturing us on how to speak and how not
to speak.

“The Security Council,
“Taking note of the oral reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation between Israel and Syria, .made
at the 1354th, 1355th, 1356th and 1357th meetings and
the supplemental information supplied in documents
S/7930 and Add.13,

218. We in turn would like to express our views on those
moralizing rejoinders which were addressed in particular to
the representative of Saudi Arabia. These remarks came
first from the United States representative, and then we
heard the same moral admonitions from the representative
of Tel-Aviv. We have expressed our views about him enough
already, and there is no need to reaffirm that one cannot
believe a single word this representative says.

“1. Condemns any and all violations of the cease-fire;
“2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
investigations and to report to the Council as soon as
possible;
“3. Affirms
that its demand for a cease-fire and
discontinuance of all military activities includes a prohibition of any forward military movements subsequent to
the cease-fire; ’

219. Yet he goes on raising his voice against the representative of a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations, and tries to lecture him on how he ought to speak.
It is sadly ironical that long discourses are being delivered
here about the inadmissibility
of criticism, which is
interpreted as interference in the internal affairs of a State.
But what is happeining in the territory of the Arab
States-is that just a statement or criticism? What is
happening there is a scandalous violation of every international law, an outrage against a nation’s sovereignty and a
shameful and disgraceful interference in its internal affairs.
Yet these people still come here and reproach other
representatives. What right have they to do so? Have they
completely forgotten where they are?

“4. Calls for the prompt return to the cease-fire
positions of any troops which may have moved forward
subsequent to 1630 hours GMT on 10 June 1967;
“5. Calls for full co-operation with the Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
and the observers in implementing the cease-fire, including freedom of movement and adequate communications facilities.”
We shall now vote on that draft resolution.

220. Washington’s representative admonished the representative of Saudi Arabia, saying that he had offended
someone and had interfered in the domestic affairs of the
United States. But what is happening in Viet-Nam? Is that
what is called respect for the sovereignty of an independent
State? What kind of farce are the diplomats of Washington
and Tel-Aviv trying to play here?

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.’

1 Seeresolution 236 (1967).

20

225. The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning, I would ask
the Secretary-General whether he has any supplementary
information for the Council.

23 1. Lord CARADON (Umted Kingdom): I would appeal
to the representative of Bulgaria to allow the normal
processes of consultations to take place. We are already well
embarked on this day and many of us wish to reflect. Some
of us indeed may wish to obtain fresh instructions before
we proceed, I do not by any means eliminate the possibility
of an early meeting, but it is the practice of the Council to
consult all members. I am sure that we have full confidence
in the President that he will do so with proper expedition. I
would therefore urge the representative of Bulgaria to allow
the processes of consultation to take place, realizing of
course the great urgency of the matter with which we are
dealing.

226. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have had no other
information from General Odd Bull since the suspension of
the meeting of the Security Council.
227. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General. I
now intend to adjourn the meeting. The time of the next
meeting will be fixed by me after consultations with all
members and on the usual understanding that all members
should hold themselves available in case of an emergency.
228. Mr,

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
I should like to say something about the time of
our next meeting. I would have preferred that we should
meet this afternoon at about 4 o’clock-I say this afternoon
because it is now 3 a.m.-so that we can keep the situation
under review and have an opportunity to consider what
other measures the Council should take with regard to it. I
think this would be acceptable to members of the Council.
I therefore propose that we meet at about 4 or 5 p.m.
today.

232. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): I would support in
principle the proposal made by the representative of
Bulgaria to have a meeting at 5 o’clock this afternoon. But I
am not against consultations to work out the time for our
next meeting.

French):

233. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (tmnslated from
The purpose of my suggestion was to consult
members of the Council. I think that it would be useful to
schedule a meeting of the Council for about 5 p.m. To all
intents and purposes we are consulting one another now.
However, if it does not prove necessary to hold a meeting at
about 5 p.m., the President could inform us that the
Council will not meet. I think, however, that it will be useful to schedule a meeting for about 5 p.m. so that we
can follow the situation. I should like that time to be fixed
in principle, on the understanding that the meeting will be
cancelled if it proves unnecessary.
French):

229. The PRESIDEN,T: Personally, I would have thought
that perhaps it would be advisable to allow a little time to
think of the problems raised, for instance, by the representative of India, and I would also take into consideration
what the representative of Bulgaria has suggested and
consult the members of the Council. If it were the view of
the members that we should convene this afternoon, I
would certainly reconvene the Council. But would it not be
acceptable to use the formula I suggested: that I would
reconvene the Council on the basis of consultations?
I

234. The PRESIDENT: I understand that it is the wish of
the representative of Bulgaria in principle to fix our next
meeting for 5 o’clock this afternoon, but that he would
agree that I complete the consultations that I have just
started here in the Council and that, on the basis of those
consultations, the final decision on the timing will be taken
later today. Since there is no objection, that will be done.

230. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulnaria) ltranslated from
F?+e&): I should have no object&r if there are no further
developments. But I think that we could meet at about 4 or
5 p.m. today. We might then have the opportunity to
consider the second stage of our work and to see how the
decisions we have already taken have been implemented.

The meeting rose on Monday, 12 June, at 3.10 a.m.

21

--

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicotions,may
the world,
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
des
dCposiloirer
du monde
Notions
Unier,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

UNIES

Notions
Unier
rant
en vente
dons
les librairies
et les agencer
entier.
Informer-vous
qupr&s de votre libroirie
ou odrersez-vous
b:
des venter,
New York ou Genbve.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacioner
de las Nocioner
Unidar
ertdn
en todar
partes
del mundo.
Consulte
e su librero
Venfas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho in U.N.

DES NATtONS

throughout
New York

en venta
o dirljase

UNIDAS
en librerior
o: Nocioner

y cosos distribuidoror
Unidor,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

X520-January

1971-2,100
