S/PV.7549

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7549th meeting

Thursday, 5 November 2015, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Juodkaitė Putrimienė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-35200 (E)
*1535200*

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
In the spirit of the Council’s working methods as set
out in document S/2010/507, I would kindly request the
briefer this morning to keep her remarks to no longer
than 15 minutes, and Council members to deliver their
statements within a five-minute period.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I wish at the outset to thank
the Council for this opportunity to address it on the
situation in Libya. This is the tenth occasion on which
I am providing this briefing since the referral of the
situation to my Office in February 2011.
Libya has been embroiled in a seemingly endless
cycle of violence, large-scale commission of crimes
and chronic instability, with serious and debilitating
ramifications for not only the proper functioning of
State institutions, but also the human rights landscape
in the country.
The breakdown of law and order induced by
incessant conflict and political divide has resulted in
an increase in the number of violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law.
In such an environment, national efforts aimed at
strengthening accountability for atrocity crimes and
establishing the rule of law face great challenges.
But from trial and tribulation comes hope. As we
are gathered here today, the Libyan people’s long ordeal
may soon see a redirection towards a more promising
future for Libya. Thanks to the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
and to the strength and commitment of the Libyan
people, significant progress has recently been made
2/17

05/11/2015

towards the goal of achieving peace and stability in
the country through the creation of a Government of
national unity.
The ongoing national dialogue, facilitated by the
United Nations, aimed at the establishment of a Libyan
Government of national accord, represents hope for
a transition to national unity and durable peace, and
it carries important promise for Libya’s efforts in the
promotion of the rule of law, the protection of civilians
and the ending of impunity for atrocity crimes.
Any such initiative that is embraced by the Libyan
people and achieves these laudable goals, including
paying homage to justice as a critical pillar of sustainable
peace, is, of course, welcomed by my Office.
In yet another important development of note,
UNSMIL has facilitated successful talks towards
the resolution of the Tawergha issue. The agreement
reached in Tunis in September to develop strategies
for the return of the Tawergha as well as to establish
clear plans for reparations to the victims is a welcome
development.
It is particularly noteworthy that the Misrata/
Tarwergha Joint Committee affirmed its full support
for the political dialogue and the formation of a
Government of national accord so as to meet the
aspirations of the Libyan people to establish the rule of
law, end the conflict and safeguard Libyan unity.
The era of accountability and the rule of law, as a
basis on which the future of the country can be built,
may indeed be within reach for the Libyan people.
We, as a collective, cannot fail the Libyan people by
standing idly by as the country degenerates into chaos
and further instability. My Office is ready to fully play
its part in accordance with the Rome Statute by ensuring
accountability for atrocity crimes in Libya. To that end,
the Council’s tangible support remains crucial.
As indicated in my Office’s tenth report to the
Council, a significant body of material provided by
the Libyan authorities in late December 2014 continues
to be reviewed, analysed and investigated, resulting
in investigative progress towards shedding light on
instances of atrocity crimes allegedly committed in
Libya. Our cooperation with the Libyan authorities in
obtaining the relevant materials continues. I stress the
importance of undertaking investigations with respect
to the ongoing crimes in Libya and reiterate my Office’s
every desire to do so. To that end, the Office requested
resources for additional investigations as part of its 2016
15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

proposed budget, to be considered by the States parties
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). However,
there are indications that those resources will likely
not be forthcoming. As such, resource constraints in
2016 will impede the Office’s ability to conduct these
additional investigative activities.
It is of paramount importance that the ongoing
crimes committed by different actors in Libya be
investigated and that my Office be provided with
the requisite resources to undertake these necessary
investigations in accordance with its mandate. My
Office therefore relies on the critical financial support of
States parties in this regard, and I take this opportunity
to call on them to provide this crucial funding. I equally
and strongly invite the Council to seriously consider
assisting the Office, in accordance with article 115(b) of
the Rome Statute, to obtain the resources required for
the effective investigation of alleged crimes committed
in a situation that has been referred to the Court by this
body.
Devising innovative and effective strategies and
action plans on how to give meaning to the provisions
of article 115(b) of the Rome Statute is essential.
Turning to the cases of the accused, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Council will
recall that the Appeals Chamber of the ICC affirmed
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi on 21 May 2014 and the inadmissibility
of the case against Al-Senussi on 24 July 2014. To
date, despite the repeated demands of my Office, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not been surrendered to the
custody of the ICC. The Libyan authorities must heed
the Council’s calls for cooperation and comply with the
Court’s request to immediately surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. The Libyan authorities are
under a clear legal obligation to do so, and remain
non-compliant by failing to surrender him into ICC
custody.
As Council members are aware, on 28 July the
Tripoli Court of Assize sentenced both Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, among other
co-defendants, to death for the crimes they allegedly
committed during Libya’s 2011 uprising. This was an
issue of concern, as my Office is still calling upon
Libya to surrender Al-Qadhafi to the ICC while it has
continued to monitor and collect information to enable
it to determine whether there are new facts that may
support an application for review under article 19 (10)
of the Rome Statute of Pre-Trial Chamber I’s decision

S/PV.7549

finding the Al-Senussi case inadmissible before the
Court.
My Office was also deeply concerned by videos
of alleged acts of torture against Saadi Al-Qadhafi at
Al-Hadba prison, which circulated online in August.
Reports of alleged acts of torture or similar inhumane
acts at the prison are relevant to the Al-Senussi case
in the context of articles 17 and 19 (10) of the Rome
Statute. My Office is currently investigating the
circumstances depicted in the videos, including by
seeking information from Libya and reviewing and
assessing the materials already furnished by the Libyan
authorities.
In its latest correspondence to my Office dated
23 October 2015, and in subsequent recent meetings
with my team and myself directly, Libyan authorities
have assured my Office that these allegations are being
pursued, and that meaningful and concrete actions have
and will continue to be taken in this regard. In addition,
the Libyan authorities have provided my Office with
documents related to their investigations into the alleged
criminal events at the prison. Our initial assessment
of the information provided gives hope for optimism
about these national efforts. My Office will continue its
constructive engagement with the Libyan authorities to
ensure that the requisite information is provided for its
own assessment of Rome Statute requirements.
It is also important to highlight the fact that
on 30 July 2015, my Office filed a request with the
Pre-Trial Chamber seeking an order directing Libya to
refrain from executing Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, to
immediately surrender him to the Court, and to report
his death sentence to the Council. In its response on
20 August 2015, Libya explained that the death sentence
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi was non-enforceable
in Libya because his trial was held in absentia, and that
he will enjoy an absolute right to a new trial when he is
transferred from Zintan into the custody of the Libyan
authorities. Libya acknowledged that Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi was not in its custody.
In relation to the Al-Senussi case, my Office
continues to monitor proceedings at the national level
and to collect information to enable it to determine
whether there are new facts in support of an application
for a review of the decision on the admissibility of the
case. It is worth emphasising that, under article 19 (10)
of the Rome Statute, my Office can submit a request for
review of the Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision only if it is
fully satisfied that there are new facts that negate the

15-352003/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

basis of that decision. The Appeals Chamber of the ICC
has held that, for due process violations in a domestic
trial to lead to a case being deemed admissible before
the ICC, the violations must be so egregious that the
proceedings can no longer be regarded as being capable
of providing any genuine form of justice to the accused.
To that end, my Office sought and is carefully analysing
information on the progress of the proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi from UNSMIL, Human Rights Watch
and the Libyan authorities.
My Office currently awaits the full UNSMIL
report on the Libyan trial of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi and the trial judgment, and
will continue to follow the situation and to collect and
analyse information with a view to determining whether
to seek the Chamber’s review of the admissibility of
the Al-Senussi case. My Office’s assessment of the
information at its disposal at this stage is that it does
not support an application for a review of the Pre-Trial
Chamber’s decision an the admissibility of the case
against Al-Senussi. This position is necessarily limited
to the information the Office currently has in its
possession and is subject to change in accordance with
reliable information that it may receive in the future.
My Office continues to monitor the situation
in Libya and is concerned that large-scale crimes,
including those under ICC jurisdiction, are being
committed by all parties to the conflict. I remain
equally concerned that all sides — including the Libyan
national army, Libya Dawn and the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their respective
allies, and international actors — continue to commit
attacks resulting in civilian casualties. Examples of
these crimes have been set out in detail in my tenth
report to the Council. My Office recalls that those
responsible for these crimes can be prosecuted either
at the national level or at the ICC. I reiterate here my
Office’s willingness and commitment to undertaking
further investigations in Libya, but stress once again
the need for States parties and the Council to ensure
adequate funding to my Office for this purpose.
Pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council
decided that
“the Libyan authorities shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution”
(resolution 1970 (2011), para. 5).

4/17

05/11/2015

This important declaration has been reiterated in
subsequent resolutions of the Council. Continued
cooperation, consultation and coordination between my
Office and the Libyan authorities remain crucial for the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
concluded in November 2013 on burden-sharing
regarding investigations and prosecutions in Libya.
The Office appreciates the cooperation it continues
to receive from both States parties and non-States
parties, as well as international organizations, in the
Libya situation, and we look forward to strengthening
efforts and synergies to assist Libyan authorities in
their efforts to build the rule of law in Libya. In this
regard, I reiterate my previous calls for assistance to
Libya in strengthening its national capacity to respond
to Rome Statute crimes through the formation of an
international contact group on justice issues.
The recent gains towards the establishment of the
Libyan Government of national accord and national
unity may indeed increase the prospects for reviving
discussions on this proposal in the near future.
Similarly, I appeal to all other States that have not yet
done so to engage and cooperate with my Office. Some
of the evidence and persons of interest to my Office
are located outside of Libya and can be accessed only
through the cooperation of States. Ending impunity
for atrocity crimes in Libya is an important goal that
is both achievable and necessary for sustainable peace
and stability in the country. It is also a goal that only
be met can through the joint action, commitment and
substantial support of all the relevant actors.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing. We commend the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for its significant contributions
to the development of substantive and procedural
international criminal law. We also recognize the
important contributions of the Court to the promotion
of the rule of law.
Nigeria commends the Libyan Prosecutor General
and the Libyan representative to the ICC for their
close cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor.
We welcome the exchange of information between the
Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office and the Office

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

of the Prosecutor and commend the commitment and
professionalism of the Libyan national investigators. We
encourage the two sides to strengthen their cooperation
and work together to end impunity in Libya.
With regard to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, we note
the Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision of 31 May 2013,
confirmed by the 21 May 2014 decision of the Appeals
Chamber, that his case is admissible. Therefore, as
a State party to the Rome Statute, Libya has a legal
obligation to surrender him to the Court.
Concerning Abdullah Al-Senussi, we note the
decision of the Court that his case is inadmissible.
We also note the ongoing efforts by the Office of the
Prosecutor to monitor his trial in Libya for new facts
that may support a reversal of the Court’s decision
concerning the admissibility of his case.
We note the progress that the Office of the
Prosecutor has made in the ongoing investigation in
Libya. That is particularly significant in the light of
the difficult security situation in the country and the
limited resources available to the Office. We commend
the Office for investigating the crimes committed by
different parties in Libya, including those committed
by terrorist groups that are taking advantage of the
political and security vacuum in the country. That is
consistent with resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015).
We condemn all mass executions, including that of
30 Ethiopian Christians, by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). We also condemn the abductions by ISIS
and other terrorist groups. We call for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire across Libya. Parties involved
in the conflict should refrain from targeting civilians
or civilian targets and should desist from committing
atrocity crimes. We call on all Libyan militias to disarm
and participate in the efforts to restore peace, law and
order in the country. We support the political dialogue
and the formation of a Government of national accord
in order to meet the aspirations of the Libyan people,
establish the rule of law, end the conflict and safeguard
Libyan unity. That is vital to stabilizing the country and
ending the impunity of terrorist groups and militias.
On the issue of resources, we note with concern that
resource constraints might hinder the Office’s ability to
conduct additional investigative activities in 2016. We
therefore call upon States parties to provide the funding
required by the Office to undertake the necessary
investigations in accordance with its mandate.

S/PV.7549

Finally, we call on key partners of Libya to provide
the necessary support to the Libyan authorities for the
purpose of restoring security in the country, protect
civilians and strengthen capacity in the areas of justice
and the rule of law.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to begin by
wishing you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom success in your presidency of the
Security Council. We also congratulate the Spanish
delegation for their excellent work during their
presidency in October. We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
briefing on the tenth report submitted according to the
provisions of resolution 1970 (2011).
Four months have passed since the previous
report and debate of the Security Council on this
issue. The report just presented reveals very little
progress in the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding, which is an important requirement
for judicial cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities. The current
political and security environment in Libya, marked
by an institutional crisis and escalating violence, has
impeded cooperation and the necessary assistance to
the Court and to the Prosecutor’s Office within the
framework of resolution 1970 (2011). Extremist terrorist
groups joined by foreign terrorist fighters, political and
military factions and militias have created mayhem
in the country. They attack civilians indiscriminately
and commit egregious crimes such as abductions and
mass executions. Against a backdrop of lawlessness
and chaos, the conditions do not exist to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of such atrocity crimes,
which the Statute of the International Criminal Court
specifies as the primary responsibility of national
authorities. However, it is obvious that in Libya there
are no conditions to apply due process and fair trials.
Information provided by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
detention facilities are illegally operated by various
factions to the conflict is a matter of the utmost concern.
The fact that thousands of people, including foreign
citizens and children under 18, have been detained and
exposed to ill-treatment, torture and sexual and genderbased violence — and, in the case of foreign detainees,
subject to extortion in exchange for freedom — reveals
the chaotic state of affairs of the Libyan justice system.
We believe that only peace and stability will allow

15-352005/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

Libya to have a normal system of justice and efficient
judicial institutions.
We therefore reiterate our support for the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community to
continue to work with Libyan parties to reach a political
settlement to the conflict. We urge them to respect the
political agreement announced on 8 October by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
León, based on the conviction that Libya’s ability to
face the challenges of the future and build a peaceful
society will ultimately depend upon political stability
and State institutions based on the rule of law.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time this month that I speak in a public
meeting, I would like to commend the delegation of
Spain on its outstanding presidency of the Security
Council last month. We also express to you, Sir, our
determination to support you resolutely during this
month.
We once again express our gratitude for the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and value the presentation of her
tenth report on Libya, in fulfilment of resolution 1970
(2011). My delegation, aware of the many difficulties
being experienced by Libya and worried about the
escalation of violence, shares the view that justice and
accountability are essential to achieving sustainable
and lasting peace.
Several delegations, as well as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights himself, have
expressed concern about the high number of civilian
deaths due to acts committed by various armed groups,
especially those attributed to terrorist groups associated
with the self-styled Islamic State. It is imperative to
stop indiscriminate attacks and acts of kidnapping,
torture, sexual violence and other cruel and degrading
treatment, which should be the subject of serious and
transparent investigations. That is why we encourage
the efforts of the parties, with the help of United
Nations, to set up a Government of national accord that
will contribute to the necessary stability and to put an
end to impunity.
Chile believes it is a duty to continue to insist on full
cooperation with the International Criminal Court and
its Prosecutor, pursuant to the provisions of resolution
1970 (2011). We also believe that the Libyan authorities
must comply with their obligations under international
law and cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor as

6/17

05/11/2015

called for in resolutions 2174 (2014) and 2213 (2015).
Moreover, we urge, on the one hand, that Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi be made immediately available to the Court
and, on the other, that Abdullah A1-Senussi and other
individuals receive guarantees of due process in Libya.
Without that happening, international justice will lack
the trust required to achieve its ends.
My country would also like to support the
Prosecutor’s call on the Council to make available
resources to facilitate investigations referred to the
Court in line with the provisions of article 115 (b) of the
Rome Statute. Given the direct impact of the financial
aspect on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor, we
also believe that, together with the specific proposal of
the Prosecutor, complementary formulas for financing
should be applied, making it possible for that Office
to carry its investigations forward in an effective and
efficient fashion. That is a central concern.
In that vein, Chile will continue to work for a closer
relation between the Council and the International
Criminal Court, especially with regard to the two
cases referred so far As we have expressed on earlier
occasions, we are convinced that referrals are not an
end in themselves. We repeat that it is the responsibility
of the Council to conduct an effective follow-up, in
compliance with the mandate given to the Court.
Finally, we wish to reiterate our recognition of the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor in the investigation
of the abuses and crimes committed against victims
in different parts of Libya and its contribution to the
process of strengthening a more just, inclusive and
resilient Libyan society.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to convey my gratitude to the delegation
of Spain for its leadership in the work of the Council
during the month of October. I also wish to congratulate
you, Sir and your country, the United Kingdom, for
directing our work this month. I would like to convey
my gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.
The security situation and the political and human
rights situations in Libya remain alarming and continue
to deteriorate as a result of ongoing violence and of
serious violations of individual rights and freedoms.
We do understand and indeed we share the concerns
expressed in the report being considered — concerns
regarding acts of torture and other degrading treatment
of which a number of detainees have been victims. We

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

encourage further steps to be undertaken to clarify the
situation, with the assistance of the Libyan Government.
In that respect, we encourage efforts aimed at carrying
out investigations to put an end to those illegal practices
and to identify the perpetrators to ensure that they are
brought to justice. We also note with concern the death
sentences issued on 28 July, some in absentia, by the
Tripoli Court of Assize against a number of detainees,
including Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi.
While welcoming progress in terms of the
investigations conducted in regard to crimes committed
in Libya, we call upon the competent Libyan authorities
to fully cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to ensure that
the detainees enjoy a fair trial, one that respects
their right of defence. We take note of the initiative
of the Prosecutor to gather new information so as to
again consider the admissibility of the Al-Senussi
case and thus to possibly to render a judgement at the
International Criminal Court.
The insecurity sustained by the armed militias,
the development of terrorism, the fresh outbreak of
criminal activities, including human trafficking, and
the lack of prospects for a political solution not only
endanger the future of Libya, but also undermine all
the institutions of State, including the judiciary. That is
why we reiterate our call to all Libyan parties to make
the necessary concessions to form a Government of
national unity, one able to put an end to the conflict in
a decisive way and to restore the authority of the State.
The chaotic situation currently prevailing in Libya
is also marked by serious violations, including murders,
abductions, torture and sexual violence, as well as the
persecution of magistrates, politicians and other human
rights defenders. Thousands of individuals have been
caught up in violent fighting, and tens of thousands of
others have fled their homes to seek refuge. That has
been compounded by thousands of individuals detained
without a trial, including African immigrants who have
been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment
because of their race and their religion.
We energetically condemn all such violations
and demand that those responsible be identified and
brought to justice. To that end, the ICC, despite its
limited resources, should explore the ways and means
to be able to follow the situation closely, including by
launching investigations for possible prosecution. In

S/PV.7549

that respect, .the Security Council, which referred the
situation in Libya to the ICC through resolution 1970
(2011), must back the efforts of the Court. We also call
upon the States parties to the Rome Statute to do just
the same.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support to the work of the Prosecutor, and we wish to
convey our appreciation for her untiring efforts aimed
at discharging her mission.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, and your team on
the United Kingdom’s assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month, and by thanking Spain and
the Spanish delegation for the excellent work they did
in conducting us in the month of October.
The situation in Libya is at a critical point. Reaching
a political solution to the conflict is vital to the people of
Libya now more than ever. We strongly urge the parties
to conclude the Libyan political agreement, and we are
looking forward to the briefing later this morning on
the prospects for that final agreement.
I want to thank Ms. Bensouda for her report and
her briefing. They are sobering. Violent deaths in Libya
continue to increase month by month, and fighting
in the south has displaced 12,000 people in just four
months. We are particularly concerned that civilian
areas, places of worship and medical facilities are
repeatedly targeted, and minorities specifically so.
The Prosecutor’s report makes plain that crimes
are being committed on all sides of the conflict. It is
also clear that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and groups that have pledged allegiance to
ISIL are playing a particularly destructive role. The
Prosecutor’s call for States to prosecute their nationals
who are operating as foreign terrorist fighters in Libya
resonates with the Council’s own commitment to
countering such actors. The Council has spoken clearly
about the need to combat ISIL, including in Libya, and
has created obligations in resolution 2178 (2014), which
binds all Member States, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, to prosecute foreign terrorist
fighters. Member States have both an obligation to
prosecute foreign terrorist fighters domestically and an
obligation to afford one another the greatest measure
of assistance in criminal investigations relating to
support for terrorist acts. International cooperation
and information exchange will be critical to effectively
countering foreign terrorist fighters in Libya. We

15-352007/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

welcome the commitment shown by the Prosecutor to
supporting such efforts.
The instability and absence of State control in large
parts of Libya make the pursuit of justice especially
difficult. We recognize that the ability of the Prosecutor
to expand investigations into other alleged crimes is
hampered not only by the security situation but by a
lack of resources. The Prosecutor is right to draw this
Council’s attention to that distinct barrier to her office
pursuing investigations into ongoing crimes. In our
view, the Council should support the mandates it gives
to the Court. On matters of finances, it should defer
to the General Assembly, which has the prerogative to
decide on funding issues.
Despite the security challenges, we are pleased
that the Prosecutor continues to receive cooperation
from the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Libyan
representative to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), and that the memorandum of understanding
is still being implemented. That groundwork should
support Libya in meeting its obligation under resolution
1970 (2011) to cooperate fully with the Court. While
Ms. Bensouda has not sought a review of the ICC’s
finding, which returned the prosecution of Al-Senussi
to Libya, she is closely monitoring the domestic
proceedings against him. Reports on those trials and
allegations of torture in the detention centre where
Al-Senussi is being held raised legitimate reasons for
the Prosecutor to watch progress. We understand that
Abdullah Al-Senussi will appeal his sentence, and we
urge the Libyan authorities to ensure that due process
requirements are followed.
We are concerned that despite its obligations to
surrender him to the ICC, the Tripoli Court of Assize
handed down a death sentence to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi in July. While Libya has since provided a
formal explanation to the Court, including explaining
the unenforceability of such in absentia judgments,
the larger issue of Al-Qadhafi’s surrender remains
outstanding. While we recognize the challenges that
Libya faces, its obligations to the Court, which were
created by a resolution of the Council, are clear. We
welcome Ms. Bensouda’s assurance that the Court
stands ready to support Libya in fulfilling that
obligation.
While the report is difficult reading, the Prosecutor’s
Office should be commended for continuing to bear
witness before the Council to the crimes in Libya. The
Prosecutor’s briefing today, coming immediately before
8/17

05/11/2015

a briefing on the political situation in Libya, should
reinvigorate the Council’s commitment to a political
settlement and stability in Libya. As the Prosecutor
notes in her report, a unity Government and durable
peace present new hope for Libya’s efforts to promote
the rule of law, the protection of civilians and an end to
impunity for atrocity crimes.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we reiterate
our congratulations to Spain on the extraordinary job it
did during its presidency last month, and we offer our
full support to the incoming United Kingdom presidency
so that it can complete its mandate successfully.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her introduction of the
tenth report on the investigation into the situation in
Libya, submitted pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
and we wish to acknowledge and commend her on her
outstanding work in Libya despite the constraints she
faces.
Venezuela reaffirms its support for the role of the
International Criminal Court in strengthening the rule of
law at the international level in order to prosecute those
responsible for flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
provisions of the Rome Statute. As a State party to the
International Criminal Court since 2002, my country
supports strengthening its institutional stature and its
effective functioning. In that regard, we call on those
countries that are not parties to the Rome Statute to
accede to that instrument in order to make it universal.
For Venezuela, cooperation is essential to attaining
the objectives of the Court, and requires the commitment
of States to implementing its decisions and supporting
its work. Strengthening the international criminal
justice system established under the International
Criminal Court requires State parties to refrain
from actions that undermine its important functions
in the fight against impunity. While reaffirming
the importance of the ICC, we are concerned by the
procedural expedition of several past cases, owing to
political reasons, and the involvement of the Security
Council in the referral of cases the jurisdiction over
which falls to the International Criminal Court. Such
was the case with Libya, which highlights the partiality
of certain decisions that should be the purview of the
international community.

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

Politicization has a negative effect on the role
of the International Criminal Court and could
unbermine its autonomy, independence, objectivity and
impartiality — principles that must govern the exercise
of its responsibilities. There can be no double standards
in those cases; cases tried by the International Criminal
Court must be resolved within the institutional structure
of the Court, with the participation of members of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, and not
outside of it.
The situation of political instability resulting from
the institutional collapse of the Libyan State, triggered
by the military intervention of NATO countries in
2011, has severely affected the rule of law in that Arab
nation and, in particular, its legal system. The lack
of institutions and the confrontations among factions
vying for control of the country hinder the functioning
of the State. In that situation, we cannot speak of the
existence of a legal system in Libya that guarantees due
process for and the human rights of persons who have
allegedly committed crimes.
Libya is a country that has sunk into deep chaos
and widespread violence, which have been exploited by
terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia to expand their criminal
agenda throughout the country and neighbouring
nations. Summary executions, the evidence of torture
of members of the Al-Qadhafi family — as in the case
of Saadi Al-Qadhafi — and former members of the
Government of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi are
part of a policy of cruel retaliation, in clear violation
of the rule of law. The disappearance and persecution
of human rights activists are glaring reminders of the
ongoing violations of human rights that are recorded
daily in Libya, to the detriment of its citizens — which
would be hard to imagine if there were the rule of law
to ensure due process to those tried for various crimes.
Venezuela therefore rejects the decision of the
Tripoli Court of Assize last July, condemning Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi and other
Libyan citizens to death in absentia, because there are
no procedural safeguards to ensure a fair trial. That
verdict has been rejected at the international level by
various organizations, including the Human Rights
Council. We therefore call on the Libyan authorities to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court in order
to transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to The Hague, so
that he can be brought to trial with due process and
full respect for his human rights. Libya must ensure the

S/PV.7549

implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), facilitating
the transfer of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC.
Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) urges
Libya and all States and concerned regional and other
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor, as ratified by resolutions 2174
(2014) and 2213 (2015), reiterating Libya’s obligation
to comply in full cooperation with the Court and to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the immediate
custody of the International Criminal Code, in order for
him to be tried.
Although Mr. Bernardino León, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, has made significant
efforts to promote an agreement, to date the institutional
structure of the country has not yet recovered, nor have
new institutions been established. Therefore, we cannot
speak of the implementation of justice where existing
standards do not ensure citizens the equal protection
under the law.
Venezuela reiterates that inclusive political
dialogue and the establishment of a Government of
national unity are the bases for building a rule of law
with solid legal institutions, through which we can
ensure the promotion of and respect for human rights,
including international standards of due process, the
right to defence and the presumption of innocence as
fundamental procedural guarantees.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Bernardino León — which we will extend
to his successor Mr. Kobler — to attain a political
solution and thereby ensure the restoration of peace to
that brother African country, which is indispensable to
rebuilding the institutional foundations destroyed by
the war and foreign intervention in 2011, the aftermath
of which continues to be felt today with the deplorable
scenario of a fractured country fallen prey to terrorist
groups, and of a population thirsting for peace and
tranquillity.
Mrs. Juodkaitė Putrimienė (Lithuania): I wish
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November,
and to thank Spain for its excellent work in presiding
over the Council in October.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her latest report on Libya and for her briefing today.

15-352009/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

Lithuania remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing conflict in Libya. Human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law continue across Libya. All parties to the conflict
have to refrain from committing atrocities and take
all necessary measures to prevent the commission of
such crimes. We are seriously concerned about the
continuous threats to human rights defenders, media
workers and journalists. Many human rights defenders
and journalists have fled the country, fallen silent or
operate underground because of the continued attacks,
threats and intimidation, abductions and arbitrary
detentions. We encourage the Prosecutor and her
Office to continue to monitor this situation closely.
Furthermore, the barbaric crimes perpetrated by Daesh
and similar groups, including massive executions, may
constitute crimes under the Court’s jurisdiction and
have to be further monitored by the Prosecutor.
We appreciate the Prosecutor’s efforts to highlight
the plight of internally displaced persons and, in
particular, the situation of the Tawerghans. We welcome
the meeting of the Misrata/Tawergha Joint Committee,
held in Tunis early in September. The agreement to
develop their return strategies and plans for reparations
is a positive development. Ensuring the safe return
and protection of the Tawerghans should be seen as an
important element of national reconciliation.
Lithuania also welcomes and supports the ongoing
dialogue on cooperation and burden-sharing between
the Government of Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor. We would like to underline the importance
of continuing such judicial cooperation in order to
address impunity for atrocities, including through the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing regarding investigations and
prosecutions in Libya.
Lithuania thanks the Prosecutor for her update
on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libya should uphold its legal
obligations and surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the International Criminal Court. With regard to the
verdicts and sentences announced in Tripoli last July
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and other Qadhafi
officials, we call on Libya to ensure that these steps
do not undermine its responsibility and obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We also note that the
Prosecutor’s Office will continue to monitor and collect
information on the progress of the proceedings against
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the

10/17

05/11/2015

allegations of torture and inhuman treatment during
interrogation sessions at the Al-Habda prison, where
Al-Senussi is also being held. We encourage the Libyan
authorities to take measures to put an end to degrading
treatment and torture, if such acts do occur, and to
investigate and punish those responsible.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our gratitude
to Prosecutor Bensouda for her dedicated work and
for the tireless efforts of the International Criminal
Court in dealing with enormously difficult cases. Let
me underline that combating impunity is an obligation
of the entire international community. Therefore, the
United Nations has to ensure that adequate resources
are available for investigating the situations referred to
the Court by the Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for the briefing on the
work of her Office to help end impunity for atrocity
crimes in Libya.
In the past few months in particular, Libyans have
engaged constructively with the political dialogue
process facilitated by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bernardino León, and have taken
important steps towards finalizing a political settlement
and establishing a Government of national accord.
However, it is critical that the parties endorse the
political agreement and establish a unity Government
now, without delay. Libya cannot lose this opportunity
and the international community needs a Government
partner in Libya.
As Secretary John Kerry said, finalizing this
arrangement can help return Libya to a path of peace,
stability and prosperity, and the United States stands
ready to support a new Government of national
accord. Libya’s political strife has exacerbated existing
humanitarian, economic and security challenges,
while the lack of effective domestic accountability
mechanisms has allowed militias and armed groups to
operate unrestrained, committing serious human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law against ordinary Libyans. In particular, those
who try to shed light on these abuses, especially civil
society activists, media actors and female human rights
defenders, have been singled out, forcing them to either
leave Libya or go underground.
We commend the efforts of those who are
documenting these abuses and violations, including
in the many detention facilities throughout Libya,

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

recognizing that the continued violence and instability
in Libya make such work all the more dangerous but
ever more important. The United States remains
deeply concerned about the growing presence in Libya
of groups aligned with the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other extremists. We strongly
condemn the ongoing violent acts against civilians
by these groups in Sirte, Derna and Benghazi. All of
these abuses highlight the stakes of the conflict in
Libya and the urgent need to establish a Government of
national accord, which can be a constructive partner in
addressing all of these challenges, as well as irregular
migration and other regional challenges, and develop
the strong institutions in international partnerships that
Libya needs.
The Council has called for those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights in Libya to be
held to account. This is absolutely critical to the way
forward in Libya. We must seek justice, not only for
crimes committed by the Al-Qadhafi regime but, as
new events have arisen in Libya, we must also purse
justice for crimes committed by ISIL-aligned groups
and other extremists. That is one reason that a strong
and unified Libyan Government is so urgently needed,
so that the extremist threat can be adequately addressed,
including through domestic Libyan prosecution. We
also encourage other relevant States to prosecute
foreign fighters involved with such groups for atrocity
and other crimes, where appropriate.
With respect to the situation before the International
Criminal Court, we continue to support the Council’s
unified call for Libya to fulfil its obligation to cooperate
with and provide assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor. We note,in particular, Libya’s obligation
to transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, and
we urge Libya to refrain from any further proceedings
against Al-Qadhafi that would pose any obstacle to his
transfer to the Court. We also continue to stress, more
generally, that national proceedings in Libya should be
conducted in full compliance with Libya’s international
obligations.
To achieve national reconciliation, it will be
important to ensure the confidence of all Libyan
citizens in their Government’s commitment to due
process and the rule of law, and that those responsible
for serious crimes are held accountable. As Libya and
the international community work towards a political
agreement, we cannot forget that accountability for

S/PV.7549

crimes in Libya will be key to achieving lasting peace
and stability.
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office, once
again, for their work over the past six months and
since 2011, when the Council referred the situation in
Libya to the ICC. The United States looks forward to
continuing to work with the Council, the ICC, a new
Government of national accord and others to end the
violence, promote justice and build sustainable peace
in Libya.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we, too, would like to thank
the delegation of Spain for having led the work of the
Council in October and wish the current President
every success this month.
We have taken note of the tenth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
regarding the investigation of the situation in Libya,
and we thank Ms. Bensouda for her comments.
In 2011, when the Security Council decided to
refer the Libyan situation to the ICC, a number of our
colleagues said that involving the Court would help to
end the wave of violence, bring to justice to all those
guilty of the worst crimes, and thereby prevent future
crimes. Unfortunately, as the report confirms, that
did not happen. The situation in the country did not
stabilize and the increase in violence continues. The
horrendous list of crimes in the Prosecutor’s report is
not growing any shorter. It includes the abduction and
murder of civilians, illegal arrests and detention, the
torture of detainees, to which we must now add the
mass executions and other evil deeds committed by the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We have studied the information in the report
regarding the individuals active in the Libyan case. The
Prosecutor of the ICC reiterated that it intends to handle
the situation of Abdullah Al-Senussi and, if required,
to request a review of the Court’s ruling pronouncing
Libya capable of conducting an investigation in that
case. In that regard, the report again concludes that
there are insufficient grounds to transmit such a
request, despite the information regarding the practice
of torture and sexual violence in prison and despite the
death sentence imposed on Abdullah Al-Senussi on
28 July by the court in Tripoli.
To strengthen the Court’s standing, its ability
to conduct unbiased investigations of the actions of
all the parties to a conflict, including in Libya, is of

15-3520011/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

key importance. No significant steps forward have
been noted in that regard. As we have noted, there is
sufficient information regarding alleged crimes, not
only by former partisans of Muammar Al-Qadhaffi
but by other participants to the conflict, including the
rebels and now, of course, ISIL. However, the report
does not refer to any real procedural steps concerning
them. We have only dry statistics and lists of figures
regarding civilian deaths. Russia hopes that in the
future the Court will address this more concretely. The
calls for continued investigations of civilian deaths
resulting from NATO air strikes also went unheard.
We take note of information in the report regarding
cooperation between the Libyan authorities and the
Prosecutor of the ICC. In that context, I would like
to stress the importance of forging and strengthening
cooperation with those States in which investigations
are conducted for the successful discharge of the
Court’s mandate. We have noted that, in her comments
today, the Prosecutor referred to so-called atrocity
crimes. As is well known, neither the Rome Statute nor
the corpus of international law contains or has defined
such a category of crime. In that respect, we consider
it important to adhere to the terminology agreed by
States, including within the framework of work on the
Rome Statute.
By way of conclusion, we hope that the Prosecutor
of the ICC, within the framework of further procedural
steps, will take into full account the need for a settlement
in Libya, whose foundation should be the restoration of
statehood and a process of national reconciliation, and
which should also pay due attention to investigating
crimes committed by all sides to the conflict.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like, at the outset, to thank you, Sir,
and through you to thank all our colleagues for their
very kind words regarding Spain’s recent presidency of
the Council. I wish to assure you and your entire team,
Mr. President, of our full support during your mandate.
You know you can count on our full support.
I would also like to express our thanks to the
Prosecuor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her presence here today and for the full and detailed
briefing she provided on the situation in Libya. Spain
wishes to commend the very valuable work of the
Court and in particular of the Prosecutor. We know that
she is working under very difficult conditions for the
members of her Office. We also wish to express our
support for her investigations of the crimes currently
12/17

05/11/2015

being committed in Libya and to offer our cooperation
in that regard.
The unanimous message conveyed by the adoption
of resolution of 1970 (2011) must not be allowed to
remain mere words. The Security Council has reiterated
on numerous occasions and in its resolutions the
importance of holding those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
accountable for their actions. We cannot tolerate
impunity. It is incompatible with true reconciliation
and sustainable peace. Nor can we be indifferent to the
horrors that the people of Libya are suffering on a daily
basis or to the contempt all parties to the conflict have
shown for international law. Reports of indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population, including abductions,
assassinations, illegal arrests, torture and other crimes,
is disheartening. Spain firmly condemn each and every
one of those barbaric acts, with particular stress on
the particularly cruel acts of Daesh and its affiliates.
Once again, we call on all parties and their allies to
comply with their obligations under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.
With regard to the relationship between Libya and
the International Criminal Court, we are grateful for
the updated information on the case of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Concerning the former, we wish to recall the decision
by the Court’s Pre-Trial Chamber I, of 10 December
2014, noting Libya’s non-cooperation, in particular
with respect to handing over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
to the Court. We strongly condemn the continuation
of his trial in the Libyan courts and the death penalty
imposed on him on 28 July. We repeat that he must be
immediately handed over to the International Criminal
Court in accordance with the obligations under
resolution 1970 (2011) and other resolutions of the
Council, which reiterate that compliance is mandatory.
The foregoing does not detract from the value of the
ongoing dialogue between the Libyan Government and
the International Criminal Court and the cooperation
taking place in implementing the memorandum of
understanding of 2013, especially by the Prosecutor
General and the representative of Libya to the Court.
Turning now to the second situation, the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi, we are concerned that he was
condemned to death and about the allegations that torture
was used during his interrogation. We will closely
follow the information provided by the Prosecutor and

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

we note the possibility that the Court may review its
decision with respect to the admissibility of his case
in accordance with the provisions of the Rome Statute.
Let me now turn briefly to the resources available
to the Office of the Prosecutor. We note that the current
scarcity of resources is making it difficult for the Office
to conduct its investigations. We should remember once
again that the costs of referrals are being covered only
by States parties to the Rome Statute and that article
13 of the relationship agreement between the United
Nations and the ICC has still not been implemented.
In conclusion, we are absolutely convinced that
there is no military solution to the crisis in Libya. Only a
political agreement among the parties can guarantee the
stability that the country needs. We support the efforts
of the United Nations and of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernardino León. We
welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Kobler as
the new Special Representative. We reiterate our call
to all parties to refrain from all acts of violence. We
furthermore call on them, in a spirit of reconciliation,
to conclude the process of dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations. That will enable them to approve
the political agreement that will permit the formation
of a Government of national accord that can establish
the basis for the country’s reconstruction. Such an
agreement will also help restore to the Libyan people
the stability and security that can guarantee the rule
of law, the end of impunity, justice for victims and the
protection of the fundamental rights of all the country’s
inhabitants.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend my thanks to Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing and for the tenth report submitted to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Jordan reiterates its support for the ICC, which is a
critical pillar in the promotion of criminal justice. Its
work contributes to putting an end to impunity during
armed conflicts, maintaining international peace and
security and promoting the rule of law.
We welcome the ongoing consultations between the
Libyan Government and the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC. We affirm that the Court will succeed in
undertaking and discharging its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), which depends largely on
cooperation between the two sides. In this respect,
we appreciate all the efforts made by the Libyan

S/PV.7549

Government to cooperate with the Court so far. We
call on the Libyan Government to continue to provide
all the facilities and logistical support necessary to
collect evidence and conduct investigations and ensure
coordination and information exchange as well as the
arrest and surrender of all perpetrators of crimes.
It is imperative that all parties to the Rome Statute
cooperate with and assist the Court in the discharge
of its mandate and in support of its jurisdiction, in
accordance with their obligations under the Statute.
The scale of the challenges faced by Libya today is
daunting, and we see the negative repercussions of these
challenges on neighbouring countries. The numbers of
the displaced and asylum seekers are increasing in view
of the atrocious, inhumane practices that are taking
place in the country, namely, killing, kidnapping,
torture, arbitrary arrest by criminal and armed groups,
in particular the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
It is crucial that Libya continue to promote the
rule of law and ensure that all perpetrators of crime
be held liable without exception, in accordance with
international standards in the areas of prosecution
and justice, with a view to ensuring stability in the
country and supporting the political process there. We
need to assist Libya in confronting and prosecuting the
perpetrators of crimes committed on its territory, and
should provide the country with every possible means
to address these crimes, which are affecting not just
Libya but all of its neighbours as well.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
international community to provide every type of
support to the constitutional and other legitimate
authorities in the country so that they can meet their
obligation to build a new democratic Libya while
taking into account the need for all actors to work
together to enable the Libyan State to assert control and
sovereignty over the entire territory of Libya.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for presenting her tenth report on Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Since Prosecutor
Bensouda’s last briefing to the Security Council, in May
earlier this year (see S/PV.7441), the political situation
in Libya has not shown much improvement while the
security conditions have worsened. According to the
Prosecutor’s report, civilian deaths increased in the
period running from April to August 2015, abductions
and executions continue to be reported, and the number

15-3520013/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

of displaced persons has reached almost 450,000
people, which is close to double the figure reported just
over a year ago.
We are particularly concerned by the Prosecutor’s
report that extremely grave crimes are being committed
not only by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Islamic groups but also by all parties to
the conflict as well as their respective allies. The
indiscriminate attacks, assassinations, large-scale
abductions, acts of torture, and executions have all
led to civilian casualties. At the same time, heavy
military clashes between the conflicting parties have
also continued to cause civilian deaths, with no signs
of abating.
Malaysia is equally concerned that civilian
casualties attributed to ISIL are consistently growing.
The Prosecutor has reported that mass executions,
suicide bombing and terrorist attacks committed by ISIL
and affiliated groups have resulted in heavy civilian
casualties. We strongly deplore these indiscriminate
acts of violence committed by ISIL. Malaysia reaffirms
that the perpetrators responsible for committing these
grave atrocities must be held accountable. The culture
of impunity must not be allowed to prevail any further.
Malaysia is of the view that the continued efforts
of the Libyan authorities to comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions would contribute positively
towards building trust and confidence, especially
with respect to their commitment to hold to account
individuals and parties responsible for grave violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. At the same time, we acknowledge
that the ability of the Libyan authorities to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of these atrocity crimes
and to continue its cooperation will depend largely on
the stability of Libya.
In this regard, Malaysia reiterates the importance
for all parties to the conflict to engage constructively in
the ongoing dialogue facilitated by the United Nations,
finalize the political agreement and immediately agree
on a Government of National Accord. We are of the
view that the formation of a Government of national
accord that enjoys the full backing of the international
community is a crucial first step in our collective
efforts to address a wide range of challenges currently
being faced by Libya, including combating impunity,
addressing the humanitarian conditions and promoting
the rule of law in the country.

14/17

05/11/2015

I would like to conclude by taking this opportunity
to express our gratitude to Mr. Bernardino León for his
tireless efforts in facilitating the ongoing peace talks
under very difficult circumstances in Libya. I reiterate
our full support for the dialogue process facilitated by
the United Nations and look forward to working closing
with the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China has been closely watching the developments
in Libya. The fundamental way to resolve the Libyan
issue lies in political dialogue, and any settlement
should respect the will and choice of the Libyan people
and maintain the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the country.
China hopes that the parties concerned in Libya
will prioritize the interests of the Libyan nation and
its people, seize the opportunity presented, value the
results of dialogue already achieved and continue
to engage in negotiation and consultation to ease
differences, with a view to reaching an early political
agreement to establish a Government of national accord
and restoring national security and stability. That is
the prerequisite and foundation for the realization of
judicial justice in Libya.
China’s position with regard to international
judicial institutions remains unchanged.
Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Spanish delegation
on its outstanding leadership last month and assure you,
Mr. President, of the French delegation’s full support in
your work.
At the outset, I would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her tenth report and her briefing, and
to affirm France’s support for the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole. While
the Council was able to adopt resolution 1970 (2011)
unanimously, giving the ICC one of the most important
tasks there can be, Ms. Bensouda’s briefing confirms
the importance of ensuring that the Council remain
mobilized to help Libya — which is still going through
a period of instability and uncertainty whose chief
victims are Libyans themselves — get back on a path to
civic peace and justice. A careful reading of her tenth
report compels three conclusions.

15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

The first is the importance of continuing to appeal
to the Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Court
above all. That cooperation will be crucial to ending
a long period of impunity in Libya and enabling the
Court to fulfil its mandate. The Court had jurisdiction
to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and requested his
surrender to the Court in accordance with the arrest
warrant issued on 27 June 2011. The Tripoli Court of
Assize’s death sentence for Mr. Al-Qadhafi, handed
down on 28 July, is doubly regrettable in that regard,
and the Security Council must step up its efforts to
ensure that Mr. Al-Qadhafi is surrendered to the Court.
Resolution 2238 (2015) of 10 September also takes due
note of the request of the Prosecutor to the Pre-Trial
Chamber dated 30 July that Libya immediately
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
Concerning Abdullah Al-Senussi, on 11 October
2013 Pre-Trial Chamber I decided that his case was
inadmissible before the Court. However, France shares
the concerns expressed by several of our colleagues
and the Office of the Prosecutor about the allegations
of torture of Mr. Al-Senussi in Al-Hadba prison. Here
we should recall the relevant provisions of resolution
2238 (2015), which condemns the acts of torture,
mistreatment and deaths by torture inflicted in some
detention centres in Libya. We should also note the
pronouncements made on 28 July by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding lack
of respect for the right to a fair trial as guaranteed by
international law. The Prosecutor’s Office emphasizes
that if those allegations are true, they could justify
a reopening of the case on the basis of the relevant
articles of the Rome Statute. We should all remain very
vigilant on this point.
France notes that despite the prevailing instability in
Libya, the Prosecutor has managed to have discussions
with Libya’s Prosecutor General and has continued
to implement the memorandum of understanding on
burden-sharing between the Court and the Libyan
authorities, signed in November 2013, and she notes
that this is a positive and encouraging sign.
Our second conclusion is that we cannot allow the
multiple crimes committed since 15 February 2011 to
go unpunished. In that regard, France paid particularly
close attention to the paragraph in the report that
emphasizes that the crimes attributed to members of
Daesh fall under the prima facie jurisdiction of the
Court, on the basis of resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238
(2015). We can only encourage Prosecutor Bensouda

S/PV.7549

to pursue her investigations and inquiries into such
crimes, which are an outrage to the human conscience.
Our third and last conclusion is that we must
provide practical support to the Libyan authorities,
particularly in the area of justice and rebuilding
the rule of law. That goal makes the formation of a
Government of national unity more urgent than ever.
After months of negotiations, and thanks to the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino León, a compromise on a final text
was reached and capped by the announcement of the
formation of a national unity Government headed by
Mr. Fayez Sarraj as Prime Minister. There is no time
left to lose. We urge all the parties to endorse the
political agreement in order to immediately enable the
formation of a Government of national unity. That is
the only way that peace and stability can be restored in
Libya, as its people are demanding.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Martin Kobler as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. France reaffirms its full support for
the United Nations mediation in Libya and will support
the efforts of Mr. Kobler as it has those of Mr. León,
whom we thank for his work. Through tenacity and
dedication he has succeeded in making major steps
towards an inter-Libyan agreement.
The challenges and expectations in Libya are still
huge, both for the International Criminal Court and the
Libyan authorities. The Prosecutor has demonstrated
her full willingness to act. It is up to the Council to
do everything possible to facilitate the success of an
inter-Libyan political dialogue and to help the Libyan
authorities cooperate fully with the Prosecutor.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her tenth report on Libya and for her
statement today.
I join others in expressing our deep concern about the
ongoing conflict in Libya. The lack of security is having
a clear adverse impact on the Prosecutor’s investigation.
The United Kingdom shares the Prosecutor’s concerns
set out in her report. Extremely grave crimes are still
being committed by all parties and their allies. Civilian
deaths are still increasing, and violence is still being
used to try to achieve political goals. We condemn all
these acts. We echo the Prosecutor’s call for States to
investigate and take action against nationals of their

15-3520015/17

S/PV.7549

The situation in Libya

countries who may have committed crimes in Libya.
The violence must stop; there can be no military solution
to the current crisis. We call on all Libyans, political
parties and civil society alike, to support the ongoing
efforts of the United Nations. A political settlement
establishing a Government of national accord is long
overdue. A political settlement remains the best way to
bring peace and security to the Libyan people and to
tackle the terrorist and extremist threat.
Tackling impunity for atrocities will also be
important in the coming months. Judicial cooperation
between the Office and Libyan authorities is vital
in that regard. We encourage the Libyan Prosecutor
General and the Libyan representative to the Court to
continue to engage with the Prosecutor. We also urge
all States to support the Prosecutor in her investigation
and to assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to
build the rule of law.
We thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the reports of
torture and inhumane acts in Al-Hadba prison, and
we support the action taken by the Prosecutor with the
Libyan authorities. We note that the Prosecutor’s Office
is still of the view that the case against Mr. Al-Senussi
remains inadmissible. We are also concerned about the
death sentence handed down to Mr. Al-Qadhafi. Libya
has failed to comply with requests for cooperation by
the ICC, including its request for Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s
surrender. We reiterate that Libya is obliged to
cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor, as
set out in resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015), and
we call on Libya to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi without
delay. We look forward to the Prosecutor’s further
views following receipt of the report of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya on Mr. Al-Qadhafi
and Mr. Al-Senussi’s trials, the full judgement of the
Libyan court and other relevant information.
We note the Prosecutor’s concerns regarding
resources and recognize the financial and capacity
constraints faced by her Office. We are working to
arrive at a budget outcome that will both meet the needs
of the Court and be sensitive to the resources available.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
16/17

05/11/2015

on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of November. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing this morning.
To be honest, I do not have much to add to what I
said at the Council’s 7441st meeting of 12 May. I would,
however, like to reaffirm that Libya is wedded to the
principle of complementarity among issues addressed
at the national level and by the ICC, despite the fact that
we are not a party to the Rome Statute. That is because
we wish to see justice prevail and confront impunity,
especially regarding crimes covered under the Rome
Statute.
I can confirm that Libya’s judicial institutions
are committed to fulfilling their obligations under
national and international law, despite the dangers
and pressure they find themselves in, particularly the
Office of Libya’s Prosecutor General, which is based
in an area that is controlled not by the State but by
militias. In that regard, it is necessary to point out
that the Ministry of Justice of the provisional Libyan
Government announced its rejection of the sentence,
issued on 28 July, by the Court of Assize with regard
to the former officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime. The
Government does not believe that one can talk about
independent justice or a fair trial when trials are held in
regions controlled by outlaw militias.
The Libyan authorities want to guarantee
accountability, fight against impunity and strengthen
the rule of law. They have repeatedly reaffirmed their
commitment to investigate all crimes committed and
to punish those responsible. The Libyan Government
condemns all human rights violations, regardless of
who the perpetrators are. However, the Government
would like to emphasize that no Libyan Government
will be in a position to control the security situation and
ensure respect for human rights and justice as long as
the capital, Tripoli, is occupied by outlaw militias. The
Government will remain unable to successfully carry
out its mission as long as its institutions cannot work
in a climate of security. The prisons will not submit
themselves to the authority of the State as long as
resolution 2214 (2015) is not implemented and as long
as Libyan army units and security elements are not in a
position to obtain weapons.
In spite of the foregoing, the Government of Libya
welcomes the continued cooperation between the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor-General of Libya.
15-35200

05/11/2015

The situation in Libya

Before I conclude, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the following. In various statements
delivered by a number of Council members we heard
that there was racial discrimination in Libya. There
was a reference to the detention of our sub-Saharan
brothers as a result of the colour of their skin. That is
wrong and does not exist in Libya. Differences in skin
colour mean nothing in Libya, especially since a large
number of Libyan citizens are black. They have always
held high positions and it is enough for me to point out
that the Head of the Libyan Government is black. The
same is true for the Head of the Libyan Air Force. To

S/PV.7549

claim anything else is simply wrong. Unfortunately,
those rumours started in 2011, at the beginning of the
revolution, when Al-Qadhafi enlisted a number of subSaharan workers to face down the revolution. That was
later used to undermine Libya and its relations with other
African States. Those who entered the country legally
were protected from human traffickers and violence.
There are tens of thousands of African brothers who
live and work in Libya under the protection of Libyan
families.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

15-3520017/17
