Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment Organization, in accordance with section II,
paragraph 23, of resolution 2152 (XXI);
9. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to enter
into appropriate arrangements with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in order to enable the developing countries
to derive increasing benefits from the generalized system

to submit to the Economic and Social Council at its
fifty-first session a report outlining the details of a
system of over-all appraisal, with a view to enabling
the General Assembly to give consideration to this
matter and take a final decision thereon at its twentysixth session.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.

of non-reciprocal, non-discriminatory preferences.

1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.
2640 (XXV). United Nations Institute for TrainIng and Research

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its past resolutions relating to the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, particularly resolution 2509 (XXIV) of 21 November
1969, and the resolutions of the Economic and Social
Council on the same subject,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and

Research; 18
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness

of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.
2641 (XXV). Review and appraisal of the objectives and policies of the International
Development Strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions contained in section D,
entitled "Review and appraisal of both objectives and
policies", of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 11
COlf,Side,ing that the International Development
Strategy should be viewed· in a dynamic context, involving continuing review to ensure its effective implementation and adaptation in the light of new developments,
1. Recalls its decision to carry out the over-all
appraisal of the progress made in implementing the
International Development Strategy;
2. Takes ncte of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1556 B (XLIX) of 31 July 1970;
3. Requests the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the specialized agencies,
the regional economic commissions, the United Nations
Bcc:>nomic and Soci_al Office_ at Beiru~ and other organizations of the Umted Nations family to continue to
review progress in their respective sectors according
to the procedures ~lready established and to be adapted
as necessary;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the bodies and organizations of the United
Nations family and after ascertaining the views of the
Governments of States Members of the United Nations,
18 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/8014).
11 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

'

2657 (XXV). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968 and 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969,
Noting with appreciation the steps that have been
taken by a number of specialized agencies and of
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to assist in the preparatory work for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,
Stressing the need to pursue vigorously the preparations for the Conference,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General,18
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment on its first session,19
Taking note also of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1536 (XLIX) of 27 July 1970,
Taking note with satisfaction of the appointment of
the Secretary-General of the Conference,~
Aware that the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade21
calls for intensified national and international efforts
to arrest the deterioration of the human environment
and to take measures towards its improvement, and
to promote activities that will help to maintain the
ecological balance on which human survival depends,
Reaffirming that environmental policies should be
considered in the context of economic and social
development, taking into account the special needs
of development in developing countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
sec?nd ses~ion of the, Preparatory Committee for the
Umted Nations Conference on the Human Environment
at Geneva from 8 to 19 February 1971 and the third
session in New York from 13 to 24 September 1971;
2. Recommends the inclusion in the agenda for the
second and third sessions of the Preparatory Committee
of one or more specific items relating to economic
and _social aspects m order to safeguard and promote
the mterests of developing countries with a view to
rec?ncil~g the national environmental policies with
therr nat10nal development plans and priorities;
. ~- Recommends that the Preparatory Committee,
m ~ts globaJ. and comprehensive preparations for the
Umted Nations Conference on the Human Environmen! in 19J2, _consi~er, inter_ alia, t~e financing of
possible !3-~hon m this field with ~ view to ensuring
that add1ttonal resources are provided to developing
18 ,0ffecial Records of th'! General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 43, documents A/8065 and
Add.I.
19 A/CONF.48/PC/6,
20 Mr. Maurice F, Strong was appointed Secretary-General
of the Conference on 16 November 1970
2 1 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
·
