UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

321trh

MEETING:

24 APRIL

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... ..

1

. .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. ... ...

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (S/13888 and Cot-r.1 and Add.l-3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2218)
Adoptionoftheagenda

SlPV.2218

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2218th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 24 April 1980, at 11 a.m.
Presidenr:

Mr. Poxfirio MU6IOZ LED0 (Mexico).

Mr. van Buuren (Netherlands),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria),
Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organizarion)
took the places reserved for .them at
the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 22 April from the
representative of Tunisia [,S/f3903], which reads as
follows:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2218)
1. Adoption of the agenda

“I have the honour to request the Security
Council to invite Mr. Hammadi Essid, Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to participate in the discussion of the item entitled ‘The situation in the
Middle East’, in accordance with rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.‘*

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April I980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/l3888 and Corr.1 and Add.l-3)
The meeting

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to accede to that request.

was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Ir was so decided.
Adoption

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: document
S/13898, containing the text of a letter dated 18 April
from the Charge d’ Affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Tunisia addressed to the President of the
Council; document S/13899, containing the text of a
letter dated 18 April from the representative of the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of
the Council; and document S/13901, containing the
text of a letter dated 21 April from the representative
of Ireland to the Secretary-General.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation-in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permaneht
Representative of Lebanon to the United*NWJns
addressed40 the President of the Secufity Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and
Corr.1 and Add.13)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2212th to 2215th and 2217th meetings],
I invite the representative of Lebanon to take a place
at the Council table and I invite the representativesof
FUi, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, and the Syrian Arab.Republii:
and the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretarion
from
French): The Security Council has once again resumed
its consideration of the situation in southern Lebanon,
a peripheral problem which has crystallized to the
point of becoming a problem in and of itself. Our brief
agenda fully expresses the dimensions of the fundamental problem concerning the entire situation in the
Middle East.
5. There will be little hope of a lasting solution to the
difficulties facing Lebanon if we confine ourselves to
the provisional measures that the Council has already
defined and implemented over the last three years.
The same causes which, have engendered suffering

At the invitation of the Pfesident, hr. Tu&i (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Vunibobo
(Fiji), Mr. Mulloy
(Ireland),
Mr, Blum (Israel),
Mr. La Rocca (Italy),
Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan),
1

and want for the people ‘of the regionquite naturally
apply to Lebanon as well. They-wih,produce the same
effects as long as fundamental responses to these
fundamental causes have not been found by the
Council.

then, did’it not do so?” Why:‘%%re its observation
posts shelled, as was stated~~~esecretary-General’s
report? The Council is erit&d~to draw the appropriate lessons from this first&pect
of the situation.
.c.g.
.I=..
10. Moreover, despite the undeniable progress made
by the United Nations towards the implementation
of a comprehensive settlement, we must note that
that progress has not yielded many positive effects.
The affirmation of the rights of the Palestinian people,
which has been clearly recognized by the overwhelming majority of Member States as the keystone
of the edifice of peace, is still subject to the veto. To
justify this, we are asked to listen to a speech about
peace, a peace in which the Palestinian people has no
right either to the. status to which it is entitled by
history and by ‘its immemorial past or to the status
conferred. upon it by the present, a status that is
recognized by more than two thirds of the Member
States-or even to the status it deserves by virtue of its
aspirations, its dynamic movement and the inevitable
victory that justifies all national liberation struggles.

6. The United Nations has tried to find a solution to
the special problem which is a challenge to the right
of Lebanon to political independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, through the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
In its context, and without prejudging an overall
solution to-the problem, that solution gave some hope
of ensuring the peace and security of the State of
Lebanon and of curbing the tendency of the Israeli,
authorities to rampage atwill from one end of the region
to the other. With regard to the root of the problem,
an overall solution is by its nature what is required,
United Nations resolutions having not always been
implemented. On that score, inestimable contributions
have been made by Member States which were
convinced that they would more directly serve the
cause of maintaining peace, put an end to the deterioration of the situation in the region and thus offer better
conditions for the promotion of an overall solution.
In so doing, they were counting, on the one hand, on
Israel’s commitment to respecting its international
obligations and, on the other hand, on the commitment
of the United Nations to implementing an overall
settlement that would bring- about the advent of
peace in the Middle East. What has happened to
those two commitments?

11. Any speech about peace is hollow if it fails to
recognize that basic element; stop-gap solutions are
destined eventually to become, in their turn, not
catalysts of peace but sources of specific problems.
The United Nations has been diverted from its aims,
while the bodies for maintaining peace-those whose
mission it is, moreover to pave the way for peace-are
becoming the target of the principal parties to the
conflict, who are supposed to be the first to benefit
from the peace and security of which those organs
are the guarantors.

7. Without having to recall the responsibilities of the
Israeli authorities and their obligations vis-h-vis
United Nations resolutions, in general, and vis-d-vis
UNIFIL, in particular, it is sufficient for us to refer to
the Secretary-General’s special report and the addenda
thereto [S/13888 and AddJ-31 to see that from
24 March, at least, provocations and wanton military
harassment by the so-called Israel Defence Forces
have opened the way to diiect violation of UNTSO
observation posts and to a vast plan of obstruction
and destruction, which has been ceaselessly intensified
from 24 March to this day, when the Security Council
is still in session.

12. The Tunisian delegation will lend its full and
unreserved support to the efforts you are making,
Mr. President, to conduct our debate to,a responsible
decision, and will go-along with any initiative likely. to
promote a positive and constructive conclusion
through the adoption of a resolution having the
broadest. possible support in the Council.
13. ,The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Fiji, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

8. In his statement before the Council, the representative of Israel openly declared that the Israeli
forces had taken “certain limited measures”
[2213th meeting, paru. 731 to penetrate into Lebanon
and that as of 14 April all Israeli soldiers had been
withdrawn. Was he referring to the plan the execution
of which began on 24 March? By what right has Israel
chosen to take such measures, whether limited or
not, to pour into Lebanese territory? And by what
authority does that Israeli general demand that
UNIFIL evacuate At-Tiri?

14. Mr. VUNIBOBO (Fiji): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the other members of the Council for allowing me to participate in your deliberations.
Since the Council first met to discuss Israel’s invasion
of southern Lebanon, this is the first time that Fiji,
a participant in UNIFIL, has asked to participate
in the discussion of issues concerning southern
Lebanon.
i5. Before I comment on the substantive issue before
the Council, it is appropriate for me to.observe that
my country, as one of the countries contributing troops
to UNIFIL, has, during its contingent’s service with
the Force, recorded, unfortunately, the highest

9. UNIFIL had every justification for assuming all
responsibilities within its area of operation. Why,
2

.

number of peace-keeping; c-asualties in the history of
UNIFIL. As we are%on&ned:with the large-number
of casualties we haveis->, ered;. I should like to state
once again my country?s,,
Yi?
~rrn commitment to the ideals
underlying the establishment of the Force. Nine deaths
may represent a very small number in a populous
country. Yet, for a country with 600,000 people, that
is a very high ftgure. The Deputy Prime Minister of
Fiji, during his talk with the Secretary-General last
.month here in New York, reaffirmed that Fiji’s soldiers would continue to serve in southern Lebanon as
part of UNIFIL in its role as peace-keeper as long as
they were required there.

encroachment on their,. area of operation by the
foicesandarmed elements. It is clear that, as
long as those forces remain inside the UNIFIL area
of operation, they will continue to be a threat to the
Force and to peace in the area. For UNIFIL to carry
out its mandate unimpeded, it is absolutely imperative
that the de facto forces and. the elements of the Palestine Liberation Organization that have encroached
on the Force’s area of operation be withdrawn.

defucto

19. It is equally important to review the mandate
concerning the use of force by UNIFIL troops. In
calling for such a review, we are mindful that UNIFIL’s
central character as a peace-keeping force should
neither be compromised nor brought into question.
At the same time, my Government is concerned at the
seeming ease with which the de facto forces appear
to have moved into UNIFIL’s area of operation and
taken up positions without any apparent reaction from
UNIFIL until too late. We believe that we have long
passed the point beyond which UNIFIL should not be
expected to-tolerate the harassment, both verbal and
physical,. to which it has been subjected, especially
in recent weeks. What has happened in recent weeks
has weighed heavily in my Government’s mind and
has prompted the above observation.

16. WhiIe reaffirming our commitment, my country
is also, at the same time, acutely aware of the ‘difficulties the Force has been experiencing. Events in
the last few weeks amply illustrate those difficulties.
The continued harassment of UNIFIL troops by the
de facta force in the south and, at times, by armed
elements from the north does not make their job any
easier. L)efacto forces drove through the Irish checkpoints and took command of the village of At-Tiri;
as a result an Irish soldier was fatally wounded. Two
Saturdays ago, the same forces began shelling UNIFIL
headquarters at Naqoura, cutting communications and
again fatally wounding a Fijian soldier. This was
followed last week by the murder of two unarmed
Irish soldiers. My Government deplores these
actions of the de facto forces and the senseless killing
of the four UNIFIL soldiers.

20. For the long term, the Lebanese Government
must be assisted as much as possible to enable it to
re-establish its presence and assert its sovereignty
on its entire territory. Only then can one hope that
UNIFIL can be withdrawn with some confidence that
peace will be maintained.

17. In the same way, it deplores the attack and
senseless killings at the Kibbutz Misgav Am by PaIestinian armed elements. The recent incursion into
Lebanon by Israel Defence Forces, apart from
vioIating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, in our view, contributed nothing constructive to the settlement of this dispute in the region. If
anything, it merely served to heighten the already tense
situation existing along the borders. Their withdrawal
would be a welcome move and a relief to UNIFIL.
My Government is conscious of Israel’s concern for
its security; at the same time, it does not believe
that any durable peace will be achieved by the tacit
support accorded to Major Haddad’s defucro forces
or the resistance opposed to UNIFIL in the latter’s
attempt to extend its area of operation as defined
in its mandate. We call upon the Israeli Government to
bring its influence to-bear on the defucto forces, whose
activities could, if not curbed; lead to irreparable
damage-not only in southern Lobanon but in the region
as a whole.

21. The PRESIDENT (inrerpreturion from Spanish):
The next speaker is Mr. Hammadi Essid, Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, to whom the Council has-extended an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22. Mr. ESSID (interaretution
from ’ French):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you and to all the other
members of the Council for having allowed me to
speak and I thank you.
23. As members of the Council may suspect,
I have not come here to repeat what my colleague,
Mr. Maksoud, our representative, said to the Council [221&h meeting] when he stated the position of the
League of Arab States both with regard to the Lebanese matter and with regard to the conflict between
Israel and the Arab countries.

18. My country believes, that, if the role of UNIFIL
is to be fully realized, then there must be a very
real and genuine effort now on the part of all the
parties to co-operate fully with the Force so that it may
be able to. carry out its mandate effectively. We are
agreed that UNIFIL personnel have been serving
under very trying and at times dangerous conditions.
They have- seen in the past year a gradual but steady

24. Nor have I come to repeat the representative of
Lebanon’s precise and exhaustive statement or to add
a new paragraph to the book by Ambassador Tueni
on the experiences of Lebanon and the Security Council-l’euce-Keeping
in Lebanon-a
book which is as
comprehensive as it is dangerous because by reading
it one might lose faith in the international community,
3

so ineffective does any effort seem to be to bring about
justice by legal means, and be’ tempted to conclude
that only arrogance and intransigence can be SUCcesaful.
25. I am here in my capacity. as the. Personal Kepresentative of the Secretary-General of’the League of
Arab States and, on his instructions, to underscore
in this debate the unanimous support of the Arab
States for the just cause of Lebanon and to remind the
Council,of their solemn commitments to the Lebanese
people and Government.
26. Having for months personally experienced the
Lebanese tragedy as a member of the committee
entrusted with ensuring the implementation of the
resolutions of the Arab Summit held in Tunis in November 1979, I believe that I can give first-hand testimony
regarding the misfortunes of a people that had
succeeded in creating one of the most original and
exemplary societies yet today, a people which, in spite
of admirable courage and tenacity, is helplessly
watching its own disintegration, just as the intemational community is watching what a journalist has
called the “Lebanonization” of the United Nations,
which has become victim of the contempt and, through
its peace-keeping forces, of the criminal manoeuvres
of that long-spoiled child-of the West, Israel.
27. But first I should like to express to Mr. Kurt
Waldheim the tribute which the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States has asked me to renew to
him, both on his behalf and on that of the Arab
Governments, for the clear-sightedness, courage and
firmness that he has always demonstrated in support
of legality and justice. The Arabs realize how difficult
it still is to win any struggle against Israel when one
is armed only with justice and legality and when one
has only international consensus as one’s ally..
28. I should also like to express once again our
gratitude to the United Nations forces, which come
from such diverse regions as Ireland and Fdi with a
message of peace and today are falling victim to the
pride and hatred upon which a State has built its
legitimacy. The Arabs salute those who have fallen so
that international order and law may prevail in the area
and that Lebanon may remain Lebanon.
29. Of course, we salute with the same respect the
millions of victims of nazism. But how long will these
victims continue to serve as an alibi for Israel, allowing
it to continue to act as an outlaw State and shamelessly
exploit the guilty conscience of the West in order to
impose terrorism and blackmail? For how long are the
souls of these dead to be disturbed in order to bring
about the triumph of an unjust cause? And how
much more Arab blood will have to be shed on
Lebanese ‘soil for the just cause of our people to be
recognized?
30. International opinion, which is poisoned by the
media so effectively manipulated by Israel, attributes

the Arab blood flowing ‘in- Lebanon-Christian and
Moslem, Palestinian and LebaneseAto internal causes
which it is made to accept under the label of “Palestinian-Lebanese confrontations’* and of “Islamic
progressive forces struggling against rightist Christians’ *. For my part, I can affirm to the Council that
my experience of Lebanon and the solid friendships
I entertain there both with Christians of the extreme
right and left and with conservative and progressive
Moslems, as well as with Palestinians who have taken
refuge in that land of asylum, are constant proof
that every victim, whatever the label applied to him
and regardless of the hand that slays him, is a victim
of Israel and of Israel alone.
31. Can there be among the Members of this Organization a single Government--even among those who
give their support to the Zionist enterprise-which is
still duped as to the true designs of Israel? In any
event, we Arabs know, and we know that everyone
else knows, that the expansionist, terrorist and racist
policies carried out by Israel have in the end but a
single objective: to continue to extend Israel’s
hegemony over Arab lands. Israel’s best friends and
certain of-its closest allies know this but they continue
to shut their eyes and ears; and if, at times, they open
their mouths, it is to mumble some vague criticism,
which is immediately swallowed again.
32. I shall not dwell on matters of which the Council
is perfectly aware, but there is one fact which the
international community must realize before it is too
late: we Arabs do not feel called upon to be victims
and we shall not wait to react until the genocide of the
Lebanese and Palestinian peoples is completed and
south Lebanon annexed. We shall not consent to living
off the exploitation of our dead.
33. At their meeting in Tunis in November 1979, the
Arab Heads of State expressed their active and
unconditional solidarity with the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples who are united by their blood, shed on
Lebanese soil, united in their common desire to
establish a just and lasting peace in Lebanon and
throughout the region and united also in their common
commitment to respect the resolutions of the Council
aimed at restoring Lebanese sovereignty over its entire
territory. The Arab Heads of State declared that south
Lebanon was Arab land and that its profanation
was felt equally in Bahrain and in Mauritania.
34. What Arabs expect of the United Nations and of
all its agencies is not merely that they should act to
ensure that the Israeli army should end its savage-and
murderous raids, but also that Israel should obey the
Council resolutions and cease all direct or indirect
military action.
35. The Arabs are aware of their international
responsibilities. In article 5 of the document adopted
at the Tunis summit conference, they stressed the
need fully to implement the Council resolutions on
4 .

south Lebanon and to, allow international forces to
discharge the functions and obligations incumbent
upon them.

represented in the United Nations and towards the
Charter and the relevant provisions of international
law. One cannot but ask what the attitude of the world
Organization would have been had another State been
guilty of all the acts of aggression committed by the
Government of Israel against the territorial integrity of
its neighbours, against civilian towns, villages and
refugee camps and even against the United Nations
peace-keeping forces. What action would the Council
and the Assembly have taken if another State had not
only failed, but defiantly and contemptuously refused
to implement repeated resolutions over a span of
31 years?

36. No one can deny the patience and level-headedness that the Arabs have shown in the face of Israel’s
exces.sesand the abetting silence of its protectors.
All the Governments and peoples of the League of
Arab States stand by the Government and people of
Lebanon in their struggle to re-establish the organic
unity of their territory and their people. The Arab
Governments are committed to doing everything they
can to serve their cause in south Lebanon until the
State’s legal authority extends over all Lebanese territory, until the legal army can fulfil its national responsibilities and until the re-establishment, in conformity
with resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent resolutions,
of a regime of international law. represented by the
General Armistice Agreement of 1949,’ which guaranteed the inviolability of Lebanon’s international
boundaries.

43. It is clear that Israel would not have dared to
pursue this irresponsible aggression, this gangster-like
and most reprehensible policy, but for the. unlimited
support it has been receiving from its allies: support
in arms, in financial assistance and in the exercise of
the veto power in the Security Council. In the face
of this, one cannot but ask how the United Nations
can effectively maintain peace and security in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and protect
the territorial integrity of a Member State like Lebanon.
Israel cannot, on any pretext, accuse Lebanon of
having perpetrated armed aggression against Israel to
justify Israel’s constant armed incursions into that
country. Finding no valid reason, Israel blames the
presence of Palestinians in Lebanon, the presence of
Arab League deterrent forces, the alleged factional
strife in Lebanon and the alleged ineffectiveness of
UNIFIL.

37. If the words legality and justice no longer weigh
very heavily on the collective conscience,-they are
still, forus Arabs, linked with our interests. We remain
attached to these principles. I hope that we shall never
be forced to impose them by any means, even means
that would harm the interests of others.
38. The PRESIDENT (interpretaiion from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

44. Israel deliberately ignores the facts, which are
that it has long coveted the south of Lebanon and the
waters of the Litani River, that it invaded the south
of Lebanon in 1978 and that it took a serious effort
on the part of the Security Council to push back the
Israeli forces-and,that only after Israel had ensured
the presence,of a Lebanese force under the command
of a Quisling major who is under the total control of
Israel. Israel has never allowed.UNIFIL to gain control
of the whole area of the south or to operate effectively
within the terms of resolution 425 (1978). ,Israel has
continued to hamper the effectiveness of UNIFIL
directly and through what have become known as the
de facto forces.

39. Mr. ALLAGANY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for giving my delegation the
opportunity to participate in these proceedings, and
to extend to you my warmest congratulations and
expressions of esteem on your assumption of the tasks
of President, the functions of which office my delegation is certain you will carry out with the utmost
degree of competence and objectivity.
40. I wish also to express my delegation’s appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica, who ably presided over the Council during
the month of March.
41. Once more the Council is occupied with the most
chronic, the most recurrent and the most dangerous
problem of Israel and Israeli behaviour. I am aware
that the item before the Council is entitled “The
situation in the Middle East”, but I would rather call
it “The problem of Israel”.

45. My Government views with great concern the
continued lawlessness of Israel and its new aggression
on southern Lebanon, as well as its flouting of resolution 425 (1978) and of the provisions of the Charter.
Israel’s repeated encouragement of the de facto
forces to harass UNIFIL constitutes a wilful and
calculated attempt to undermine the authority of the
Security Council and to perpetuate the aggression
against Lebanon. This is part of the notorious policy
of Israel in the Middle East: invasion under the pretext
of defending Israel’s security, followed by mass
destruction of lie and property, followed by settlement
and creeping annexation. Obviously, the resolution
adopted immediately by the Security Council in 1978

42. I believe that if one were at this stage to reflect
on the record of debates and reso&tions over the past
31 years, and in particular since 1967, by both the
General Assembly and thaecurity Council, one would
find that the constant preoccupation of the United
Nations has been with Israel and Israel’s defiant and
belligerent attitude towards the world community as
ce--

3:

J-

providing for the establishment of %iYint&im force to
ensure the withdrawal of Israel.did not give Israel time
to implement that policy, but’Israer has-not given up:
it continues to circle in the air like a vulture awaiting
the kill. It is all the more incumbent upon the Council to take firm action condemning Israel’s military
incursion into Lebanon and its violation of Lebanon’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to compel
the direct and indirect withdrawal of Israel’s forces
and its hegemony over the area.

mandate tie have,given United?N&ons
~~,*,ft.j~)?~.j.{~
_, forces deserve
oui full support;
..,,,z;:
; :4:i
53. Now we must take more far-reaching action and,
with political consistency, we.must convert our reproaches into measures binding upon the Member
States capable of guaranteeing the- peace and security
of the area.
54. The establishment of UNIFIL has gone a long
way towards reducing, tension and preventing the
crisis from spreading. The decisions we have adopted
have particular political importance because they
reflect a consensus among the members of the Council
and have been supported by the majority of the community of nations.

46. My Government considers it of the utmost
urgency that peace be restored to southern Lebanon
and that resolutions 425 (1978) and 459 (1979) be fully
implemented. We also find the shelling of the UNIFIL
hospital and the continued acts of harassment of
UNIFIL and UNTSO staff most abhorrent.

55. Israel’s violation of Lebanon’s, border and the
illegal forces’ harassment of and .attacks on our contingents are open acts of defiance of the authority of
the Council, as well as of the international conscience.
The representatives of the contributing countries
agree on at least three points: they have no doubt
about the fact that the illegal forces are receiving
direct assistance from Israel; they regret that, as a
consequence of the harassment to which it is sub-’
jetted, UNIFIL cannot do more than prevent incursions, and they consider it necessary for the Forceto be deployed in the entire area of operation under
its jurisdiction.

47; In closing, my delegation urges the Council, in
the tight of the latest Israeli aggression against the
territorial integrity of Lebanon, to condemn unanimously the recent armed invasion of that country and
the constant attacks on a peace-loving Member State
and to adopt a resolution that would provide for forthright measures against the Israeli aggression. My
delegation urges also the condemnation of Israel for
its naked aggression by sea and air against, and
massive shelling of, the Sarafand area in southern
Lebanon, which led to the loss of the lives of I5 civilians
and the injuring of several persons, including children,
women and older people, and the destruction of several
houses and other property. Israel’s continuous harassment of UNIFIL and UNTSO peace-keeping personnel
and its systematic attacks on the towns in southern
Lebanon, including the area of operation of UNIFIL
and UNTSO, cannot be interpreted except as a means
for Israel to reoccupy the area.

56. The Force is an essential element in the creation
of conditions conducive to the negotiated settlement
of the problem of the Middle East; therefore, it is
reprehensible that the narrow views of a warlord and
its allies should stand in the way of the completion
of this vital task. The violence against the Force must
come to an end and, under resolution 425 (1978), it
is our duty to-ensure and confirm the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanese territory.

48. Inthose circumstances, the Council must demand
that Israel scrupulously respect the territorial integrity
of Lebanon and that it cease in particular lending its
assistance to the illegal armed group in southern
Lebanon.

57. We established that UNIFIL would use force
only in self-defence because we supposed that the
parties to the conflict were prepared to comply with
resolution 425 (1978). But the Secretary-General’s
reports convincingly demonstrate. that quite the
contrary is true. The assumptions that led to the
definition of the limits of military action by the Force
have been changed to such an extent that the mandate
cannot be fully implemented and the restrictions we
have placed on our Force are now putting it ina very
vulnerable position.

49. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wi.sh now to make a statement as the representative
of MEXICO.
50. The Council has come to the end of a long debate
which has frequently been interrupted and resumed.
My delegation has not yet had an opportunity to state
its position on the substance of the item before us.

58. We must ensure that all the parties. concerned
will co-operate towards placing the Force in a position
of being able to carry out this task, and we must make
it perfectly clear that it is legitimate for itto use force
against any attempt to prevent it from carrying out its
functions.

51. Over the past few days serious incidents have
taken place in the problem area and there have been
complex negotiations in the Council, which has the
full-responsibility of adopting decisions in this case.
52. The Council’s unanimous reaction to the shameful events of 18 April was praiseworthy. The response
of the contributing countries and the steps taken by
the SecretaryGeneralto facilitate compliance with the

59. In various cases the Security Council has
resolutely condemned violations of; the territorial
6

-

integrity &d sove~~~gR~~.~f;,$t~t~s.
On this,QFcasion,
we are faced with irrefutable facts which have- been
recognized even by the accused State.
.,,...,_
Fit,<.,’
60. Our decision shou[d‘ match the gravity of the
facts, if we wish to en.sure that there will not be an
indefinite repetition -of,this fype of transgression. This
is, quite clearly, a matter of principle which we shall
confront, I am quite sure, setting aside special interests
or matters of temporary convenience. The future of
United Nations peace-keeping operations is at stake.

Israel has ,-,perpepated- and continues to perpetrate
acts of aggression against the Republic of Lebanon, a
Member of our’Orga&ation. With the assistance of
the Haddad gang, Israel has- even raised its hand
against UNIFIL in southern Lebanon, and that act was
severely condemned at the Council meetings at which
southern Lebanon was discussed. A unanimous
demand was voiced that the Council take effective
measures against Israel’s aggression; the need to
disarm and disband Haddad’s gang was emphasized.
68. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic notes that the draft resolution in document
S/13905 unequivocally condemns Israel’s aggression
against the Republic of Lebanon, Israel’s support for
the Haddad gang and the acts of hostility of those
circles against UNIFIL in southern Lebanon, Unfortunately, the draft resolution does not contain
effective measures which would prevent further acts
of aggression by Israel in the region.

61. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
of the Council.
62. Members of the Council have before them in
document S/13905 the text of a draft resolution which
was ,prepared in the course of consultations. I understand that the Council is now prepared to vote on this
draft resolution. If I hear no objection, I shall put it to
a vote,

69. In view of certain misgivings that we have about
UNIFIL’s mandate connected with the recruitment
and financing of the Force, matters that have beenrepeatedly mentioned by my delegation in various
United Nations bodies-for example at the eighth
special session of the General Assembly on 21 April
1978*-we shall abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution.

63, First, I shall call on the members of the Council
who wish to explain their vote before the vote.
64. Mr. CHEN Ghu- {China) (inrerpretution from
Chinese): With regard fo the situation in Lebanon,
the Chinese delegation pointed out in its statement
of 18 April [2227th meering] that the serious deterioration of the situation in southern Lebanon was
brought about entirely by Israel’s armed incursions
into Lebanon and the incidentsand conflicts provoked
by the Israeli-backed Lebanese secessionist forces.
The Israeli acts of aggression have grossly encroached
upon the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. The Chinese deiegati‘on holds
that the. resolution adopted by the Council should
strongly condemn Israel’s acts of aggression and
firmly support the Lebanese Government and people
in their struggle against the Israeli aggression and for
the defence of their national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

70. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
situation in southern Lebanon remains ‘a grave threat
to peace in the Middle East and a grave threat to the
lives of innocent human beings in the area, whether
in southern Lebanon or indeed in northern Israel.
The United States will abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution which is before us, because it does not
deal with the grave problems in a balanced and comprehensive way. We would have preferred a resolution
which concentrated on constmctive proposals rather
than a resolution which concentrated on condemnation.

65. On the basis of the aforementioned position, the.
Chinese delegation holds that although we consider
that the draft resolution contained in document
S/i3905 has some serious deficiencies, it is on the
whole conducive to support for the Lebanese and Arab
peoples in opposing Israel’s aggression and. to the
defence of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of- Lebanon. The Chinese delegation
will therefore support it.

71. It is important for the Council to mince no words
about exactly what the problem is. The lack ofauthority
and discipline in the area permits lawless elements
to attack each other, to attack and murder United
Nations soldiers, to harass them and to engage in acts
of violence and terrorism against innocent civilians
across international borders. Because of the inability
of any authority to impose theaecessary discipline and
control, the southern Lebanon-Israel border region has
been a focal point of infiltration, terrorism, intimidation
and confrontation. Violence has produced counterviolence and a rising scale of dangers to all the innocent
inhabitants of the area. We cannot allow a return to
the terrible violence of last summer.

66. As-for the reference to UNIFIL contingled in that
text, the Chinese delegation clearly stated its%position
when the Council adopted resolutions 425 (1978)
[207&h meering], and 426 (197& [207&h meeting]
and the subsequent relevant resolutions, and we will
not repeat it here.

72. Two Years aao the Council adouted resolution 425
(1978) set&g up CNIFIL to help tdprovide discipline
and to extend the authority of the Lebanese Govemment to the area. The United States fully supported

67. Mr. FLORIN (German pemocratic Republic)
(interpretation from Russian): It has -treen.proved that
7

the creation of UNIFIL, and it regards the strengthening of UNIFIL today as critical in the effort to
establish order in the area. The attacks. on UNIFIL
headquarters and the indiscriminate attacks and even
murders of individual soldiers are abhorrent to the
entire international community and can neither be
condoned nor allowed to continue.

78. At the same time, UNIPIL faces a grave challenge fromanother quarter, UMfFJt’sreportsindicate
that there has been an increasing number of attempts
by Palestinian and other elements to infiltrate its area
of operation, This; too, represents an unacceptable
threat to UNIFIL and to the authority of the Council.
79. It is also essential that there be an endsto the
use of Lebanese territory as a base for attacks against
Israel. The United States shares with the people of
Israel the sense of shock and outrage over the attack
at Misgav Am. No objective can justify violence. We
condemn such acts, and the Council should condemn
that act as well. We-and, we are confident, the other
members of the Council-share Israel’s desire for
peace on its northern border. We agree that the best
way to achieve this important objective is to. bring
about a restoration of Lebanese authority in south
Lebanon. One of the main reasons for UNIFIL’s
presence is to bring. about a cessation of all attacks
across the Israeli-Lebanese border from any quarter
whatsoever. Israel itself can contribute to the achievement of these objectives by co-operating fully with
UNIFIL.

73. At the same time, it was the purpose of resolution 425 (1978) that southern Lebanon should not
remain a staging base for attacks across the LebaneseIsraeli borders against innocent civilians in northern
Israel. In the recent attack on Misgav Am, where
babies were held hostage, harmed and killed, those
attacks reached the depths of inhumanity. In this
situation the United States regards this draft resolution as,an unbalanced and inadequate,response to the
problem. The important objective is to agree on
practical measures to improve the conditions for
UNIFIL’s operations and to ensure full co-operation
with UNIFIL.
74. Furthermore, the draft resolution does not
directly ackno-wledge the fact of cross-border terrorism
against Israel, which is one of the essential elements
of the threat to peace in that area. Tragedies like
that at Misgav Am are not referred to even by implication, and therefore the United States will abstain.

80. In thisconnection, it is imperative that UNIFIL,
be able to..move freely, without hindrance, in southern
Lebanon in order to carry out the important duties
with which it has been charged. All parties must
support UNIFIL in carrying out its mission. UNIFIL
must not be frustrated by the illegal militia forces.
While UNIFILfaces many-challenges, the most serious
threat-of all comes from the militias. If left unchecked,
their behaviour will cause still more needless bloodshed,and ,will threaten UNIFIL’s continued ability to
carry onf its mandate. This, in turn, will divert
UNIFIL’s attention from the efforts to deal with-illegal
infiltration into its area of operation and across the
intemaiional:frontier and, ultimately, from UNIFIL’s
effort to assist. the Government of Lebanon in the
restoration of, its authority.

75. The policy of the United States in. this area has
been guided by three principles: that all parties must
respect Lebanon’s territorial integrity; that the
authority of the Governme,nt of Lebanon must be
restored up. to the international border; and that a
cease-fire should be re.spected in all quarters, including
the cessation of all attacks against Israel from Lebanese territory.
76. To that end,. in March 1978 the United States
strongly supported the establishment of UNIFIL.
Since then, in close co-operation with the Government
of Lebanon, the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral, we have worked intensively to assist UNIFIL
in carrying out itsmandate. As the Secretary-General
has reported to the Council, UNIFIL is now confronted
with a grave challenge to its authority. Indeed, the
existence of the Force may well be at stake.

81. As the Secretary-General has reported,
UNIFIL’s freedom, of movement has been severely
curtailed by the closure of roads in the border zone
controlled by the militias, and thus UNIFIL’s head:
quarters has bee-n isolated from the troops under its
command. Helicopters used by UNIFIL intheenclave
to evacuate wounded personnel have been damaged.
The increasingly harassed observation posts in the
border area have been cut off from outside communications.

77. In recent weeks, United Nations personnel, both
the men of UNIFIL and the unarmed military obs.ervers of UNTSO, have been. subjected to attacks
from militias operating in the border area. In, recent
weeks, those attacks have increased in intensity. A
member of the Fiji battalion and members of the-Irish
battalion have been killed, and on 12 April UNIFIL
headquarters and the hospitalat Naqoura were heavily
shelled by militia artillery. This followed a succession
of attacks, fully catalogued by the Secretary-General,
by militia forces against UNIFIL and UNTSO personnel, against UNTSO positions and vehicles. These
attacks must be brought to an end, once and for all.

82. The# United States is prepared, in conjunction
with the Secretary-General, the nations that contribute troops to, UNIFIL and with other concerned
nations andmembers of the Council, to explore how
UNIFIL can- be. Strengthened so as to enable it- to
defend&elf effectively when it is attacked. Weewill
exert every effort to use our influence to see that
those who attack U?lIFIL and UNTSO personnel
are brought under control.
8

83. My Governmen+ would ‘also like:~ouncil members to consider whethera high-level’meeting of someof the principal parti&vauld beusefuland productive,
perhaps under the auspices of the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Commission. Such a meeting of
interested parties under those auspices or under the
chairmanship of the United Nations might offer a
means of resolving some of the current difficulties.

87. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerution from Spanish):
I call upon the representative of;the Soviet Union for
an explanation of vote after the vote.
88. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union-of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from flussian): During the
debate in the Council in connection with the complaint
by Lebanon of Israeli aggression, the overwhelming
majority of delegations condemned Israel for its armed
incursions into the territory of Lebanon and its attacks
on Lebanese towns and Palestinian camps. The responsibility borne by Israel for the premeditated
murder of two Irish soldiers of the United .Nations
forces in Lebanon was emphasized. By their policy of.
maintaining a tense, explosive situation in southern
Lebanon and by their policy of encouraging and
inciting the separatist units under-Haddad’s command
and in their pay, the ruling circles of Israel are
attempting to implement their expansionist aims and
gradually to annex the lands of the neighbouring Arab
States, as well as to hamper the attainment of a’
genuinely comprehensive and just solution of the
Middle East problem, including the Palestinian
problem.

84. As another possibility, the members of the
CounciI might wish to consider asking the SecretaryGeneral to work closely with a commission composed
of States contributing to UNIFIL to discuss and
formulate new ways to help tocnsure the security of
the Lebanese inhabitants of the region and forestall
acts of violence across the border, assisting UNIFIL
in fulfilling its mandate. The members of such a commission might include, in addition to representatives of
the troop-contributing States, third States which have
so far not involved themselves directly in the southern
Lebanon situation except by supporting the peacekeeping responsibilities of the United Nations. Any
such commission would have to have a mandate
broader than one of mere fact-finding. It should be
charged with the responsibility of actively seeking
long-range solutions to the serious threat to the peace
which the unresolved situation in the southern Lebanon border area presents. It should come up with
concrete proposals which ultimately might be presented to the Council and to other concerned parties.

89. We feel particularly indignant and outraged
because Israel has not only not demonstrated any
intention of heeding the opinion of the international
community, but has, on the contrary, demonstrated
its flagrant disdain for Security Council resolutions
and appeals. This is proved by the fact that, during
the present consideration of this item in the Council,
Israel not only did not stop its acts of aggression
against Lebanon but continued to perpetrate them,
thus facing the Council with a most serious challenge.

85. Finally, I want to commend the brave men of
UNIFIL for their restraint and their firmness. There
is no higher calling than peace-keeping. Those who
attack peace-makers attack us all. On behalf of the
United States, I extend the deepest sympathy of the
American people to the Governments of Fiji and
Ireland and to the families of all the brave men who
have shed their blood in the cause of peace. UNIFIL
will continue to have the strong support of the United
States in carrying out the mandate entrusted to it by
the Council.

90.‘ The Soviet delegation notes that the resolution
just adopted by the Council contains a condemnation
of Israel’s armed intervention in Lebanon, as well as
of its support by Haddad’s separatist forces. At the
same time, we consider that that condemnation should
have been more clear-cut and definite and that the
resolution should have included effective measures to
achieve a complete cessation of all the acts of aggression being perpetrated by Israel against Lebanon,
both directly and indirectly.

86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document S/13905.

91. The delegation of the Soviet Union abstained in
the vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/13905 in accordance with its position of principle
on the United Nations forces in Lebanon. That
position is based on the need to defend the victim
of Israeli aggression and to secure the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from the entire territory of
Lebanon, without any infringement of the sovereign
rights of the Government of Lebanon. The Soviet
delegation would like to reaffirm that position at this
point, including our position on the Security Council’s
administration of the United; Nations forces in
Lebanon, on the principles governing the selection of
national contingents and on the method of financing
the forces.
~

A vote was taken by show of hands.
1i favour: Bangladesh, China,. France, Jamaica,
Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal,
Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Zambia
Against: None ._
Abstaining: German Democratic Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to
none, with 3 abstentions (resolution 467 (1980)).
9

92. The-PRESIDENT (interprezation from Spanish):
The representative of Israel, has asked to speak.
I invite him-to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
93. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The deliberations of the
Councilon the matter before us, as well as the resolution it has just adopted, have again been marked by
a striking lack of balance and also by a selective
conscience.
94. Gome awareness, it is true, was shown of the
background to the limited Israel action inside Lebanon
following the outrage at Kibbutz Misgav Am on
7 April and-following the receipt of information that
the PLO was planning to launch similar attacks on
civilian targets in Israel. But generally speaking,
even that display of awareness was little more than a
prelude to criticism of Israel, as if the outrage at
Misgav Am was an isolated event and not part of a
terrorist campaign which has been going on for many
years and has continued since the establishment of
UNIFIL in March 1978. The Misgav Am outrage is
not even mentioned in the. resolution.
95. The same selective conscience also characterized the Council’s meeting held last Friday night

killings. there was an element gftblood revenge. None.
the,Jess, there was no inclin&io,n~on the part of anyone here to refer to that aspt&.Ipstead, most used
the occasion ‘for an onslaught.;gelther direct or by
implication and innuend&ag$nst Israel.
99. The sad fact is and ret&&s that Israel repeatedly
apptised.the UNIFIL command of the possible implications arising from the deaths of the two Shiite youths.
Tragically, our pleas for caution went unheeded.
100. It is not for me to elaborate on the norms and
customs which still exist, not only in Lebanon. but
indeed in various parts of the world, with regard to
requiting the blood of one’s kin. If some members of
the Cot&ii are unfamiliar with these customs, and
if-like Israel-they find them both intolerable and
repugnant, perhaps the representative of Lebanon
would care to explain them, at least in so far as they
are p,ractised in liis country. That perhaps may be
more difficult than to inject cynical and snide remarks,
as he did last Friday night, in the midst of a meeting
which he himself said “must be shrouded in great
solemnity” [ibid., para. 221. In any event, the facts
cannot be obscured by resort to the perennial expedient
of blaming every calamity on Israel.
101. Then there is the assertion that what happened
in southern Lebanon last Friday is “without precedent” in the history of United Nations peacekeeping. This assertion is inaccurate, and essentially
reflects the double standards: which are applied in
any matter connected. with the Arab-Israel conflict,
including the functioning of UNIFIL. As all of us
know, the vast majority of the casualties sustained by
UNIFIL in the tine of duty have been caused-directly
or indirectly-by the terrorist PLO. Just over a year
ago, on 3 February 1979, the PLO deliberately
ambushed two. Fijian soldiers and killed them in cold
blood. Somewhat exceptionally, United Nations
spokesmen at the time laid the blame for that outrageous act where it belonged: that is, squarely on the
PLO. And a day after that event, the PLO itself
declared that it had killed the two Fijian soldiers
because UNIFIL had “executed” one of its terrorists
a short time before-as reported, for instance, in
The Wall Street Journal of !i February.
,

[2227rh meeting].

%. Israel condemned and continues to condemn
unreservedly and unequivocally the indefensible
murder of two Irish soldiers by villagers in southern
Lebanon last week. But the Council’s meeting last
Friday night was held in an atmosphere of complete
certainty~about who had perpetrate.d that unconscionable crime, Likewise, it was asserted time and again
that it was “unprecedented” in the history of United
Nations. peace-keeping.
97. With all due respect to the Council and the
Secretariat, I would only point out that on the following
morning newspapers such as The New York Times,
reporting from Beirut, indicated that the afIXation of
the killers was far from clear. Despite the unqualified
assertiotimade here last Friday that the local Lebanese
forces were responsible, the UNIFIL spokesman at
Naqoura was quoted as saying that the culprits were
members of the families of the two Shiite youths who
had been killed by .Irish soldiers in the shooting
incident the previous Gaturday. Likewise, according
to The New York Tiines of 19 April, the UNIFIL
spokesman specifically stated that.the Irish soldiers had
been shot in what was te.rmed a reprisal for the death
of the two Moslem youths concerned. Similarly,
The Washington Post reported on 21 April that a family
of Shiite Moslem villagers had claimed responsibility
for the murder of the two Irish soldiers and declared
a blood feud, pending the customary reconciliation,
in revenge for the death of a member of the family.

102. When, may I ask, was the Security Council ever
convened for the.purpose of condemning these andall
the other killings of UNIFIL’s men by the PLO?
103. Let me. reiterate that in making these remarks
Istiel is in no way condoning the murder of the two
Irish soldiers last Friday or seeking to derogate from
the extreme. gravity of that act. -As I said earlier,
Israel stands by its unqualified condemnation of that
crime.
104. The same selectivity has characterized other
aspects of this debate. Nothing has been said by most
speakers about the 700 or so terrorists who have been

98. The Secretariat and the members of the Council
must have been aware that in these unpardonable

10

allowed to enter ~~1~~;~~~~-6~~~a~iu~
and t&
deploy themsetves ih:rdtj~Y’40positioils in ihat arez+
Siinilarlyi nothing. I%&&& said aljo@. the Fo-rce$
exclusida from the “T@~~~cket”, which reaches to
within eight miles of I&&s northern border and
contains some 1300 terrorists. It should be borne in
mhsd that, in accordancl tiith its mandate, UNIFIL
was to be deployed in the ‘“Tyre pocket”. The PLO
prevented UNIFIL’s entry into Tyre.lby force, and the
commander of the French unit conetimed was badly
wbgnded iti the legs by the PLO. Had UNIFIL gone
ahead with its deployment in the Tyre area as originally
pkmned, the situation in the whole of southern Lebanon
would be very different ‘today.

other Party ;“or%tigainst ,dvilians in territory .under
the control of that Pgyty.“’
,’ +
To make matters worse, the Government of Lebanon
even concluded agreements with the PLO allowing
that terrorist organization to operate in southern
Lebanon-the so called “Cairo agreement” of 1969
and the subsequent “Shtura agreement” of 1975both utterly incompatible with the Armistice Agreement, which it is now trying to re-invoke.
109. This debate has also had itsgrotesque moments.
We listened to the two spokesmen of the new Arab
League making lengthy and specious analyses,of what
they assert to be Israel’s strategic objectives in and
through southern Lebanon. In his flights of fantasy
into the rearm of the absurd, Mr. Maksoud.cIaimed,
among other things, that Israel’s aim .is to debilitate
the Arab States and even “to impugn Arab national
existence*’ [221&h meeting, para. 231.

105. The failure to withstand the PLO’s design to
frustrate UNIFIL in the fulfilment of its mandate has
from the very start led to a progressive deterioration
in the situation on the ground.
106. The common denominator in all this selectivity
is an unwillingness on the part of the Council, the
Secretariat and UNIFIL even to criticize the PLO,
let alone take effective steps against it. Thus, for
example, asreported in the press cm 19April, five PLO
terrorists were apprehended trying to enter UNIFIL’s
area of operation and they were escorted out of the
area. This apparently is the most that UNIFIL is
capable of or*willing to do. It involves no risk to the
PLO. The worst that can happen to it is that its
operatives may have to-try their luck again in making
their entree. If UNIFIL had been more forthright from
the.very beginning in its dealings with the PLO, many
other problems confronting it today could well have
been avoided.

110. It is preposterous for these armchair strategists
to talk in these terms when everyone knows that, for
reasons totally unconnected with Israel, Arab unity
is at a low ebb and the new Arab League, which
Mr. Maksoud and his colleague represent, is incapable
of reconciling the manifold tensions and frictions
between its members. All of us witnessed the dibgcle
at the emergency meeting of the Arab League held in
Tunis in February of this year with a view to patching
up the differences between Tunisia and Libya. Since
that proved impossible, the customary expedient was
adopted of converting the meeting into yet. another
anti-Israel carnival.
111. And then we listened to the representative of
the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan making one of
his typicaIly tedious statements. It surely would have
been more appropriate for him to explain the difficulties
which Jordan encountered when, in the three years
after the Six-Day War of 1967, the PLO established a
State&within-a-State on his country’s territory. It would
have been helpful too if he had described the steps
which Jordan took in September 1970 to remedy the
threat to its existence posed by the PLO at that time.
What is sauce for the goose is sauce fo! the gander.

107, Then. there are those who see the panacea
for all UNIFIL’s ills in the now-defunct IsraelLebanon General Armistice Agreement of 1949.
Israel’s position with regard to. that Agreement is
well known and remains consistent. It was set out
in some detail in my statements before the Council
on 12 June [2147rh meeting] and on 19 December 1979
[2 180th meeting].
108. It is sureIy bizarre, especially for the Govemmerit- of Lebanon, to invoke that. Agreement now,
when by its declarations and actions it has made it
c!e,ar that it considers the Agreement to have come to
an end; and, more particularly, when, in viaIation of
that Agreement, it has tolerated for years a terrorist
presence on its territory with the accompanying
freedi>m t‘b conduct warlike andYhostile acts against
Israel. One of the key provisions of the Armistice
Agreement is summed up in article III, which, inter
alia, prohibits terrorists from operating on or from the
territory of either party. Paragraph 2 of that article lays
down that:

112. But what is more serious is that once again a
conscious attempt has been made in this debate to
focus narrowly on the problems of southern Lebanon
and to take them out of both their domestic and their
regional context. Such a narrow view of these problems
can only produce a warped and distorted result.
.
113. ‘Southern Lebanon is part and parcel of Lebanon
as a whole. As the Secretary-General has observed in
several of his reports, it cannot be arbitrarily detached
from the rest of the country and what goes on there.
Indeed, southern Lebanon is marginal to Lebanon as
a whole; and its problems will not disappear until the
larger problems of Lebanon are resolved. Those larger
problems include the continued occupation of the

“No . . . paramiitary forces. . . ., including nonregular forces, shall commit:any warlike or hostile
act against the military or paramilitary forces of the
11

country by Syriaand the presence on its soil of upwards
of 15,000 PLO terrorists.
114. In this context too the Council has revealed yet
another aspect of its selective approach and its selective conscience. It seems to have been of no consequence that, in the days immediately prior to the
Council’s meeting last Friday night, there were bloody
clashes in. Beirut between PLO terrorists backed by
Iraq and local Shiites. Artillery and heavy weapons
were employed in the clashes. Dozens of people
were killed and wounded on both sides, while many
innocent passers-by also suffered injuryi The fighting
and turmoil in, the north of Lebanon has also continued this week. Only two days ago, on 22 April,
two cars loaded with explosives blew up, one in the
centre of-Beirut and the other in the area of Al-Mattan.
Syrian troops killed a local Shiite and, in reprisal, six
Syrian soldiers have been kidnapped, Moreover,
terrorists at aroadblock south of Beirut have kidnapped
two membets of the local Lebanese ,gendarmerie and
in Tripoli terrorists. have killed a local resident, with
the result thatthe city is now in a state of considerable
tension.
115. All that and more has been going on while the
Council has been seized of the questionbefore us. But
these matters apparently do not merit mention, let
alone discussion.
116, Over and beyond the artificial attempts to
detach southern Lebanon from the country as a whole,
there has been a marked unwillingness to recognize
that the Arab States implacably opposed to peace
with Israel-the so-called rejectionist camp-regard
southern Lebanon as an extension of their “eastern
front”.
117. Should the Arab rejectionist States be tempted
to launch another war of aggression against Israel,
attempts will undoubtedly be made by Syria and its
allies in the eastern front to attack Israel also through
southern. Lebanon.
118. In the meantime, the rejectionists have allocated
to the PLO the task of launching acts of indiscriminate
terror against Israel from Lebanon in general, and from
southern Lebanon in particular.
119. In this connection and en passant, I should
point out that those in the Council’s meeting on Friday
evening, 18 April, who chose to mention the action
taken the previous night by the Israel Defence Forces
against a?LO terrorist base at Sarafand were in no way
inhibited from deliberately misleading the Council. The
Israeli.forces acted against a terrorist base at Sarafand
because we had solid information that a PLO attack
of the Misgav Am type was about to be launched
fr.om there. As reported both by the Associated Press
and Reuters on 1%April from Beirut, the facilities and
the buildings destroyed by our forces belonged to the
so-called “Popular Front for the Liberation of Pal-

estine--General Command’t. P,FLP-GC),.which is one
of the constituents of the PL-6 ; The Associated Press,
basing. itself on information,‘fro*m the Office of theGovernor of Sidon, rep0rte.d that a number of motor
boats equipped,with machine-guns were blown up, as
well as. two bulldings used by PFLP-GC men.
According to the Associated Press, in that operation
at least 14 PLO terrorists were killed.
120. In addition, the rejectionists have allotted to
the PLO the task of building up the military infrastructure in the area, which will be required in the
event of another Arab war against Israel, and all the
information available to us shows that the PLO is
actively engaged at this very moment in carrying out
that task-also within UNIFIL’s area of operation.
121. As I have had occasion to observe in other
debates, certain States may be able to ignore these
hard military and geo-political facts. Israel cannot.
122. Be that as it may, the rejectionistg intentions
are well known and undeniable. And, as ifthose were
not bellicose enough, there also exists the so:called
“steadfastness front”, whose warmongering goes
even further. Only last week, that front;. composed
of Libya, Syria, Algeria, South Yemen and’the. PLO;
met in Tripoli and on 15 April issued a final communique, the, first point of which was an outright
rejection of any settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict
based on Security Council resolution 242, (1967). for
the simple reason that it implies recognition of’Israe1.
The same.communique announced the creation of a
jointmilitary command,to be established in Syria:and
to be.headed by a senior Syrian officer. Ifthere were
any doubts on anyone’s part before, there certainly
can be no doubt now about the-longer term objectives
of the Syrian and PLO presence in Lebanon today;
123. According to Radio Monte Carlo on 14 April,
Yasser Arafat declared in the course of the meeting at
Tripoli:
“Qaddafi’s speech, in which he called for. . .
the eradication of Israel from the map, will serve
as a guide&@ to the PLO and as a working programme to which the PLOivill be fully dedicated . . .
The PLO wrV adhere from now on to the ,resolutions
of the steadfastness front and it will reject all European initiatives which are based on the Camp Dayid
accords .**
; 2.
124. Moreover, lest there be any illusions about the
PLO% intentions, George Habash, one of Arafat’s
chieftains, in preparing the ground for the Tripoli
meeting, was quoted, also by Radio Monte Carlo, on
31 March as follows:
“The Palestinians will not lay down the rifle in
return for mere recognition of the PLO; . . . they
will continue to struggle until the destruction of the
Jewish State: complete destruction and nothing
less.”
,.

--./ i

125. The same co&i&q&
issued by the steadfastness front last week &&.&ined a call for closer ties
with #he Soviet Uniti& It. has thus exposed ‘again the
Soviet Union’s role as the guiding hand behind the
PLO and its supporters; It also throws into true and
proper perspective the statements made in this and
other debates by the Soviet Union and its satellite
on the Council.
126. If we take a wider view of the situation, as
Israel is bound to do, the strategic facts are incontrovertible. Let me quote a few tines from a far-sighted
article published in The New York Times on 17 February 1979-that is, over a year ago:
“What is happening in Lebanon is an organic
part of a grand strategic encircling movement that
has been unfolding for years;
“The encircling subject is the Soviet Union and
the encircled object is the entire Middle East, with
its unique strategic position and its immense natural
resources.
“The events in Iran, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, the
Horn of Africa, Yemen, Lebanon, . . . as well as
the Arab opposition to the Camp David accords,
all belong to the same encircling phenomenon.”
These incisive comments, written, as I have sai& in
February of last year, were made by none other than
Professor Charles Malik, a predecessor of Ambassador
Ttini in this Organization, a former Foreign Miiiister
of Lebanon and a fdrmer President of the General
Assembly.
127. This debate and the resolution adopted.by the
Council again totally ignored the wider dimensions
of the developments in southern Lebanon, to which
I have just alluded, and were thus surrounded by an
air of unreality.
128. Israel, for its pa&, cannot and will not take a
blinkered view of the situation in southern Lebanon.
129. The PRESIDENT @zterpreturion from Spunish): The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
130. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I do not believe that
the representative of the racist Zionist entity in
occupation of Palestine deserves the waste, of one
minute of the Council’s precious time. How can
illegality deserve an answer in legal terms? He is, as
the members of the Council are well aware, a tape
cassette on which are stored the tedious repetitions of
the distortions to which I have repeatedly replied in
the past and to which I feel it would be redundant
to reply’ again. These distortions are compiled by him
with the main design of diverting the Council’s attention from the subject at hand on which the Council

has just passed a r&luti&.
He should be taken for
what he is: the true representative of a universally
condemned aggressor, in violation of all norms of
international law.
131. I have, however, taken note of his serious
statement that he regards the Lebanese-Israeli permanent Armistice Agreement as being defunct. Now,
this is a revelation to me, for I know that the permanent Armistice Agreement, as it pertains to Lebanon, is valid, and that it is only Israel’s aggression
which has prevented it from functioning. This is the
reason why the UNTSO personnel are still statibned
in their various posts along the international borders
of Lebanon with the Zionist entity.
132. I must confess that deep in my heart I am
gripped by the most serious misgivings about the
usefulness of making a statement before fhe Council
concerning the unmitigated lawlessness--and brazen
aggression against sisterly Lebanon which have
been continuing with virtually assured immunity.
133. Rarely has the Council been reduced to such
total paralysis in the face of blatant and ill-disguised
Israeli aggression. This is no reflection upon the
members of the Council who are dedicated to their
sacred duty of safeguarding peace and security whenever or wherever they are placed in serious jeopardy.
This has been categorically demonstrated in the prideinspiring, courageous and forthright condemnation of
Israeli lawlessness by the President in the statement
he made on 18 April on behalf of the Council
[2217th meeting, para. 151.
134. And yet, through the abuse and exploitation of
a special linkage to one of the major pillars of the
Council in issues pertaining to the, Middle East, no
matter how clear-cut and unequivocal things may be,
it has become an exercise in futility, an ill-conceived
act of self-deception, for any coutitry in the region to
place its security, let alone its survival, in the hands of
the Council. Mere condemnation, no matter how
deeply felt and fearless, is hardly adequate to persuade
the Israelis to stop their acts of aggression against
the territorial integrity of Lebanon, or give solace to
the victims of such wanton aggressions. It is for the
Council not merely to deplore and implore, but to
act.
135. Indeed, I have equally grave reservations
-notwithstanding my deepest concern over the daily
agony of the valiant brotherly Lebanese peopleregarding the efficacy of expecting that the Lebanese
people’s ordeal will be redressed by verbal expressions
on the part of this Council.
136. For reasons well enough understood, peaceloving and innocent Lebanese citizens-men, women
and children-are daily fodder for Israel’s huge
military arsenal. They must therefore necessarily
bring their agony before the Council. Only recently,

at 4 a.m., before the ~break of ‘dawn:‘;Che village of
Sarafand lost 15 of its inhabitants; including- children,
to Israeli ground-shelling and infiltration, helicopter
gunships and tighter bombers-indeed, none of the
Israeli services was denied a share in Israel’s murderous spree. Other Lebanese citizens and Palestinian
refugees have also been harvested by Israel’s instruments of death, including bombardment from the sea.
It has become almost adaily routine, as every resident
of Lebanon knows all too well-and I myself have
many relatives living in Lebanon.
137. ’ I can very well understand the immensity of the
feelings generated by these wanton attacks against
civilians, in what is tantamount to an undeclared and
ceaseless war. The Security Council is the highest
executive organ of the United Nations for arresting
an aggressor’s penchant for murder.
138. And what has the aggression against Lebanon
to do with the attack on Misgav Am? It has been the
tradition of the Council to seek reports from the
personnel of UNTSO on whether or not there had been
an infiltration, In the present case the Lebanese
Government has presented almost incontrovertible
evidence that there had been no such infiltration. As
a matter of fact, the observers-and I spoke about this
at a previ.ous meeting-know a footprint, when they
see one. They have not submitted a single report in
which they testify that there was infiltration across
the Lebanese border. So we must view Israel’s attack
and aggression against Lebanon in another light.
139. The time has come-if indeed it has not long
since passed-for the peoples of the region and of the
world to recognize that the Council, with all the best
intentions in the world, has been incapacitated in the
performance of its.duty. My delegation deeply appreciates the tireless efforts which the Council has been
expending.over the past week in its attempt to tackle
this.problem. We deeply appreciate even the resolution
the Council has just adopted, watered down and mild
as it is. But I am talking now about the incapacitation
of the Council, as it is envisaged in the Charter.

the: .’shelting and de’struct’ion~‘r’of the Norwegian
hospitalahas shown-how~V&fld anyone in the area
trust his right to life to .a deliberately paralysed
United Nations apparatus?
.,!;i,.,
143. UNTSO as well as UNIFIL personnel are still
being threatened with abduction, killing and assaults
in broad daylight; there has been no commitment at
all to discontinue these graveviolations. I do hope that
this story aboutthe villagers’ vendetta will be taken for
the fabrication it is. If one or two villagers were
involved, we- know that they are part of the band:of
that traitor- Major Haddad, operating against the territorial integrity and independence of his owtrcountry.
If they were indeed involved, they must have acted
at his specific orders because he has vowed that he
will not allow either UNIFIL or UNTSO to remain
in south Lebanon. He has said that publicly.
144. United Nations personnel must be seriously,
and justifiably, wondering what has happened to the
United Nations, and particularly the Security Council,
which has all the powers required to protect at least
its own people, if not. the peoples that are victims of
aggression.
145. I am speaking candidly and truthfully when
I state-and I may be tedious, as the representative of
the Zionist entity has said, but at least I am not
hypocritical-that what is happening in south Lebanon
today is not without purpose. The purpose, in my
‘delegation’s modest judgement, is to harass UNIFIL
and UNTSO to the point where they would choose to
withdraw rather than endure sustained humiliation.
I am proud that the contributing countries have&en a
courageous answer to the challenge by Major Haddad
by insisting that in no circumstances will they withdraw their contingents from the area.
146. If the Israeli objective were to be achieved,
that would be the signal for a much larger onslaught
against not only Lebanon but other neighbouring countries; it would be an onslaught which would be
launched undetected and the blame for which would
then. be placed on some fabricated excuse, which
has always characterized Israel’s ubiquitous aggressions over. the past three decades.

140. The resolution just adopted by the Council has
been so critically watered down that it is unlikely to
be heeded, In future weeks and months the truth of
what I have just said will be proved.

147. The Israelis, determined not to concede any
Palestinian rights-and currently they are facing the
moment of truth and reckoning--need action to divert
attention from the centrality of the Middle, East conflict, namely, the question of Palestine. They are
inflicting their heedless wrath upon Lebanon.

141. It is strange indeed that Misgav Am should be
an excuse for an attack on the territorial integrity of
Lebanon, when no evidence whatsoever has been
produced that any infiltration had occurred across the
Lebanese border. As a matter of fact, 40 observer
posts were wrecked 24 hours before this incident
occurred.

148. The peoples of the region are awakening to the
fact that their survival depends. upon their individual
and collective self-reliance. There is no other viable
avenue left. Time is fast running out, and their response should:be commensurate to the dangers which
he ahead. I rmist confess thatour worst enemy is our
artificial and totally unjustified discord, which I assure

142. Indeed, if the Security Council has found itself
in the unenviable position of not being able to protect
its own flag, its sanctity, its personnel, its premises,
its equipment, and even its hospitals and clinics-as
14

i55; Apparently&e representative of-Tel Aviv takes
pleasure in using so.me:shady sources for his quota-,
tions. He repeatedly told the, Council-and. even
circulated a document [S/1$?72]-that Chairman
Arafat had made a statement to a certain paper in
Caracas, Venezuela, called El Undo. Through your
good offices, Mr. President, and those- of our good
friend from Tunisia, we circulated-a paper denying
that Chairman Arafat had ever given that interview
[S/13898].

representatives, irmo.+wy &kcts th&deeply~oot,ed.
feelings of solidarity a,n,d~ne.ness-amongstour leaders
and peoples in the regjon?. i i
1.49. I,wish the representative of Israel were here, to
feel more comfortable about wh.at I have just said.
150.. In. the mean time, while hoping against hope
that the Council will shoulder its responsibilities as
outlined in the Charter, the least we should have
rationally expected was for the. Council to have taken
practical measures as spelled. out in the Charter, if
only to ensure its safety, inviolability and standing in
the eyes of the world; rather than wait for the grievously aggrieved Lebanon$o do what the Council. itself
is in duty bound to do. Needless to say, Jordan wholeheartedly supports our Lebanese brethren in their
view of what is minimally acceptable.

156. The representative of Tel Aviv is now reporting
things from Radio Monte Carlo, but I do not understand why he does not get the official statements
since he quoted the offtcial communique that came out
of Tripoli after the meeting of the steadfastness States.
157. There has been a lot of talk about Misgav Am.
first and foremost, we are told. by the Government of
Ireland, in its statement of 20 April;

151. A gathering storm and ever-darkening clouds
are hovering above our region: Nobody-can foretell
what lies ahead, but I am sure of one thing: no matter
what happen-s, we shall struggle for our survival with
all the.means at our disposal, and in concert, in spite
of all the artificial differences. An indifferent world
would share with us an intolerable price for any complacency, timidity or masterly inaction. Actionoriented measures must be taken before it is too late.
What price Israel?

“They emphasize, however, that there, is no evidence that the infiltrators who-carried out this attack
came through the area where UNIPIL had been
allowed to exercise effective control.” [S113901,
annex.]
The GoveTnment of Ireland is, apparently, not very
well informed. Therefore, I leave. it to the Council to
decide whether there is any proof that the people
who carried out that attack were infiltrators.

152. The PRESIDENT (interprerution from Spunish): The representative of the- Palestine Liberation

158. In its issue of 13 April, The Jerusalem
a weekly publication, says:

Oiganization has asked to be allowed to speak. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Post,

“Two of the fences were cut to allow a ‘man to
walk through upright, and the break in a-third would
have required them to crawl. through.”
.-

153. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The Council hasjust been informed that when the neofascists, the Zionists of Tel Aviv, attacked Sarafand
the other day, they did so because they had information
that the Palestine Liberation Organization bad plans
to attack Israel. While speaking, their representative
informed the Council that they had information that at
this moment the PLO was planning a similar attack.
I wish I could verify that-1 do not have the statement-but if what I think I heard is correct, then the
Council should-be-prepared to hear of another outrage.,
another crime, against a convaIescent home or a
refugee camp, under the guise of a pre-emptive attack.
So I want to alert the Council to an impending attack
on the Palestinian people in their Diaspora.

I am sure that the Government of Ireland was not
made aware of that opening that would allow a person
to walk upright through it.
159. With reference to what really ‘happened at
Misgav Am, I again quote the following from The
Jerusalem Post reporting ,what one of the ,night+.watchmen said:
“There were two childrenunder a year old in
one room, and four in the ‘three-plus’ group in
another room. Two nurses were also- in the
building . . .
“Peretz said he felt shock at. first but did not
panic: When he ‘recovered’, he was sure ‘they
wanted to-get ridof’ him. They tied him to the bed,

154. In referring to..-Sarafandtheother day we stated
vety clearly, and there was no w.ay ofhiding facts, that
the convalescent home was destroyed.as a result of a
dastardly attack and that a, medical office-r and two
medical assistants were murdered as a result of that
attack. So there was no misleading information. We
also said that there were civilians in houses near the
convalescent home who were also kihed as a result of
that attack.

“One of them” -that is to say, one of the attackers, speaking of the “infiltrat_ors’~--“showed
him a leaflet and explained that they were demanding
the release of 100 [of their friends] imprisoned in
Israel and a plane to fly them out of.IsraeI,”
15
.L

According to The Jerusalem Post; the babies were still
asleep; but there was some dhooting: “The shots woke
the- infants, who started crying.** What did those
“infiltrators” do? They loosened the bonds of Peretz
and asked him to caIm the babies and reassure the
children that they were not there to kill them. People
who think of freeing a watchman to enable him to look
after two babies are not there to kill the children or
the watchman. The article continued: “One proposed
to kill them all, but another argued that this was
harum”which
means “forbidden”. One does not
kill children. It was reported. in that article that the
“infiltrators” felt it. was forbidden to kill children.
They were not there to kill children. They were there
to demand the release of a hundred of their colleagues.
The article continued: “Again they took Peretz to the
window and .ordered him to shout in English” to the
attackers “not to shoot:‘-which he did. Nine hours
later an explosion was heard, which signalled the
attack by the soldiers. The article-continued:

dated 13 February, which contains a list of the people
killed as a result of israeli attacks during the year
1978/?9. During that period there were. 26 women,
278 men and 40 children killed;, of--whom 157 were
Palestinians and the rest Lebanese. The United States
has expressedshock at whathappened at?Misgav Am;
and I can- understand them if they want to express
shock. But they could really express some shock
at thi.s wholesale murder and annihilation of the Palestinians and. the Lebanese, and they could stop
supplying Israel with arms, bombs, 175 mm artillery
and cluster bombs.
162. I think that the worst crime is to deny an entire
people the right to: return to its home. As I appealed
to the Council the other,day, please help us and enable
us to return to our homes on the highway, and do not
force us to take the mountain paths because those
mountain paths are planted with mines and many
innocentcivilianlives will be lost. We shall have more
debates on the denial of our rights, but I want to
assure the Council that it is not our intention-to continue the bloodshed. Please:help us to return to our
homes, to exercise our rights and to enjoy the same
rights as any people.

“To protect the two-children Peretz rolled off the
bed with them, he said: Shielding them with his body,
he crawled towards the door and out of the building.”
I am not trying to dramatize, I am just quoting what
Post wrote about the children who were
in the building, According to the m.ilitary authorities
of Israel, and again I quote from The Jerusalem

163. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spunish): I call on the representative of Lebanon, who has

The Jerusalem

asked to be allowed to speak.

Po3t:

164. Mr. TIJENI (Lebanon): We now have a-resolution. For 10 or 11.days the Council has continuously
held consultations, negotiations or debates. It has
displayed sufficient patience and. at times has undergone,sufficient abuse. I do not feel that I-am at liberty
to abuse the privilege that the Council has granted me,
now that we are concluding the debate. I shall therefore be extremely. brief and shall speak only for the
record on a few minor points. I shall not follow the
rempresentative of Israel, in the art of quoting, mis:
quoting and selfiquoting, in which he is, of- course,
a master. However, I do want to-state the following.

“Military sources. believe that the terrorists
entered the children’s house by chance, and not because they had previously chosen a building or
because they had intimate knowledge of the kibbutz’s layout.**
What was Begin’s answer? He said:
. . . vengeance for the blood of a child has not
been created. We are no longer in exile, and we are
not defenceless. We have a magnificent army, as
w.as$roved adequately.”

165; First; the reference of: the- representative of
Israel toa statementby the. United‘Nationsspokesman
is f$8e. The. spokesman related: what he<was told by
the. Israeli sources. That, was made explicit in, the
statement of the IJnited,Nations- spokesman.

They. have a magnificent army, which shelled and
attackedi&raf$rid, killing a medical doctor and two
medical assistants, in addition to civilian women and
children.
160. Terrorism in our part of the world has,its roots
among- the,Zionists who planted bombs in the streets
of the Old City of Jerusalem, in Jaffa and. in Haifa,
who planted bombs in piles ,of watermerons to kill
Palestinian peasants and civilians. Their crimes make
up a long list,. including-acts committed in such places
as Qibia, Kafar Kasem and Deir Yassin, where
253 men, women and children, all innocent civilians,
were killed.. Deir Yassin was not a military outpost.
It wasjust a peaceful village with civilians living in it.

1‘66. S@x~~~dl)y,
with respect. to the Lebane.se villagers, for the record the Council might be interested
to know thar the famify referred to has held a press
conference and. stated’ that those who murdered the
Irish soldiers incold blood were acting for Israel and
not for the family%
167. It is very difficult:to speak for a victim country
and it is indeed very strange that our position here
should ibe in defence of an a.rmistice agreement which
is presented by the other party as an. act of war.
I shall not.quote from the articles of the Armistice
Agreement, but-the Council will certainly be interested

161. I,should now like, to refer to the Congressional
Rt%~rd of the United States House &Representatives,
16.

to know that, even if my country wanted to denounce
that Agreement, it would not be at liberty to do so
because those of us who have examined that Agreement know that it is an act of the Council and that
it can be abrogated only by a decision of the Council.
I have spoken about that before in the Council. We
have always claimed that it is still in effect and we
sincerely hope that it will be enforced.

at it from the south, “upwards”,
or from the north,
“downwards”.
One might say, of course, that the
problems
that my country
has been tragically
experiencing
will not all be miraculously
solved if
UNIFIL
is enabled to carry out its task. But I should
also suggest that the problems in the north have
probably been artificially
created by various parties,
particularly
Israel, that have utilized southern Lebanon as an instrument of destabilization
and have held
hostage the people of the south.

. 168. I should like to say one thing further. The
distance in time between our request to the Council
and the moment when this resolution was adopted
is such that we cannot view the resolution as the
expression of an exercise in rhetoric, but merely as a
resolution that is oriented towards the future. We beg
the Council to accept this attitude.

172. I hope that I may affirm, in all solemnity, that
by UNIFIL,
with UNIFIL
and with the Governments
which support it, we are interested in transforming
southern Lebanon into an area of peace and security
and not into an arena for future wars.

169. We should like to thank those members who
voted for the resolution, and in particular the delegation of China, which joined those that voted in favour
of previous resolutions on Lebanon. We should like
also to thank those that abstained. I should like to
make particular
note of the efforts made by you
personally, Mr. President, by my brother the representative of Tunisia and also by the representative of
Norway in making it possible for the Council to
display a sense of consensus on this issue of Lebanon.

173. I should also like to say that we in Lebanon,
with our traditions and our consistent, peace-loving
policy, have no addiction to barbed-wire countries
or ghetto States. Our vision of the future of the Middle
East is not one of a collection of ghetto States and
barbed-wire countries.
174. Finally, Mr. President, I know how much you
love Lebanon. I know the concern that has been displayed around this table for Lebanon. It is very difficult indeed to speak for a victim country, very difficult and very painful. I do, however, beg for one
thing: that my country should not be held accountable
for what it has not done. We in Lebanon are only
accountable for what the legitimate authorities of the
land do in the name of the Lebanese people.

170. My final point is the following: what is at stake
in Lebanon-or
in this resolution, if it is viewed as a
future-oriented
resolution? Of course Lebanon is at
stake. But also at stake are a concept of peace and
the credibility of UNIFIL,
the only serious, ongoing
enterprise undertaken by this body to establish peace
in one part of the Middle East. It is not any part of
the Middle East but one very crucial and axial part,
which has been referred to, even by those who
abstained in the vote, as being of such paramount
importance
that the consequences of a failure of
peace-keeping
there could be so far-reaching as to
provoke a general war in the area. We therefore
propose and submit that any erosion of UNIFIL,
from
whatever source, is indeed not only a challenge to the
Council but also a challenge to peace: a challenge to
a serious, dedicated
effort which has produced
marvellous results, but which has not been allowed to
continue.

175. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): Since there are no further speakers, the Council
has concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on the agenda.
The meeting

rose

at 2.45 p.m.

NOTES
I Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 4.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Special
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2nd meeting.

171. In conclusion,
I should like to say that one
might look at Lebanon in two ways: one could look

17

’

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les libraities et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-voos
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

IIOJIYYZiTh

CONSEGUIR

HSAAHUH

OPI-AHEI

PUBLICACIONES

3AiKHEI

DE LAS

OG’hE,!UfHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAIWFi

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerlas y casas disttibuidoras
en
todas pattes del mundo. Consulte a su libtero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-August

19862,425
