Re1olation1 adopted wlth-t referenee to a Main Committee

tion and, in particular, creating satisfactory conditions
for activities by national and international nongovernmental organizations in support of the peoples
under coloniP' 1omination.
( 8) The t. ...!~.... Nations as well as all States shall
intensify their efforts in the field of public information
in the area of decolonization tbrou$h all media,
including publications, radio and television. Of special
importance will be programmes relating to United
Nations activities on decolonization, the situation in
colonial Territories and the struggle being waged by
colonial peoples and the national liberation move-

ments.
(9) T.ae Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples shall continue to examine the full compliance of all States with the Declaration and with
other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization. The question of territorial size, geographical
isolation and limited resources should in no way
delay the implementation of the Declaration. Where
resolution 1514 (XV) bas not been fully implemented with regard to a given Territory, the General
Assembly shall continue to bear responsibility for
that Territory until such time as the people concerned
has had an opportunity to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration. The Special Committee is
hereby directed:
(a) To continue to assist the General Assembly
in finding the best ways and means for the final
liquidation of colonialism;
(b) To continue to give s~cial consideration to
the views expressed orally or m written communications by representatives of the peoples in the colonial
Territories;
(c) To continue to send visiting missions to the
colonial Territories and to bold meetings at places
where it can best obtain first-hand information on the
situation in colonial Territories, as well as to continue to. hold meetings away fr6m Headquarters as
appropnate;
(d) To assist the General Assembly in making
arrangements, in co-operation with the administering
Powers, for securin~ a United Nations presence in
the colonial Territones to participate in the elaboration of the procedural measures for the implementation of the Declaration and to observe the final
stars of the process of decolonization in the Territoncs;
(e) To prepare draft rules and regulations for
visiting missions for approval by the General Assembly.

1862nd plenary meeting,
12 October 1970.
2622 (XXV). Admission of Fiji to membership
in the United Natiom
The General Assembly,

Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 October 1970 that Fiji should be

"

admitted to membership in the United Nations,2
l Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth

Session, Annexes, agenda item 100, document A/8119.

s

Having considered the application for membership of
Fiji,8
Decides to admit Fiji to membership in the United
Nations.
1863rd plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.
2627 (XXV), Declaration on the Occulon of the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations
The General Assembly
Adopts the following Declaration:
DECLARATION ON THE OCCASION OF THE TwENTYFIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS

We, the representatives of the States Members of
the United Nations, assembled at United Nations Headquarters on 24 October 1970 on the occasion of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the coming into force of the
Charter of the United Nations, now solemnly declare
that:
1. In furtherance of the anniversary objectives of
peace, justice and progress, we reaffirm our dedication to the Charter of the United Nations and our
will to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter.
2. The United Nations, despite its limitatiou,
has, in its role as a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in attaining the purposes mentioned in
Article 1 of the Charter, made an important contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security, to developing friendly relations based on
respect for the prmciple of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples and to achieving international co-operation in economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields. We reaffirm our deep conviction
that the United Nations can provide a most effective
means to strengthen the freedom and independence
of nations.
3. In pursuance of the rurposes of the Charter,
we reaffirm our determination to respect the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States. We will exert
our utmost efforts to develop such relations among
all States, irrespective of tl)eir political, economic
and social s~tems, on the basis of strict observance
of the principles of the Charter, and in particular the
principle of sovereign equality of States, the principle
that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial inte~ty or political independence of any
State, the prmc1ple that they shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means, the duty
not to intervene in matters within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State, the duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with th,:
Charter, and the principle that States shall fulfil in
good faith the obligations assumed by them in
accordance with the Charter. The progressive development and codification of international law, in
which important progi-ess was made during the first
twenty-five years of the United Nations, should be
a A/8118. For the printed text of this document, see Official

R#ord,,,, of the Security

Council, Twenty-fifth Year, Supplen'rlnt for October, November and December 1970, document
S/9951.
