S/PV.7929

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7929 th meeting

Thursday, 20 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley/Ms. Sison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Rakhmetullin
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 10 April 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/305)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-10629 (E)
*1710629*

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 10 April 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/305)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Neville Melvin Gertze, Vice-Chairman,
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, and His Excellency Mr. João Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
I propose also that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
2/65

20/04/2017

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/305, which contains a letter dated
10 April 2017 from my delegation addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I welcome Mr. Mladenov and give him the floor.
Mr. Mladenov: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to again address the Council on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I took note of the presidency’s interest this
month in discussing a number of issues pertaining
to the Middle East and North Africa region. I will
therefore highlight some of them in my presentation
and defer to my fellow United Nations envoys who
regularly brief the Council for greater detail on many
of these challenges.
Today, a perfect storm has engulfed the Middle
East and continues to threaten international peace
and security. Millions have been displaced in the
biggest refugee crisis since the Second World War.
In many countries, societies have fractured along
ethnic or religious lines. Non-State actors have taken
control of territory and terror attacks have spread
indiscriminately, striking civilians of all origin and
confession. From the onset, I would like to pay tribute to
the countless victims of these senseless acts of violence
and call on the international community to show its
full and unwavering commitment to defeating terror
and incitement, to supporting the forces of moderation
against extremism, and to untangling the Gordian
knot of political, economic and foreign forces that are
driving the myriad conflicts in the Middle East.
Developments in the Arab-Israeli conflict continue
to resonate across the region. The question of Palestine
remains a potent symbol and rallying cry that is easily
misappropriated and exploited by extremist groups.
Ending the occupation and realizing a two-State solution
will not solve all the region’s problems, but as long as
the conflict persists it will continue to feed them.
Sporadic violence has continued in recent weeks,
as five Palestinians and one Israeli were killed in
various acts of violence. Among the fatalities were
two Palestinian teenaged boys, shot by Israeli security
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forces outside Ramallah, as well as a British woman
who was murdered by a Palestinian man in Jerusalem.
In March, Israel approved the establishment of a
new settlement and declared some 240 acres as State
land inside the occupied Palestinian territory. These
moves further undermine the territorial contiguity of
a future Palestinian State in the West Bank. Tenders
for close to 2,000 housing units, the vast majority in
major population centres close to the 1967 lines, were
also issued. I take note of recent reports that Israel has
adopted a policy of restraint by which construction will
be advanced “almost exclusively” in the built-up areas
of settlements, but it is too early to determine how this
policy will manifest itself on the ground. Settlement
construction is illegal under international law and I
urge all such activities to cease.
On the Palestinian side, multiple worrying
developments are further cementing the Gaza-West
Bank divide and dangerously increasing the risk of
escalation. In April, the Palestinian Government
reduced payments to thousands of Palestinian Authority
employees in the Gaza Strip. It is important that the
burden of decisions to reduce expenditures be fairly
distributed and made with due consideration to the
harsh conditions under which people in Gaza live.
Four months ago, Palestinians in Gaza went to the
streets when people were left with only a few hours
of electricity per day. The situation was temporarily
resolved with the help of Qatar; however, a more serious
crisis is now unfolding again as electricity is down to
less than six hours per day. The social, economic and
political consequences of these developments should
not be underestimated.
Meanwhile, Hamas continues to tighten its iron
grip over Gaza by forming an administrative committee
that is seen by many to be a direct challenge to the
legitimate Palestinian Government. Following the
assassination of one of its militants, it temporarily put
in place a series of restrictions preventing Palestinians
and internationals from leaving and banning fishing for
two weeks.
On 6 April, three Palestinians were executed
by Hamas in gross violation of international law and
without a fair trial. These actions were condemned by
the Secretary-General, and I am deeply concerned that
further extrajudicial executions are anticipated in Gaza.
On 7 April, nine people were killed in armed clashes
between the newly formed Palestinian joint security

S/PV.7929

forces and members of Islamist militants with links to
Al-Qaeda in Lebanon’s Ein El-Hilweh Palestine refugee
camp. I note that young Palestinians in refugee camps
across the region remain particularly vulnerable to
extremists and religious radicals, as living conditions
in these communities remain extremely harsh. On
17 April, an estimated 1,500 Palestinian prisoners and
detainees began an open-ended hunger strike to protest
their conditions in Israeli prisons. I am also concerned
by today’s report of an attempt to smuggle explosive
material from Gaza into Israel via medical material.
Such actions will only exacerbate existing tensions.
Turning to some broader regional dynamics,
several States of the region continue to bear a massive
burden from the flood of Syrian refugees. While
the international community must do more to stand
in solidarity with Syria’s neighbours by increasing
assistance and burden-sharing, the underlying causes
of displacement must be addressed through a political
solution to the ongoing conflict.
In Syria, a democracy deficit, systematic repression
and wholesale human rights violations, including by
the Government — which holds the primary obligation
to protect the human rights of all civilians in the
country — have combined with a prolonged conflict
to create a fertile ground for sectarian polarization,
radicalism and violent extremism. One of the greatest
contributions we all can make today to the defeat of
listed terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (IS1L) and the Al-Nusra Front
is to achieve a comprehensive and credible political
settlement to the Syrian conflict and a political transition
that is inclusive, democratic and participatory. Such
an outcome would also help to enable a more unified
international counter-terrorism response.
I would like to briefly touch upon recent reports
of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. If
confirmed, this abhorrent action would amount to
a serious violation of international law and pose a
threat to international peace and security. This is an
area in which the Security Council has the primary
responsibility, and I hope that it can unite to send a
strong collective message that the perpetrators of such
attacks will be held accountable.
In Lebanon, on 12 April President Aoun decided
to adjourn the tenure of the Lebanese Parliament
for one month. It is hoped that this will allow time
for Lebanon’s leaders to agree on an election law, in

17-106293/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accordance with the Constitution. The Council will
soon receive the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), which called
for the disbanding and disarmament of all militias.
Recognizing the vital progress achieved in restoring
Lebanon’s institutions to their full functioning, it
will be essential for the country to seize the current
momentum to counter the maintenance and alleged
increase of weapons outside the authority of the State.
Libya, as Special Representative Kobler briefed the
Council yesterday (see S/PV.7927), has made important
strides in the fight against ISIL, which no longer
holds territory in that country. However, the stalled
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement is
contributing to a political and security vacuum, putting
Libya’s population and its neighbours at risk of further
destabilization. Armed groups have committed grave
violations and abuses of human rights. It is critical that
the political process be resumed, with the support of the
international community.
Meanwhile in Iraq, the security forces supported
by the international anti-ISIL coalition are making
progress in retaking Mosul. I welcome the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to secure and rebuild destroyed
areas and to advance the national reconciliation process.
That will be essential to depriving ISIL of legitimacy,
access to resources and support.
Across the region, social exclusion and marginalization,
particularly in areas of prolonged and unresolved
conflicts, tend to provide fertile ground for the rise of
violent extremism. Unity across ethnic and religious
lines, reconciliation and a fair sharing of resources help
heal wounds and isolate extremists.
Listed terrorist organizations and other non-State
actors, including armed groups such as Hizbullah,
have thrived in the climate of weak governance and the
failure to protect human rights that pervade the region.
It is estimated that over 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from over 100 Member States have travelled to the
Middle East in recent years to join such groups. Their
presence over expanses of territory and accumulation
of resources and weaponry pose an increased threat to
regional and international peace and security. Some
foreign fighters have already returned to their home
countries, spreading violence in their own communities.
The humanitarian and social impact of the
conflicts in the Middle East is catastrophic. In Syria,
hundreds of thousands have been killed since 2011 and
4/65

20/04/2017

approximately half the population is displaced. Over
5 million refugees are registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with
nearly 3 million in Turkey, over 1 million in Lebanon
and more than 650,000 in Jordan, putting a huge social,
economic and security strain on those societies.
In Iraq, over 334,000 people are currently displaced
in total as a result of fighting in Mosul. Let me note that
most of them are people who have lived for two years
under the barbaric rule of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Owing to intense efforts by the Government
and humanitarian partners in Iraq, operations have kept
pace with growing needs but capacities are strained.
In Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East, the
situation continues to deteriorate as 18.8 million Yemenis
are in need of humanitarian assistance, including a
shocking 10.3 million who require immediate help.
More than 2 million are internally displaced and over
2 million children are acutely malnourished.
I urge the Security Council and all stakeholders
to do everything in their power to protect and spare
civilians from the brutal effects of those conflicts and
as required under international law. Regardless of the
causes, whether defence or counter-terrorism, the abuse
of human rights in the conduct of any conflict can never
be justified. It serves only to reinforce the fundamental
drivers of extremism and violence.
The complexity of the region’s conflicts means
that political solutions based on justice, dignity and
social cohesion are required to achieve and sustain
peace. Developments on the political front continue. In
Yemen, Special Envoy Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed
is consulting with key regional and international actors
in an effort to build support for the framework of peace
talks, as well as to mitigate the effects on the civilian
population of military hostilities.
On 12 April, the Security Council heard from
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, who underscored
that there can only be a political solution to the bloody
conflict in Syria. I reiterate his urgent call for the
Council to unite behind the United Nations-convened
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on political transition
as per resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Efforts to revive engagement between Israelis and
Palestinians to achieve a negotiated and sustainable
peace must also be intensified. In that regard, I am
encouraged by ongoing efforts by Egypt, Jordan and
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the United States to advance the prospects for peace.
On 29 March, the League of Arab States convened
in Jordan for their 28th annual summit where, once
again, the leaders of 22 countries endorsed the Arab
Peace Initiative.
In closing, let me reiterate the words of SecretaryGeneral Guterres that the region requires a surge in
diplomacy for peace. Member States, especially through
a united Security Council, will have to assume the
leading role, including by advancing the implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. In today’s
world, there can be no justification for terrorism, nor
for the glorification of those who commit it. But without
justice, dignity and the protection of human rights,
communities will continue to fracture and provide
fertile ground for extremists. To that end, the fragility
of States must be addressed. Governments need to
respond to the legitimate demands of their people and
strengthen social cohesion and reconciliation. That is
the first line of defence against extremism. Efforts to
strengthen the voices of moderation and build religious
tolerance must also be strengthened.
Divisions within the region have opened the door
to outside interference and manipulation, breeding
instability and sectarian strife. Multilateral approaches
and cooperation are necessary to address interlinked
conflicts, cross-border humanitarian impacts and
violent extremism. Let us not forget that behind the
images of savagery, behind the shocking statistics of
human suffering, there are millions fighting every day,
not only for their own survival but, for the true humane
essence of their cultures and societies. They are the
true faces of the Middle East, and we must do all we
can to help them prevail.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for that
thorough briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, confident of
the United States’ skilled guidance of the Council’s
important work. I also express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for its leadership of the Council in the
month of March.
I thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Special

S/PV.7929

Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing to the Council.
Before making my national statement, I wish to
note that, while the State of Palestine is Chair of the
Group of Arab States for April, the Council of Arab
Ambassadors has decided that Jordan, in its capacity
as host and president of the 2017 Arab Summit, shall
deliver today’s statement on behalf of the Arab Group.
We align ourselves with that statement, as well as with
the statements to be delivered on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
We meet at a time of simmering crises, rising
tensions, and declining optimism about prospects
for Middle East peace. At the heart of the instability
in our region remains the Palestine question, a grave
injustice that continues without remedy, causing
misery to millions, and that continues to pose a threat
to international peace and security. The persistence of
that injustice also continues to fuel perceptions of bias
and double-standards and to be exploited by extremist
elements as justification for their vile actions and
as a recruitment tool. There can be no discussion of
countering extremist terror and stabilizing the region
without recognizing that fact, as well as the imperative
of addressing the root causes of our region’s conflicts,
in order to fully resolve them and allow us to enter a
new era in the Middle East.
That said, it is beyond clear that the PalestinianIsraeli conflict is about the denial of a people’s
inalienable rights and a prolonged foreign occupation;
it is not a conflict arising from incitement or terror. A
territorial solution and fulfilment of rights are what will
resolve the conflict, ending the Israeli occupation of
our land and realizing Palestinian national aspirations
and rights, including to self-determination and freedom
and a just solution for the Palestine refugees, in
conformity with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The Security Council has a role and responsibility to
foster such a just and peaceful solution, consistent with
its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 2334 (2016) is the most recent articulation of
the Council’s positions, decisions and determination in
that regard and reflects the long-standing international
consensus on the issue. We reiterate that resolution
2334 (2016) is not anti-Israel; it is anti-settlements,

17-106295/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

anti-violence and anti-violation of international law,
and is therefore actually and clearly pro-peace and protwo-State solution — Palestine and Israel — and was
globally welcomed as such. The resolution provides the
most viable path to preserving the two-State solution
on the 1967 lines and creating the conditions necessary
to end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in all
aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and security
a reality.
Once again, we call for full respect of resolution
2334 (2016). In that connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s report pursuant to the resolution,
as orally delivered on 24 March 2017. Yet, we reiterate
the expectation for written reports to ensure proper
documentation of the implementation of the resolution’s
provisions and of the developments promoting or
obstructing its objectives.
In addition, while the report rightly reiterated
the call for the complete cessation of illegal Israeli
settlement activities, it echoed the call for a cessation
of violence and incitement, reaffirmed the global
consensus on the two-State solution, noted ongoing
international efforts to promote it, and reflected on the
worrying reality on the ground. We believe that further
analysis, based on international law and the context of
the occupation, and recommendations to rectify the
negative trends are required in future reports to assist
the Council in upholding its duties. We await the next
report in June, which will coincide with the marking of
50 years of the occupation.
We condemn Israel’s disrespect of Security Council
decisions, as evidenced in its flagrant violations
of resolution 2334 (2016). Thousands of violations
have been deliberately carried out, including the
advancement of at least 6,000 more settlement units
in the months since the resolution’s adoption — even
the establishment of a new settlement — along with
other violations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Settlement activities are
eroding the two-State solution, based on the 1967
lines, and must stop immediately in all manifestations,
as demanded by the Council. The colonization,
fragmentation, and annexation of our land will never
bring peace. Here, we also recall the clear affirmations
by the Council that
“it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem,
6/65

20/04/2017

other than those agreed by the parties through
negotiations” (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 3);
and reiterate as well the call upon all States
“to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967” (ibid., para. 5).
Actions consistent with these provisions are more
urgent than ever.
Each day, as more violations entrench the occupation,
hope and potential for a solution are considerably
diminished. At the same time, Israel’s contempt
diminishes the Council’s own stature and credibility,
seriously compromising its ability — that is, of the
Council — to act with authority in other crises around
the world.
How can this situation be acceptable to anyone, least
of all Council members? Security Council resolutions
must be implemented without exception. As in any
other case, Israel must comply with Council demands
and its legal obligations, or be held accountable. It
cannot continue to be absolved of responsibility for its
crimes and violations, its perpetuation of the conflict,
and its obstruction of peace.
I must turn now to the human dimension of this
conflict and the endless suffering being caused to the
Palestinian people, young and old, by this illegal and
brutal occupation at the hands of the Israeli occupying
forces and extremist Israeli settlers.
As we meet today, more than 1,000 Palestinians are
on hunger strike in non-violent protest of their captivity,
inhumane treatment and torture by Israel. This hunger
strike, led by Marwan Barghouti, a Palestinian
parliamentarian and political leader who has been jailed
for 15 years now, aims to call attention to the plight of
the over 6,500 Palestinians imprisoned or arbitrarily
detained, including men, women, youth, children and
elected officials, and to secure the legitimate rights
being denied to them by Israel, in grave breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
We call for international solidarity with our
prisoners — whom we salute from the Chamber — in
this peaceful effort to compel Israeli compliance with
the law and respect for their human rights and to avert
the dangerous consequences of deterioration of this
situation. We believe that the International Committee
of the Red Cross can play a positive, facilitating role,
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and urge all necessary efforts in this regard. Moreover,
we stress that the release of our prisoners and detainees
is indispensable for peace, one of the most important
indicators of the readiness to end the oppression and
occupation and to create peace and coexistence.
Today, we must also remind the Council of the
appalling situation of captivity of 2 million Palestinians
in the Gaza Strip, under Israel’s illegal blockade, in an
act of massive collective punishment and a crime against
humanity. For nearly 10 years, an entire population has
been imprisoned, denied freedom of movement, access
to livelihoods, access to basic supplies, even vital
medicines, deprived of clean water and energy, and
forced to live in the ruins of war, as even reconstruction
continues to be obstructed and at least 40,000 people
remain displaced from the destruction caused by the
2014 Israeli aggression. We caution that hope is fading
and despair rising in Gaza, and reiterate our call for
an end to the blockade and for respect by Israel of its
obligations as an occupying Power under international
humanitarian law.
Our calls for respect of international law go hand
in hand with our readiness to engage in negotiations
to achieve peace. The Palestinian leadership has
clearly committed itself to negotiations and has acted
in good faith in over two decades of peace processes.
We are insistent, however, on international law as
the foundation and guarantor of peace. Resolution
2334 (2016) fully recognized this and the Palestinian
leadership is committed to the respect of that resolution.
We are engaging with all efforts to advance a just
solution. This includes engagement with the new United
States Administration of President Trump. Several
Arab leaders have met with the President since the
Arab Summit, reaffirming their commitment to peace,
in line with the Arab Peace Initiative, which marked
its fifteenth anniversary last month. That Initiative was
remarkably renewed again, and still awaits reciprocation
by Israel. President Abbas will also soon travel to
Washington, D.C.. My understanding is that he will be
meeting with President Trump on 3 May. He is ready to
engage in political dialogue with the United States and
all other concerned partners, including the Quartet, to
launch a credible political horizon, on a clear basis and
in a set time frame, that will lead to a solution that ends
the Israeli occupation and achieves the independence of
the State of Palestine, with its capital in East Jerusalem,
based on the two-State solution on the 1967 lines,

S/PV.7929

whereby the Palestinian and Israeli peoples can live
side by side in peace and security.
At the same time, internally, we continue to pursue
the development and strengthening of our national
institutions and to also seek to heal the divisions in
the Palestinian political system. We hope that ongoing
reconciliation efforts will come to fruition, recognizing
the imperative of unity for the achievement of our
legitimate national aspirations.
Failure to justly resolve the Palestine question,
the crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict, has brought
us to several regrettable milestones in this year: the
fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and other Arab
territories since June 1967; 100 years since the Balfour
Declaration; 70 years since the General Assembly’s
decision to mandate the partition of Palestine by its
resolution 181 (II), which led to the Al-Nakba of the
Palestinian people, which continues to this day; and 10
years of Israel’s inhumane blockade of Gaza.
The status quo is far beyond unsustainable. This
is shown starkly by the prisoners’ hunger strike; the
immense despair in Gaza; the high tensions in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, as Israel’s settlement
and wall construction, demolition of Palestinian homes,
violent military raids and arrest campaigns, and Israeli
settler terror and provocations against our civilians
continue unabated; and the painful tragedies being
endured by our refugees throughout the region.
It is an explosive situation requiring immediate
action to uphold the law, reverse the deterioration on
the ground, and avert further crises. We thus call again
for responsible, collective efforts to advance a genuine
peace process to achieve, without delay, the end of
the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the just,
lasting and comprehensive peace we have long sought.
We appeal to the international community, with the
Security Council at the forefront, to heed our appeals
and to act urgently on their obligations in order to
restore hope in the possibility of peace and to actually
make it a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Before I begin, I must respond
to the hateful lies of the Palestinian representative
about the Palestinian prisoners. Marwan Barghouti,
the leader of the striking prisoners, is a terrorist and

17-106297/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/04/2017

a convicted murderer. Mr. Barghouti has overseen
dozens of suicide bombings and the murder of innocent
civilians. He was arrested and tried in a fair and open
trial. He was convicted of direct involvement in the
murder of five people, including three men at a seafood
restaurant, a monk driving to his monastery and Yoela
Chen, a mother of two children. Glorifying terrorists
not only distances us from peace, it dishonours the
memories of the innocent victims.

community to finally fulfil its 2013 pledge and honour
its commitment to remove all chemical weapons from
Syria. There is no doubt that the primary blame for
these crimes lies with Damascus. But at the same time
we must not forget that Tehran is an accomplice to
the atrocities taking place every single day in Syria.
Al-Assad and his henchmen are puppets of the Iranians,
propped up with their funding, trained by their military
advisers and armed with their weapons.

I would like to congratulate the United States for
a successful term at the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Israel appreciates the clear moral
stand and basic respect for fairness that you have
brought to that role.

Iran’s influence in Syria can be found everywhere,
from the militias roaming the cities to Iranian attempts
to build a port in the Mediterranean. We in Israel know
firsthand about Iran’s attempts to spread terror and
violence throughout the region. We have presented the
Council with our latest intelligence about the terror
organization Hizbullah in Lebanon. We showed in great
detail how their rockets are aimed at Israeli homes,
schools and offices. This Iranian proxy entrenched
along our northern border is placing its weapons in
homes, mosques and hospitals with the intention of
once again committing a double war crime — targeting
our civilians while using Lebanese women and children
as human shields.

For the past 17 years the Council meets regularly to
discuss the situation in the Middle East under the false
assumption that all the ills of the region can be traced to
Israel. When it comes to the Middle East, the Council is
stuck repeating the same statements instead of seeking
new ways forward to bring stability to our part of the
world. The truth is that in a region filled with brutal
dictatorships and an endless disregard for civil rights
and human lives, Israel remains the one beacon of hope.
We are still the only true democracy in our region and
the only country where people are truly free regardless
of their race, religion, gender or sexual orientation.
Quite simply, Israel is a true partner in the fight against
terrorism and for positive change in the Middle East.
There is no denying that the Middle East is in
disarray. States are dissolving, dictators are using
horrific weapons against their own citizens and
terrorists are killing innocent people. We welcome
the American Ambassador’s insistence that today’s
meeting actually discuss those real causes of so much
instability in the Middle East. Let me be clear. There
is one country that sows dangerous chaos throughout
the Middle East. Where there is terror, where there is
death, where there is complete disregard for human
life, there is Iran. Just a few weeks ago we witnessed
the most horrific manifestation of Iran’s influence in
Syria. Our hearts ached as we saw the horrible pictures
of children, even babies, gassed by the Syrian regime.
It was devastating. What kind of leader does this to his
own citizens? What kind of monster does this to his
fellow human beings?
Israel fully supports the American strike on the
Al-Assad regime. It was a moral stance on horrific crimes
against humanity. Now is the time for the international
8/65

We continue to warn that Hizbullah has increased
its stockpile from a mere 6,000 rockets and missiles in
2006 to almost 150,000 even more advanced weapons
today. Where do these weapons come from? Iran, of
course. The Al-Quds Force trains Hizbullah fighters,
funnels money to them and directly provides the
terrorists with those deadly weapons. We also know
that Hizbullah is constantly improving the range
and accuracy of their rockets and now are capable of
targeting 90 per cent of my country.
Hizbullah is also growing stronger politically.
Senior leaders in the Lebanese Government have
recently voiced support for those terrorists and some
have even gone as far as to describe Hizbullah as a
legitimate force in Lebanon. Instead of working with the
international community to implement resolution 1701
(2006), those extremists are drowning out the moderate
voices in Lebanon who wish to realize the true potential
of their country. Hizbullah is not only threatening the
delicate calm on our border but endangering the chance
of Lebanon ever becoming a stable and peaceful State.
Iran has stopped at nothing to arm Hizbullah. It sends
arms on convoys over land, tries to smuggle them in
from the sea and even unabashedly places them on
civilian airlines — such as Mahan Air — and flies them
into Damascus and Beirut.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Iran does not only threaten our region through
proxies. It also does so directly by supporting terror
throughout the Middle East and continuing their
ballistic missile tests. Those tests are in total defiance
of the international community and the Council has
clearly stated that Iran is “not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles.” (resolution 2231 (2015),
Annex B, para. 3). Yet, since resolution 2231 (2015) was
adopted, Iran has conducted at least 14 ballistic missile
tests. The Iranians have not hidden their intentions.
In fact, just two days ago they wrote on one of their
missiles, “Death to Israel”.
That same violent call for Israel’s destruction,
written on that missile, can be found in the Hamas
charter. Let me remind the Council that Hamas is Iran’s
proxy. It rules the Gaza Strip and holds the people of
that region hostage. The founding document of Hamas
states that “there is no solution for the Palestinian
question except through jihad”. As the Council knows,
Israel withdrew completely from the Gaza Strip in 2005.
We did so in the hope that the Palestinians would create
a thriving economy and abandon the path of terror. We
destroyed every Israeli home, reduced every synagogue
to rubble and even removed every Jewish grave.
Sadly, those hopes for the possibility of peace and
better lives for Israelis and Palestinians were dashed.
Hamas took over the Gaza Strip and has spent millions
of dollars — much of it stolen from foreign humanitarian
aid — on rockets, guns and terror tunnels. Meanwhile,
the Palestinian people continue to suffer. Almost every
week, we uncover a new incident of Hamas manipulating
the goodwill of the international community. Employees
of recognized humanitarian organizations have been
caught aiding terror infrastructure. Food and goods
meant for the people of Gaza have been diverted to
the black market, where they are sold for funds to buy
arms. And official employees of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East not only incite violence against Israelis but
also serve simultaneously as Hamas officials.
In the decade that has passed since we left Gaza,
Israel has been forced on numerous occasions to fight
Hamas and defend our people. During the last round of
fighting in Operation Protective Edge, in 2014, Hamas
unleashed over 3,000 rocket attacks on Israeli civilians.
At the same time, it used sophisticated terror tunnels
to try to attack our border communities. Its plan is as
simple as it is evil. It aims to attack kindergartens and

S/PV.7929

community centres with the hope of massacring as
many innocent people as possible.
Members of the Council must understand that
Hamas is unfortunately leading us to the next conflict.
Since the end of Operation Protective Edge, we
estimate that Hamas has increased its arsenal to over
12,000 rockets. At the same time, it has continued to
dig its terror tunnels, day in and day out. Many of these
tunnels, which stretch into Israeli territory, are as long
as 2.5 kilometres, which is longer than the Lincoln
Tunnel connecting New York and New Jersey under the
Hudson River. The Lincoln Tunnel is used by millions
of people to come to their jobs and then go home to their
families. In contrast, the Hamas tunnels are intended to
kidnap and kill as many Israelis as possible.
I have here an image illustrating the reach and
scope of Hamas’ network of terror tunnels from the last
operation in Gaza. The green line is the border. Here are
the openings of the tunnels in Gaza. Notice how they
use civilian homes and hospitals to hide the entrances.
Here is where these tunnels end up: next to Nahal Oz,
Saad, Kfar Aza, just metres from Israeli towns. They
spend millions of dollars on these tunnels.
Council members may ask how Hamas continues to
arm and replenish its weapons supply. The answer lies
in the words of Hamas leader, Mousa Abu Marzook,
who said last June that
“[t]he support offered by Iran to the Palestinian
resistance — be it in logistics, training or
funds — is unmatched and beyond the capabilities
of other countries. Iran’s support and backing to
the resistance and the Palestinian cause is clear”.
The Hamas representative does not exaggerate this
connection. Iran’s Foreign Ministry spokesman,
Hossein Jaberi Ansari, said that “resistance movements
are part of Iran’s foreign policy”. We need to think
about that.
To so many members of the United Nations, foreign
aid to Gaza means donations to UNICEF or to the Red
Cross. This is money that goes towards clean water,
education, health. For Iran, foreign aid means supplying
deadly missiles and training terrorists.
We welcome the new position that has been
proposed with respect to the Security Council and its
meetings about the Middle East. We know from our
own experience that there is only one way forward
for those who really want peace in our region. As

17-106299/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we have said time and again, peace between Israelis
and Palestinians will not come from meaningless
manoeuvring in international bodies, and it most
definitely will not result from one-sided resolutions
here in the Security Council.
The chance for real peace to be pursued will
only come when the Palestinians abandon terror, end
incitement and finally return to the negotiating table.
More importantly, the chance for peace and stability
for our region depends on the Security Council, and
the international community as a whole, recognizing
real threats when we see them. I ask a simple question
to those who insist on keeping the focus here in the
Security Council on Israel: Is Israel at fault for the
spread of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant?
Is Israel to blame for the dire situation in Yemen? Is
Israel responsible for the daily massacres in Syria? The
answer is a resounding “no”.
We welcome efforts to widen the scope of the
meetings of the Security Council to focus on the real
dangers in the Middle East. The time has come to finally
put an end to the obsessive focus on Israel. The time
has come to stop this scapegoating of the Jewish State
for every war and conflict in our region. The Council
should remain focused on stopping the countries that
support sadistic dictators who gas their own people.
The time has come for the Council to speak in a clear
voice and finally classify Hizbullah and Hamas as
terrorist organizations. We are warning that an alliance
of evil with Iran at its centre is spreading throughout
the Middle East. They seek to spread chaos, terror and
instability through a region once known as the cradle
of civilization. We call upon the Council to condemn
Iran’s dangerous behaviour.
The good news is that Israel is no longer alone
in standing up to these threats. Countries of good
conscience throughout our region are putting the
chance for peace and security and the hope for a better
future for their people ahead of the conflicts of the past.
It is also Israel’s hope that this body will begin to seek
true moral clarity when it comes to the Middle East.
Only then will the Security Council finally be effective
in fulfilling its stated role of maintaining international
peace and security for the world.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Every month, the Security Council convenes a
meeting on the Middle East. We have lots of meetings
10/65

20/04/2017

on specific countries and conflicts in the region but
today’s debate is our opportunity to talk about the
Middle East as a whole. It is our opportunity to look
at the threats that go beyond one country’s borders, the
threats that affect not just every country in the Middle
East but all too often every single one of us.
Regrettably, these monthly meetings routinely turn
into Israel-bashing sessions. That is the way the Security
Council has operated for years. It is a formula that is
absurdly biased against one country. It is a formula that
is painfully narrow in its description of the conflicts
in the region. And it is a formula that does nothing
to help find solutions. The truth is these Security
Council meetings do not do anyone in the region any
favours, least of all the Israelis and the Palestinians.
These meetings do nothing to bring the parties closer
together; they actually work to push the two sides apart.
The United States firmly believes that peace is possible
between Israel and the Palestinians, and we are actively
working towards that goal. Peace will only come
from direct negotiations, not from one-sided Security
Council meetings and one-sided resolutions.
These biased discussions on the Middle East also
impose a real cost. Threats are evolving and do not fit
neatly within borders. By limiting itself, the Council
ignores the pressing rights that are right in front of us.
We should be asking these monthly Middle East sessions
to talk about the factors that cause conflict across the
region. I thank Mr. Mladenov for his remarks today and
for the fact that he went beyond the usual Israel-bashing
and touched on the border issues plaguing the region.
I will do the same and I encourage other countries to
do the same as well. By breaking out of old, familiar,
counterproductive patterns, we might actually achieve
something valuable.
If we are speaking honestly about conflict in the
Middle East, we need to start with the chief culprit,
Iran, and its partner militia Hizbullah. Iran and
Hizbullah conspire together to destabilize the Middle
East and their actions are expanding. For decades, they
have committed terrorist acts across the region. Today,
they prop up Bashar Al-Assad’s brutality, fighting
alongside his forces, adding to the killing of thousands
of civilians and the misery of millions of refugees. They
train deadly militias in Iraq and arm Houthi militants
in Yemen. While the Council has paid too little attention
to this growing menace, the United States will not. We
are going to speak up about Iran and Hizbullah, and we
are going to act against their lawlessness.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In Lebanon, Hizbullah, a terrorist organization,
uses towns to shield its arsenals of tens of thousands
of illegal rockets. In Syria, Hizbullah controls territory
on the ground. With Iran’s instructions, its militias
stand side by side with Syrian troops as they slaughter
the Syrian people. Sometimes, Hizbullah is the one
giving orders to Al-Assad’s fighters. Hizbullah helped
Al-Assad starve and destroy Aleppo. According
to press reports, when supporters of the Syrian
regime die in battle, they sometimes come back with
Hizbullah flags on their coffins. As one activist said
recently, “Hizbullah designs it, and the Syrian regime
wears it”. They are reportedly even recruiting Syrian
children to join pro-Hizbullah youth groups so they can
indoctrinate a new generation, in a new country, with
its toxic ideology.
Hizbullah is a terrorist group spreading its
influence across the Middle East with the backing of
a State sponsor. Iran is using Hizbullah to advance
its regional aspirations. They are working together to
expand extremist ideologies in the Middle East. That is
a threat that should be dominating our discussion at the
Security Council.
The United States is not waiting to respond. We
have imposed targeted sanctions on Iran’s Islamic
Revolutionary Guard and its Ministry of Intelligence
for their support of the Al-Assad regime. We recently
designated for sanctions members of Iranian-backed
terrorist organizations in Bahrain. Iran remains a
designated State sponsor of terror, and we continue
to enforce all sanctions related to Iran’s support for
terrorism and destabilizing activities in the region. The
United States will work even harder with its partners
and allies to disrupt Iran’s support for militant and
terrorist groups.
All States Members of the United Nations must live
up to their obligations. Iran’s ballistic missile tests defy
Security Council resolutions and further undermine
the stability of the region. We call on all States to
fully implement resolution 2231 (2015), which bans
the transfer of weapons to and from Iran, as well as
the arms embargoes against the Houthis in resolution
2216 (2015) and for Lebanon in resolution 1701 (2006).
The United States will work closely with our partners
to document and address any actions that violate these
resolutions. We must take a stand against Iran and
Hizbullah’s illegal and dangerous behaviour.

S/PV.7929

How one chooses to spend one’s time is an
indication of one’s priorities. The same is true for the
Security Council. The Israeli-Palestinian issue is an
important one, deserving of attention, but that is one
issue that surely has no lack of attention by the Security
Council. The incredibly destructive nature of Iranian
and Hizbullah activities throughout the Middle East
demands much more of our attention. It should become
the Council’s priority in the region.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I want to remind everyone to please respect the
speakers and take conversations outside so that they
can say what they need to say.
I now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank the United States
presidency for convening this open debate, which
comes at a time of great uncertainty in the Middle East.
In Syria, we entered 2017 with the same array of
factors that had poisoned all the efforts to reach peace
last year. Military logic still prevails over the political
will to reconcile and the blockade of cities and use of
starvation as a means of warfare continue unabated.
The use of non-conventional and prohibited weapons
seems to be the new norm and perpetrators are walking
away without punishment.
We regret that, owing to the eighth veto of the
Russian Federation last week, the Council has once again
failed to uphold its duties. The Council’s continuous
inability to address chemical attacks in Syria is leading
to further impunity and sending a signal to perpetrators
that they can get away with murder.
Proxy warfare in Syria and the fact that foreigncontrolled militias are deepening their roots on the
ground are increasingly concerning. Sustainable peace
and the stabilization of Syria require expedient and
organized withdrawal of those militias. This issue bears
particular importance for the future of Syrian State
institutions. Ukraine condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack in Rashidin on 15 April during the
evacuation of the towns of Foah and Kefraya.
The highly volatile security environment in Syria
continues to aggravate the humanitarian situation.
The humanitarian disaster is a reflection of the overall
situation on the ground. The Council must be proactive

17-1062911/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in addressing this crucial issue. A more effective
monitoring, verification and enforcing mechanism is
badly needed.
With regard to the Syrian political track, today
we are clearly at a very low point. Following the latest
two rounds of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, it is fair to
say that, unfortunately, we have not seen much desired
progress on either of the 3+1 baskets. Why is that the
case? The answer is obvious — it is a lack of political
will on the part of the Syrian regime to negotiate in
good faith on the core issues. Ukraine is disappointed
by the absence of real results from the Astana process
and the ceasefire negotiated within its framework. We
are afraid that the stalled political process may set
in motion a vast number of alternative scenarios that
nobody will like. Damascus and its allies need to realize
that the ultimate victory standpoint is a mirage which
will lead nowhere, prolong the crisis and contribute to
increasing extremism.

20/04/2017

their military positions, the Council’s unity on Yemen
is badly needed to strengthen the position of the Special
Envoy and the Secretary-General in their attempts to
break the current deadlock and give peace a chance.
We call on the parties to resume direct talks without
preconditions and to negotiate in the most flexible and
constructive manner that would enable them to swiftly
reach a final and comprehensive agreement.
We reiterate our concern about the clear upsurge
in 2017 in rocket attacks launched by the Houthi forces
in Yemen against objects located on Saudi Arabian
territory, as well as those on maritime vessels operating
near Bab Al-Mandab. Such attacks should cease
immediately and the necessary steps should be taken to
de-escalate the situation. The Al-Houthi-Saleh forces
must relinquish their arsenal of ballistic missiles under
any future peace deal. No long-term settlement of the
conflict is sustainable without that.

We are convinced that any political progress would
be unsustainable without a clear adherence to the word
and spirit of the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), resolution 2254 (2015) and a transparent and
strictly scheduled political transition. We hope that
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva will resume in May.
That will allow time for Damascus and its allies to
demonstrate a change — a change in mindset, in
intentions and attitude.

More must be done to prevent greater numbers
of sophisticated weapons from reaching Yemen from
abroad. Without a meaningful dialogue, the result could
be a disaster, and the only actors that would benefit
are the terrorist groups that are increasingly active in
Yemen. It is extremely worrying that we continue to
see Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula demonstrating
a sustained ability to expand its operational support
base in Yemen and exploit the deep rifts in war-torn
Yemeni society.

The situation in Lebanon remains key to the
security and stability of the Levant. It is therefore
important that, after the election of the president and
the formation of the Government, the political process
maintain a positive momentum. The stability of Lebanon
remains, to a high degree, hostage to the developments
in Syria and wider regional dynamics. That is why
there is an urgent need at this stage to assist Lebanon
in establishing its effective control of the border with
Syria and prevent illegal arms transfers.

With regard to Palestine and Israel, Ukraine has
consistently supported the Middle East peace process
and the principle of a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. The
lack of direct dialogue, along with a stalled negotiating
process, has led to an extremely unpredictable and
explosive situation. As a member of the Security
Council, Ukraine firmly believes — and shares the
belief of the current President of the Council — that
peace can emerge only through direct negotiations.

Ukraine sees an urgent need to put an end to
violence in Yemen. We are concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in that country.
The international community faces an imminent risk
of seeing an entire generation of Yemenis traumatized
by hunger and war. This is not only an immediate
humanitarian challenge, but a long-term challenge for
the stability of Yemen and the wider region.

Underestimating the ability of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and of Al-Qaida, to
capitalize on the grievances in the currently unresolved
Israeli-Palestinian conflict could backfire in very
unexpected and dangerous ways. In order to prevent
such a scenario, the root causes of the conflict must be
addressed. Ending the violence and de-escalating the
situation are immediate priorities. All sides should take
concrete steps to calm the tensions, bring the parties
back to the negotiating table, renew the peace process

Reaching a negotiated political solution remains
complicated. As the parties continue the strife to improve
12/65

17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7929

and re-inject some confidence into the fading concept
of a two-State solution.

bilateral format with no preconditions, and mediated by
the Middle East Quartet.

The rapidly evolving terrorist threat transcends all
boundaries in any region. It is benefiting from existing
conflicts and continuing to destabilize countries
throughout the Middle East. We are concerned about the
fact that despite some serious military setbacks, ISIL is
still a genuine threat to regional and global security.
Mosul, for example, where the military operation to
liberate the city is ongoing, is rightly seen as ISIL’s last
stronghold in Iraq. Its people have suffered enormously
in the past two years under ISIL’s despotic rule, but
they now finally have a chance to be freed from the the
tentacles of their monstrous terrorist masters.

The catastrophe in Syria has spread beyond the
region and is having global repercussions. Kazakhstan
supports the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation,
Turkey and the international community to bring the
Syrian Government and opposition together. The
upcoming meeting to be held in Astana on 4 and 5 May
is intended to carry forward the Geneva negotiations
that are scheduled to take place soon after.

While we await the ultimate and inevitable
conventional military defeat of ISIL, it is vital that we
formulate a day-after strategy by which regional actors
should play a leading role in preventing the resurgence
of ISIL’s clones. Without a clear way out of the
multiple crises that are tearing apart the Middle East,
particularly in Syria, Yemen and Iraq — coupled with
the simmering Israeli-Palestinian conflict — it will
be impossible to contain the growing threat of violent
extremism and the global spread of terrorist groups.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first like to
express my country’s firm condemnation of the heinous
terrorist attack of 15 April in Kefraya and Foah, which
killed more than 120 children and women and injured
hundreds of innocent civilians. On behalf of my
Government and the people of Kazakhstan, I would like
to offer our sincere condolences to the Syrian people,
particularly the families of the victims, and to wish the
injured a speedy recovery.
We would like to thank Special Coordinator
Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, and we would like to comment on
some key issues.
With regard to the Palestinian question, we urge
both sides to demonstrate the political will necessary
to reach a historic and long-awaited peace agreement
by strengthening the peace, security and development
nexus. Promoting economic confidence-building
measures between the parties will help to accelerate
a political settlement based on the principle of two
States for two peoples. That concept should guarantee
the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood
and Israel’s right to security. We are of the view that
negotiations should be resumed as soon as possible in a

While doing everything possible to ensure the wellbeing of the Syrian people, we urge the international
community to make a coordinated effort to combat
the terrorist activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other organizations. In that
regard, we would like to remind the Security Council
of Kazakhstan’s initiative to develop a code of conduct
for anti-terrorist operations, which represents a major
step towards establishing a worldwide, United Nationsled coalition or network for implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government
and the election of a new President are positive events
leading to the holding of free and fair parliamentary
elections. We should help Lebanon consolidate its
Constitution and democracy, which remain contingent
on developments in its neighbour Syria. The Lebanese
armed forces are playing a vital role in maintaining
security on the border with Syria and throughout
Lebanon and thereby helping to avert threats from ISIL
and Al-Nusra. Syrian refugees in Lebanon now number
more than 1.5 million, and the international community
must provide the country with more assistance.
The conflict in Yemen has no military solution; as
with all other conflicts and crises, only a diplomatic
and political settlement can resolve it. All the parties
involved in the conflict, along with their allies, should
end all warfare and every form of military force. It is
clear that the deep-seated contradictions in Yemeni
society can be resolved only through a broad, inclusive
national dialogue.
The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Middle East demands urgent action on the part of all
of us to mitigate the suffering of the local populations,
especially in besieged cities. The humanitarian crisis
impedes progress on political processes, and the failure
to achieve political progress is an obstacle to solving the

17-1062913/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian crisis. Similarly, the exodus of refugees
from Syria and other countries in the region has brought
political problems to the host countries and caused
geopolitical tensions with far-reaching implications in
Europe and other countries around the world, resulting
in worsening destabilization. Besides that, we have also
been witnessing outbursts of xenophobia, hostility and
Islamophobia that must be urgently addressed if we are
to maintain harmony within and among nations.
Finally, I would like to emphasize Kazakhstan’s
strong commitment to ensuring that the long-awaited
peace in the Middle East can be reached, based on the
fundamental principles of compromise, mutual respect
and political dialogue.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing. The United Nations and its agencies deserve
to be commended for the increasingly challenging work
they are undertaking in the field across the Middle
East. I would like to start with three issues relating to
the Middle East peace process.
First, the Palestinian question has been on the
agenda of the United Nations since the Organization
was founded. Today, 70 years later, after decades of
violence and suffering affecting both sides, and after
50 years of occupation, it seems clear to all that the
parties by themselves are unable to resolve the matter
and reach the solution that the Security Council is
striving for — two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.
Reaching that final-status agreement would have
several positive regional side effects. It would enhance
regional cooperation, diminish regional tensions and
remove some of the arguments used to recruit and
radicalize youth in the region and beyond. If the Arab
Peace Initiative were part of the solution, those positive
side-effects would be multiplied, creating a whole new
regional dynamic that would benefit all constructive
actors. That highlights the importance of maintaining
the Middle East peace process and the Palestinian
question on the agenda of the Council. Together with
Israelis and Palestinians, the international community
and the Council have a responsibility to remain engaged
in order to find a just, comprehensive and sustainable
resolution to the conflict, and regional partners have a
key role to play.
Secondly, there is now a real sense of urgency
regarding the issue of settlements. Developments on the
14/65

20/04/2017

ground continue to take us further away from the twoState solution. The idea of a status quo is an illusion. The
increased number of settlement units and the growing
incidence of the demolition of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure will only lead to further suffering.
That will spark continued and recurring outbursts of
violence, which must, of course, be condemned. It
will also have severe repercussions for regional peace
and stability. The settlements, the separation barrier
built on occupied land, the demolition of homes and
the evictions are illegal under international law. They
negatively impact the human rights of Palestinians and
seriously threaten the two-State solution. Indeed, the
viability of the two-State solution could soon move
beyond our reach. Israeli settlement expansion in the
West Bank must, therefore, come to an end.
In line with European Union policy, Sweden strongly
condemns the so-called regularisation law, which seeks
to allow the confiscation of privately owned Palestinian
land. That law, as well as the Israeli announcements
regarding thousands of new illegal settlements units
on occupied land and the decision to establish the first
new settlement on the West Bank in over 20 years,
constitute flagrant violations of international law, as
stated in resolution 2334 (2016). They also undermine
peace and the viability of the State of Palestine.
Resolution 2334 (2016) on settlements, violence and the
distinction between Israel and occupied land was also
in line with the important recommendations made in
the report of July 2016 by the Quartet (see S/2016/595).
The resolution has clear messages for both parties, and
both parties have a duty to implement its provisions.
Thirdly, the situation in Gaza remains tense
and unsustainable. All parties must act responsibly
and in the interests of the inhabitants of Gaza. Steps
must be taken to produce a fundamental change in
the political, security and economic situation. That
includes intra-Palestinian reconciliation, accelerated
reconstruction and an end to the Israeli closure policy.
The full and sustainable opening of the crossing
points for humanitarian organizations and State
representatives, with due consideration given to both
Israeli and Palestinian security needs, is key.
I would now like to say a few words on Syria
and Lebanon.
The conflict in Syria has entered its seventh year,
with devastating human suffering. The repeated use of
chemical weapons in the conflict is appalling and must
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

stop immediately. We support the full investigation of
the attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April and the work
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in that regard. We condemn in the strongest
terms the horrific attack in Rashidin on 15 April,
which killed 126 people, including many children. We
welcome the readiness of the United Nations to scale up
support for evacuees and call on all parties to protect
civilians, which is their obligation under international
humanitarian law.
Intensified efforts to achieve a real nationwide
ceasefire are urgently needed. A political agreement on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), including a credible
political transition, is the only path to sustainable
peace in Syria. Key stakeholders must intensify efforts
to facilitate progress on launching the next round of
United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva under
the leadership of Secretary-General Guterres and his
Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura.
We welcome recent progress in Lebanon. It is now
important to reach an agreement on a new electoral
framework and to hold timely parliamentary elections.
In conclusion, settling the Middle East peace
process and realizing the two-State solution is, first and
foremost, in the interest of Israel and Palestine, but also
in the interest of wider regional peace and security, as
it will create better conditions for dealing with other
regional conflicts and tensions. A two-State solution
must meet the security needs of both parties and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
and it must end the occupation and resolve permanent
status issues. The two-State solution is seriously at risk,
and we must now avoid any prejudging of the outcome
of future negotiations, such as the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States.
The parties hold the key to finding a final status
solution, but the international community, including
regional actors, must also meet their responsibilities
by supporting the parties in their efforts to break
the current deadlock. We welcome the efforts by the
United States of America to move the issue forward.
The Council, too, has an obvious role in shouldering
that responsibility and in moving forward with concrete
and constructive ideas on how to solve the conflict. We
have a very important task ahead of us.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,

S/PV.7929

Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive
briefing. We also thank the American delegation for
convening today’s event. However, we would like to
express our categorical disagreement with the attempt
to tailor this meeting to the domestic American context
and exclusively to American foreign policy objectives.
For example, in the concept note (S/2017/305, annex)
prepared for this meeting, whose topic has traditionally
read, “The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question”, our American colleagues have
remained silent on the Palestinian issue. Moreover, in
the document prepared by the United States delegation
we do not find any reflection of the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other extremists and terrorist groups of all kinds, nor of
the fact that civilians in Syria, Iraq and Libya continue
to suffer from the excesses committed by those groups.
The terrorist acts that they have carried out cause death
far beyond the borders of the region.
Perhaps the authors of the concept note do not have
any objections to that phenomenon. Indeed, we are
invited to label those who are fighting those groups
in Syria as terrorists. The authors advise the Security
Council to think about “who are the regional players
that most benefit from the chaos in the region?” But we
have a question as well: Should we not search for such
players beyond the region?
In point of fact, one should proceed from the
premise that the Palestinian-Israeli problem and — in
a broader context — the Arab-Israeli settlement should
remain at the centre of the regional agenda and of the
international community’s attention. Without a solution
to that long-standing conflict, a long-term and stable
stabilization of the entire Middle East is impossible.
Despite the fact that other fierce and destructive wars
are aflame in the region, the situation demands that the
Security Council not lose sight of the need to search for
ways to establish a formula to ensure the peaceful and
safe coexistence in the region of two States — Israel
and Palestine. We must not forget the lamentable plight
of the Palestinians and the high level of violence in
Israel and on the occupied Palestinian territories.
The current situation with regard to the PalestinianIsraeli question remains extremely complex. Various
incidents in the West Bank and Jerusalem, as well as
periodic tensions around the Gaza Strip, show that the
risks of the escalation of the conflict remain high. One of
the reasons for the growth of extremist feelings among

17-1062915/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians has been the unilateral actions by Israel.
Those actions have sought to create irreversible facts
on the ground, including the expansion of settlements
in the occupied territories.
In that regard, we would like to recall that
Russia voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016).
In so doing, we assumed that its content would be
based on tried and tested formulae. We think that
that resolution sends a clear signal that unilateral
actions are unacceptable — either by Israel or by the
Palestinians — as would be any actions that pre-empt
the outcome of the peace negotiations. It also states that
it is important that we preserve the prospects for a twoState solution.
Together, we must look for a way to intensify the
work on the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. We
support the coordination of international efforts on
the Middle East settlement, based on tried and tested
mechanisms and those approved by Security Council
resolutions, primarily the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. Our initiative to organize
a personal meeting in Moscow between Mahmoud
Abbas and Benjamin Netanyahu remains on the table.
We hope that, despite the possible domestic political
considerations, the leaders of Israel and Palestine will
demonstrate commitment to a peaceful settlement and
will start direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
On 6 April, the Russian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs issued an official statement in support of the
two-State solution, stressing the imperative of creating
a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders. We
recognize East Jerusalem as the capital of that State. At
the same time, the Russian leadership took a decision
to recognize West Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Israel. We think that that step is consistent with the
well-known international legal basis for a Middle East
settlement. In practical terms, our recognition of West
Jerusalem will not, however, change anything until the
parties agree on all final status issues, including the
future of Jerusalem. We intend to keep our Embassy in
Tel Aviv.
A most serious problem in the Middle East is
that of terrorism, which has assumed unprecedented
dimensions. It is spreading towards Africa, Asia and
Europe. Unilateral actions are futile, something that
we have already seen on numerous occasions. We must
solve such problems together within the United Nations.
Unfortunately, owing to the numerous violations and
16/65

20/04/2017

disregard for the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, such as the independence and the
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention in their
internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
the situation in many previously stable countries of
the Middle East has become horrifying. For instance,
the consequences of the occupation of Iraq, which was
initiated under what was clearly a false pretext, continue
to impose a heavy burden on the people of that country.
We have also seen the heavy-handed manipulation
of Security Council mandates, which has resulted in
the destruction and unrelenting chaos in Libya, the
methodical incitement of the internecine war in Syria,
and the connivance in escalating the spiral of violence
and mutual hostility in Yemen. All of those unhealed
scars will long remind us of the perniciousness of the
ideology of exclusiveness and of the drive to decide the
fate of other States and peoples.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that the destabilization of the
situations in the Middle East and North Africa is
having a very serious effect on Christians and other
religious minorities who live in those areas. Extremists
are using violence against those religious minorities
so as to incite sectarian strife, which contributes to
filling the ranks of the extremists and allows them to
benefit from the persisting conflicts in the region. For
our part, we will continue our efforts to prevent attacks
on Christians and breakdowns in the relations between
civilizations and religions.
In that context, we should consider the joint
statement made by Patriarch of Moscow and all Russia
Cyril and Pope Francis to take immediate steps to stop
the mass exodus of Christians from the Middle East.
There was also a meeting in Tashkent on 7 April, at
which a joint declaration was adopted by the Foreign
Ministers of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, condemning discrimination and
intolerance directed against Christians, Muslims and
members of other faiths. We hope that we can serve as
an example for other United Nations Member States.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Nickolay
Mladenov very much for his briefing. As he explained,
peace for many people in the Middle East remains a
remote prospect and a distant memory.
Two weeks ago, we saw a horrific chemical-weapons
attack on Khan Shaykhun in Syria. Environmental
samples from the sites have tested positive for sarin. We
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are now almost certain that the Syrian regime carried out
the attack using sarin. Yesterday, the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) confirmed that the organization’s
incontrovertible evidence indicates the exposure of
victims to sarin or a sarin-like substance. The United
Kingdom Government supported the United States
action in response, and we hope that it will deter any
further barbaric chemical-weapons attacks. But when
the moment came for the Security Council to show
leadership after the attack, it failed. We were stopped
by one Council member who would rather prop up
Al-Assad than seek justice for the victims.
We will not be deterred by Russia’s use of the
veto. We will continue to press for accountability in
the Chamber. The international community owes it
to the people of Syria. Any attempt to tie the hands
of investigators will be defeated, just as the IranianRussian proposal in the OPCW was defeated today.
As you said, Madam President, we must remember
the interplay among the various conflicts in the Middle
East region. For a start, we must not let up in our
efforts to defeat Da’esh in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.
The United Kingdom supports Iraqi Prime Minister
Al Abadi and his Government in their fight against
Da’esh and in their efforts to build a stable, secure and
unified Iraq.
Iran continues to play a destabilizing role in
the region. That is most clearly seen in Syria. Iran
has violated its obligations under international
humanitarian law in Syria by failing to allow the
delivery of humanitarian aid into eastern Aleppo while
it was besieged. Iran continues to provide substantial
military and financial support to Hizbullah and the
Syrian regime. As the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2017/244) makes clear, the leader of Hizbullah
has stated that Iran supplies all of their weapons
and missiles.
Senior Iranian individuals listed under resolution
2231 (2015) continue to flout the travel ban imposed
by the Council. For instance, Major General Soleimani
was photographed in Aleppo in September in a show of
support for the Syrian regime. Such actions demonstrate
that Iran chooses to complicate, not extinguish a
conflict that has continued for far too long.
This year marks 50 years since the Six-Day War.
This year, either we move towards peace with the
support of the region and the international community,

S/PV.7929

or we face an uncertain and dangerous future. Unless
the parties show leadership, including the willingness to
make compromises, the risk of terrorism and instability
will increase. Israelis and Palestinians cannot afford
another 50 years of that.
The United Kingdom’s long-standing position on
the Middle East peace process is clear: we support
a negotiated two-State solution leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States, and a just, agreed and realistic settlement for
refugees. However, that vision grows distant. As the
British Foreign Secretary said last month, the United
Kingdom strongly condemns Israel’s decision to found
new settlements deep in the West Bank — the first such
decision in more than 25 years.
Such announcements run counter to international
law and have seriously undermined the prospect of two
States for two peoples. As a strong friend of Israel and
one prepared to stand up for Israel when it faces bias
and unreasonable criticism, the United Kingdom urges
Israel not to take steps that move us away from our
shared goal of peace and security.
It was because of our support for the two-State
solution and commitment to Israel as the Jewish
homeland that we voted in favour of resolution 2334
(2016), but we recognize that the conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians is deeply complex. Settlements
are not the only obstacle to peace. The people of Israel
deserve to live free from the scourge of terrorism and
anti-Semitic incitement, which, as the Quartet report
outlined, has undermined the prospects for a two-State
solution. It is critical that the Palestinian leadership
implement the recommendations of the Quartet’s
report and continue their efforts to tackle terror and
incitement, strengthen institutions and develop a
sustainable economy.
We must continue to press Israelis and Palestinians
to refrain from actions that make peace more difficult.
It is because the conflict between Israel and Palestine
is one of the central issues in the Middle East that the
United Kingdom supports a regional approach to peace.
The changing regional context, the Arab Peace Initiative
and converging Arab and Israeli interests present
an opening. We recognize that additional impetus is
needed, and we welcome President Trump’s interest in
working towards a deal that meets the requirements of

17-1062917/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

both parties. The United Kingdom’s view remains that
the two-State solution is the best way to achieve that
goal and is ready to do all that it can to support that. We
do not underestimate the challenges, but, if both parties
show leadership, peace is possible.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Nickolay Mladenov for his commitment and briefing,
which highlights once again the risks posed to the
entire region by the lack of a settlement to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The conflict has dragged on for
nearly 70 years, and the occupation of the Palestinian
territories has lasted nearly 50. The lack of a settlement
in the Arab-Israeli conflict, which is in and of itself
of particular gravity, also poses a permanent threat
to international security. By its gravity, its symbolic
dimension and its place in the collective imagination,
the scope of the unresolved conflict is foundational and
goes far beyond the borders of Israel and the Palestinian
territories. Any escalation in the conflict carries the
risk of uncontrollable regional destabilization. That is
why we cannot resign ourselves to a false status quo
that masks a day-by-day regression, both on the ground
and in the mind.
The end point of this path is clear. The disappearance
of the two-State solution, like a mirage in the desert,
would represent a leap into the unknown and the risk
of unleashing a worst-case scenario. The situation
is even less acceptable considering that we all know
that the best guarantee of the security of Israel and
the region is a just peace with the Palestinians, which
arises through a two-State solution that ensures the
creation of a viable and independent Palestinian State.
That is not an ideological stance but a pragmatic and
realistic observation, since there can be no denial of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians to statehood
or the equally legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and
the Palestinians for peace and security.
It is on the basis of that observation that France
embarked on an international process that led to the
adoption in Paris on 15 January of a joint declaration
signed by more than 70 States and international
organizations. The declaration was the result of all
ongoing efforts, particularly those of the Middle East
Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative, the initiatives of
Russia and Egypt, and the essential role played by
the United States. The declaration reinforced the
unanimous commitment of the international community
to the two-State solution and the fundamentals that
bind us, namely, the international framework of any
18/65

20/04/2017

future settlement — the 1967 borders and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
We reaffirmed that priority at the Paris conference
in spite of the fact that the prospects for a two-State
solution are endangered on the ground every day.
The absence of a political process, the encroaching
settlement policy — which is illegal under international
law and has fragmented the Palestinian territories
for decades — the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, the destruction of Palestinian infrastructure
in Zone C, violence and incitement to hatred, terrorism
and rocket fire are all elements that feed a relentless
vicious circle threatening the very conditions necessary
to lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Those were the conclusions reached by the Quartet in
its July 2016 report, and it was the shared observation
that led to the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Since early 2017, the situation on the ground has
further deteriorated. Announcements of settlements
by the Israeli Government have increased, including
concerning more than 6,000 housing units in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem in the first three months of
2017. On 6 February, the Knesset enacted a law opening
the way to the normalization of unapproved settlements,
which are illegal even under Israeli law. IN late March,
the Israeli Government decided, for the first time in
two decades, to establish a new settlement in the West
Bank and declared new private Palestinian land to be
“State lands”.
As for the policy of restraint in matters of announced
settlements, it is a mere optical illusion whose
conditions are so vague that they actually give carte
blanche to the ongoing rampant settlement-building
in the most sensitive areas — the very ones that cause
despair and escalation of conflict. Those developments
are contrary to international law and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), which
requires Israel to halt its settlement activities and to
respect its obligations under international law. France
also condemns with extreme firmness all acts of
violence and terrorism, which remain an almost daily
and unacceptable reality. I want to be unambiguous
on that point. France will never compromise with
Israel’s security.
In this context of extreme volatility, it is more
important than ever to recall our position on Jerusalem.
Pending a negotiated settlement of the conflict and
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

under international law, including resolution 478
(1980), France does not recognize any sovereignty
over Jerusalem. Its status will have to be resolved by
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, which
will have to allow Jerusalem to be the capital of the two
States, Israel and the future State of Palestine.
The elements that triggered the three wars in Gaza
over the past six years are still present today and could
once more lead overnight to an eruption of conflict.
From the perspective of a lasting settlement, the lifting
of the Israeli blockade on the territory seems more
necessary than ever.
After years of stalemate, it is our duty to re-establish
the conditions for the resumption of credible political
negotiations. The Security Council, through resolution
2334 (2016), renewed its commitment to supporting the
parties during the negotiations and the implementation
of a peace agreement. It was also the message of the
joint declaration of Paris, the purpose of which was to
remind the parties of their interest in peace and how
the international community could, without imposing
anything, help them get there. To reiterate, France will
support any effort to reopen a credible political process,
which is the only answer to despair, radicalization and
disengagement among the parties. We will spare no
effort to that end.
Let me say a few words about Syria, which is one of
the most important threats in the region. The cessation
of hostilities no longer exists. The humanitarian
situation is catastrophic because of the lack of access
to populations in need. On 19 April, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons indicated
that it had conclusive evidence that sarin gas had been
used in the attack of 4 April at Khan Shaykhun, which
constituted a war crime and whose perpetrators must be
held accountable before justice.
Chemical weapons are only one element in the work
of annihilation in Syria. In addition, there are inhuman
sieges worthy of the Middle Ages, the indiscriminate
use of barrel bombs, incendiary bombs, as reported by
the United Nations in recent days, torture, executions,
displacements and many others crimes. That appalling
record belongs and foremost to Bashar Al-Assad and
bears his signature written in blood. There will be
neither peace nor reconstruction in Syria so long as the
regime clings to power through terror and destruction.
Nor will any victory be achieved against the terrorist
threat, which will continue to feed on the violence and

S/PV.7929

misery that gave birth to it and caused it to flourish, as
we were sadly reminded by the terrible attack carried
out in Rashidin on 15 April.
More than ever, a political solution is urgent and
inevitable. We encourage the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to begin on an accelerated
timetable the next round of negotiations in Geneva
for a political transition, in line with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2016). That is our top priority — an issue of national
security for France and of collective security for us all.
Finally, allow me to add a comment on the situation
in Lebanon. That country is linked to France by a
profound friendship, and its resilience to suffering
demands our admiration. The international community
will continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with
Lebanon in facing all the consequences of the Syrian
conflict, beginning with the refugee crisis. Providing
support and essential humanitarian aid is the primary
objective of the conference convened in Brussels on
4 and 5 April by the European Union.
The Lebanese people have made political and
institutional progress since the election of Michel Aoun
as President of the Republic and the establishment of a
Government by led by Saad Hariri. It is our hope that
the Lebanese parties will be able to agree as soon as
possible on an electoral framework leading to free and
fair elections, consistent with the Constitution. It will
not be possible to indefinitely extend the Parliament
that was elected in 2009. Legislative elections are
crucial to Lebanon’s stability and the preservation
of its democratic tradition. Political progress must
be strengthened in order to reinforce State authority
throughout Lebanese territory and allow the country to
address its challenges.
In that context, Lebanon’s disengagement from
the Syrian conflict and implementation of resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004) remain more necessary
than ever. We therefore encourage the parties to firmly
reconfirm their commitment to that end, in the interest
of Lebanon and of the entire region.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the presidency for
convening this debate and for preparing the concept
note (S/2017/305, annex) before us. I would also like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.

17-1062919/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Today I will address the wider Middle East region,
focusing on some of the challenges defining the present
day Middle East.
The Middle East peace process is one of the central
issues shaping international relations in the region.
The conflict between the Israeli and Palestinian sides
feeds into wider regional dynamics and the opportunity
cost has been immense. Peace there would unlock new
political, economic, security and cultural opportunities,
to the benefit of the region and beyond.
To achieve peace, underlying issues of conflict,
including settlement activities and violence, must
be addressed. Japan’s position has been clear and
consistent. Settlement activities are in violation of
international law, and the recent announcement by the
Israeli Government that it will build a new settlement
is deeply concerning. Japan is also concerned by the
continuing violence. Various instruments, such as
the Quartet report and most recently, resolution 2334
(2016), provide steps towards credible negotiations,
which is the only way to achieve lasting peace. Japan
calls upon both parties to take concrete steps to that
end, and continues to support a two-State solution to
accommodate the aspirations of both sides.
The spread of terrorism and violent extremism is an
issue that plagues the region. In Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
Libya, the deterioration of governance, coupled with
conflict and political turmoil, has benefited terrorist
groups, further escalating tensions and exacerbating
conflict. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is also not
free from the risk of radicalization. The effects of
regional turmoil have spread far beyond its source, as
we have seen in the massive movements of refugees and
migrants and the expansion of terror threats into Africa
and Asia.
We have seen some progress in our fight against
terrorism. Japan believes that unless further efforts are
made to strengthen governance, it will be difficult to
consolidate the gains made and to counter the social,
economic and political conditions that feed violent
extremism. To strengthen governance, progress in
the political process is necessary. As the SecretaryGeneral noted in his first statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7857), we need a surge in diplomacy.
We definitely need it in Syria and Yemen. Libya also
requires further international support to make headway
on the political track.
20/65

20/04/2017

The United Nations, including the Security Council,
has an important role to play. While each country’s
political process should be different, Japan believes
that creating tolerant and stable societies embodying
coexistence and inclusivity is a common goal for the
region. Such societies are resilient to violent extremism,
spillover conflicts and relapse into conflict. That goal
should complement the political process.
In this regard, Japan stresses the need to focus
on three issues: humanitarian assistance, including
host community support, social stability and
governance, and investment in human capital. To
give an example, Japan has contributed to the United
Nations Development Programme Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization in Iraq, to support the early
return of internally displaced persons to their homes and
to enhance social resilience. Through measures such as
the restoration of key infrastructure and generation of
income and employment opportunities, we support the
Government of Iraq in stabilizing the newly liberated
areas to ensure that they do not slide back into turmoil.
Turning to Yemen, Japan aims to boost the
resilience of urban and rural communities, in
partnership with international organizations, through
micro-businesses and entrepreneurship projects that
enhance the economic empowerment of women and
youth. Our efforts to create inclusive societies extend
to addressing the needs of the vulnerable in conflict
situations. Japan has introduced maternal and child
health handbooks to Palestinian refugee communities.
The handbooks help mothers and children keep track of
their health conditions so that they can receive timely
and appropriate medical treatment. Most recently, we
have launched a smartphone appl of the handbook
in Jordan, thereby making it more convenient and
accessible. We aim to further expand the coverage of
the app in the coming years.
In closing, Japan reiterates the need for a shared
region-wide effort to achieve enduring peace. Efforts to
create tolerant and stable societies should complement
the political process. Japan attaches importance to
post-conflict reconstruction efforts that build and
consolidate peace under a credible political process,
and will continue to actively engage in such efforts. We
must also bear in mind that peace can have a positive
ripple effect. Japan remains convinced that a successful
Middle East peace process will unlock the potential for
region-wide stability and prosperity.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Like
my colleagues before me, I congratulate you, Madam
President, on organizing this open debate, and thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing.
I again reiterate Uruguay’s full support for his work.
The Middle East remains the epicentre of numerous
armed conflicts of extreme complexity, including
sectarian and inter-faith elements. Participants in those
conflicts include not only regional and other States,
but also various non-State entities, such as militias
and armed groups, that claim supposed religious
affiliations based on intolerance and fundamentalism
that violate the population’s most basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms. We have also witnessed
the rapid growth of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida,
Jabhat Fath al-Sham — better known as the Al-Nusra
Front — and Da’esh, all of which have exploited the
institutional vacuum in various countries of the region.
Such absence of State power in many cases stems from
foreign military interventions that were not authorized
by the Charter of the United Nations or by the Council
and that in recent years have led to chaos and death for
the civilian population.
Of course, this is not the only cause of terrorism,
which also feeds on the deep religious, sectarian, ethnic
and tribal divisions that have dominated the region for
centuries, as well as the evolution of these societies, in
which we sometimes see a lack of political freedom as
well as the excessive repression that fuels radicalization.
Nor can we overlook another evident reality that
explains how these extremist groups have managed
to survive, despite their savage acts and their total
contempt for human life, as an ongoing presence in the
contemporary history of the Middle East. This reality is
the military, logistical, financial and political support
of some States of the region as well as outside of the
region, which use them as tools in order to pursue their
own agendas and interests, as they do with the armed
militias and groups that I have mentioned.
Several of these groups, which try to hide behind
the label of “moderate opposition”, have perpetrated
acts that are just as, or even more, reprehensible as
those committed by the terrorists themselves, with
whom they sometimes ally themselves, depending on
the circumstances.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, owing to its
duration and its spillover into the rest of the region,

S/PV.7929

remains the most relevant of all of the situations that
affect the Middle East. Uruguay reaffirms once again,
as we have been doing since 1947, its unwavering
support for the right of Israel and of Palestine to live
in peace, within secure and recognized borders, in a
framework of renewed cooperation and free of any
threat or action that would breach that peace.
Likewise, we reiterate our support for a solution
involving two independent States, convinced that this is
the only option that will allow the peaceful coexistence
of Israel and Palestine, and in this respect we call once
again for the resumption of negotiations between the
parties, which is a crucial step towards achieving that
goal. To achieve that goal, we must reverse the current
trends on the ground identified in the most recent
report of the Quartet, failing which it will be difficult
for Palestine to strengthen its State.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) was a clear
sign of the importance that the international community
attaches to the peaceful and successful conclusion of
this process. The announcements made in the past three
months by Israel on the expansion of its settlement
policy violates the provisions of that resolution and of
resolution 242 (1967), which states that the acquisition
of territory by force is inadmissible.
These measures, as well as the recent episodes of
violence and terrorist attacks, the incitation thereto
and their glorification, do not help in the least to move
towards peace together and also risk endangering the
possibility of a two-State solution.
Uruguay welcomes all international initiatives
that would allow us to move forward in the quest for
solutions in the framework of the Middle East peace
process, in order to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated
and lasting solution, in accordance with international
law, that takes into account the legitimate aspirations
of both parties.
Throughout the open debates on the Middle
East in which we have taken part, we have reiterated
the vital need to protect civilians. Humanitarian
assistance is critical in order to enable them to survive
in the situations in which they find themselves; this
is particularly crucial for the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children.
Also particularly pressing are the situations
in Yemen, Iraq and Libya, where we are seeing a
combination of political, security, economic and

17-1062921/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian crises, with the potential of giving
rise to truly disastrous situations if we do not take
action immediately.
In Yemen, whose humanitarian crisis could become
even worse than the one in Syria, is on the verge of
famine, and the population continues to be the target
of indiscriminate attacks against hospitals, schools
and markets.
Finally, I should like to mention once again the
conflict in Syria, the worst crisis of our time and one
that requires greater efforts in order for it to be resolved
peacefully. Well into the twenty-first century, we are
still seeing chemical attacks, sieges, famines, the use
of civilians as human shields, brutal public executions,
forced displacement of the population, attacks against
schools and hospitals, the recruitment of minors as
soldiers and the destruction of the historical and cultural
heritage of humankind, all of this met with frustrating
inaction on the part of the Security Council.
We vigorously condemn the chemical attack that
took place on 4 April in Khan Shaykun, and we trust
that a complete, impartial and independent investigation
can be carried out to identify those responsible for this
war crime, so that its perpetrators can be brought to
justice. We call upon all actors in this conflict to remain
calm and not take any unilateral action outside of the
United Nations that could endanger the possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis and stability
in the region.
The most recent chapter in this string of horrors
was written last Saturday, when, during the evacuation
of Fo’ah and Kafraya, a brutal attack killed almost
130 people, half of them children. They were innocent
civilians who, after suffering siege and hunger for many
years, had hoped to begin a new life. In their memory
and in that of the hundreds of thousands of people who
have died in Syria and the millions of victims who
have fled the conflicts in the Middle East, we reiterate
that only a political negotiation can make it possible
to reach the agreements necessary to ensure that, in
the not-too-distant future, the region will no longer be
synonymous with war, grief and devastation, but will
gradually begin to see a more promising future.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
China has listened closely to the statements made
by the representatives of Palestine and Israel. This year
22/65

20/04/2017

marks the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), on the partition
plan for Palestine and Israel. Seventy years on, the
Palestinian people are still seeing their legitimate
rights and interests denied and continue to be subjected
to unfair treatment, a situation that must be rectified
without delay.
The Palestinian question remains at the heart of the
Middle East issue and is of fundamental importance to
the region. The latest developments on the ground are
testimony to the fact that the Palestinian question, if
left unresolved, will undermine security and stability
in the region and beyond. In this connection, the
international community should shoulder collectively
the responsibility of defending the legitimate rights and
interests of Palestine with a renewed sense of urgency.
There is a pressing need for both Palestine and Israel to
observe restraint and to take concrete action to revive
the peace talks.
First and foremost, both parties should implement
in earnest resolution 2334 (2016) by stemming
the violence against civilians. Israel should cease
settlement expansion, lift restrictions on humanitarian
access to Gaza and demonstrate goodwill so as to
enable renewed peace talks. Meanwhile, the legitimate
security concerns of regional countries must also be
respected and addressed.
Secondly, both Palestine and Israel should resume
talks at the earliest opportunity and make strategic
choices that serve the interests of their peoples.
Resolving the question through peace talks is the best
way to serve the interests of all parties. The use of force
offers no solution. The earlier the talks resume, the
sooner the peoples of both sides and of the wider region
will benefit. Both parties should respect each other’s
right to statehood and survival. Talks must begin, and
breakthroughs can be made along the way. Efforts should
be made to achieve an early harvest of positive results
and gradually to rebuild and strengthen confidence. It
is crucial to sustain dialogue in preparation for a final
and comprehensive solution. China supports efforts to
resolve the question on the basis of, inter alia, the twoState solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle
of land for peace and relevant Security Council
resolutions with a view to establishing a fully sovereign
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7929

Thirdly, we must build international consensus and
engage all forces actively working to de-escalate the
situation. China welcomes the fact that the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and countries with influence are playing a more
affirmative role and stepping up their efforts with
respect to Palestine and Israel in order to consolidate
the will for peace talks and to foster synergy. The lead
role of the United Nations must be fully leveraged.
Any outcome of such efforts should be endorsed by the
Security Council.

East, to the detriment of efforts to restore peace and
stability in the region. The international community
should forge a united front against terrorism, make use
of all means at its disposal and enhance cooperation
in curbing the spread of terrorist materials via the
Internet through exchanges of intelligence and law
enforcement. We must cut off the channels of terrorist
financing and arms supplies, block the spillover and
back-flow of terrorist fighters, curtail the spread of
terrorist ideologies, and root out the underlying drivers
of terrorism.

Apart from the intractable question of Palestine,
other hot-spot issues in the Middle East have also dragged
on for years and defied solution, and are compounded
by the rampant presence of terrorist forces, resulting in
a dire peace and security situation in the region. The
Middle East is now at a crossroads. It faces the risk of
rising instability and at the same time raises hopes for
peace. The countries of the region and the international
community should work more rigorously to de-escalate
tensions and seek a fundamental way forward.

China is well prepared to continue playing
a constructive role, alongside the international
community, in seeking a way out of the current
conundrum in the Middle East so as to achieve peace
and stability in the region and benefit its peoples.

First, we need to remain committed to dialogue and
consultation and pursue a political settlement to hot-spot
issues. The countries involved are unsurpassed in their
knowledge of local realities and the underlying causes
of conflict and tensions. The international community
must fully respect their sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence, recognize and promote the political
processes that they have led and own in a way that
meets their aspirations to achieving a viable solution
that accommodates the interests of all parties.
Secondly, all countries of the region and beyond
must play a constructive role. The United Nations
remains a main mediator of the Middle East peace
process. Countries with influence inside and outside
the region can give significant momentum towards
peace. International cooperation must be coordinated
in helping the countries concerned to build their
capacities, working more with the conflicting parties
and to settle differences peacefully through talks and
negotiations. All parties should at all times remain
true to the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations and other basic norms governing
international relations. Attempts to resolve conflicts by
non-peaceful means are inadvisable.
Thirdly, we must strengthen our counter-terrorism
campaigns. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind and a venom spreading across the Middle

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Madam, for organizing this debate today. We shall
attempt to respond to what I refer to as key questions in
the concept paper (S/2017/305, annex). There are three,
and I shall try to address them.
We are also grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
the Middle East.We appreciate the humane sentiments
that underpinned his presentation.
The peace and the security situation in that region
remains a matter of serious concern because of its
obvious grave implications for international peace
and security. In the meantime, what we see is, as
Mr. Mladenov stressed, the continued worsening of the
humanitarian situation and the danger of chemical and
biological weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups. The fact that the overall trajectory is worrying
cannot be gainsaid. It seems to us very easy in this
regard to respond very quickly to the first question in
the concept paper on who benefits from this state of
affairs. It is those who believe that they benefit little
from peace or the balance of normal life based on justice
and fair play, and the the terrorists who are determined
to undermine trust among peoples and religions.
There are no easy solutions to the multiple and
complex challenges facing the Middle East region.
However, the need for a comprehensive and holistic
approach to addressing the multiple and complex
challenges and threats facing the region has never been
more urgent than at this particular point in time. In fact,
developments taking place daily make it rather plain

17-1062923/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that one would be delusional if one thought it were
possible to see light at the end of the tunnel.
We often talk about how United Nations peacekeeping
would fail without a political framework and a political
strategy to guide it and to identify the end game. This
problem is even more pronounced and more and more
evident at the global level, including with respect to
the situation in the Middle East, most particularly in
this regard in connection with the Palestinian issue.
It is impossible to question the claim that in all parts
of the world, including the Middle East, it is not the
primacy of politics but rather the military approach
that has pride of place as the chosen means of resolving
disputes, misunderstandings and conflicts.
This takes us very close to addressing the second
key question in the concept paper, which asks what
steps can be taken to identify and address threats to
international peace and security. Obviously, as we have
already the implied in the foregoing, the steps that have
to be taken have to be political and diplomatic, based on
justice and aimed at addressing the legitimate demands
and concerns of all concerned. Very rare indeed are the
instances, without denying exceptional circumstances,
when the military approach has resulted in laying the
foundation for durable and sustainable peace among
States. This is all the more pertinent today when the
devastating effects of war are making resort to it a
threat of existential proportions.
Therefore, the answer to the second question it
seems to ask is provided by the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446). This would mean that we should invest
more in diplomacy and thus ensure the primacy of
politics, which in fact is and should be the major vocation
of the United Nations and the Security Council, which
is supposed to be the tip of the spear for the world body
in ensuring international peace and security.
This applies to all the difficult conflict situations
in the Middle East. We do not believe that, given
the presence of political will and an unambiguous
commitment to a win-win outcome based on justice
and security for all, it would be impossible to make
progress with respect to any of the conflict situations in
the Middle East and, for that matter, in our own region,
the Horn of Africa. But honest dialogue has to be given
priority. In that respect, it is critical that the Secretariat
play its proper role by way of providing analyses of
conflict situations as objectively as possible, without
24/65

20/04/2017

fear or favour. Differences in the interpretation of fact
are unavoidable and more or less acceptable, but we
cannot be allowed to have our own facts. That is one
major impediment to the success of diplomatic efforts.
The answer to the last question speaks to the need
for unity within the Security Council, most of all in
isolating, marginalizing and defeating the enemies of
peace, which requires an unambiguous commitment
to the fight against terrorism. Perhaps Syria is the
best example for doing more to create some clarity in
connection with the end game, including with respect
to the fight against terrorism. It seems to us that there
is a need for major efforts in that area.
I would like to conclude by reiterating what
we have always stressed — one cannot ignore the
Palestinian issue. In that regard, no diplomatic effort
will succeed in providing a sustainable solution unless
the Palestinian conflict is addressed on the basis of the
two-State solution. That is also critical for regional and
international peace and security.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
having convened today’s debate, which enables us to
address one of the most important items on the Security
Council’s agenda — the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Let me also welcome today’s briefer, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, who has just painted a grim picture
of the region, including the unfortunate major negative
trends destabilizing the heart of the Middle East
and beyond.
Wars that are now being waged with sophisticated,
but banned, weaponry, such as chemical weapons, have
devastating effects that are felt as far as Africa. At the
same time, sectarianism, intolerance and even religious
discrimination continue to divide national communities
that once lived peaceably together in many countries
of the region. In addition, pernicious acts of terrorism
and violent extremism continue to be perpetrated,
very often by foreign terrorist fighters, throughout the
world, including in North Africa, West Africa, Central
Africa and East Africa. The spread of terrorism could
worsen if terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State, Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front are not defeated
in Iraq and Syria and if they attempt to establish new
strongholds in regions that are more clement. We must
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

examine those new threats so as to identify possible
solutions to the various conflicts that plague the Middle
East. I will mention but a few of them today.
Such threats have emerged to join the list of
long-standing conflicts addressed by the Security
Council, such as the Israeli-Arab conflict. We all
agree that the Palestinian question remains relevant.
There is no need for the Senegalese delegation to
recap the facts already outlined by Mr. Mladenov. I
would simply like to reaffirm our belief with regard
to the need for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security,
within safe, internationally recognized borders, and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. The
Senegalese delegation would like to invite Israelis
and Palestinians — who are the only parties capable
giving peace a genuine chance — with the support of
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, the Quartet and the countries of the region,
to make resolute efforts to apply international law and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).
The Senegalese delegation welcomes the diplomatic
efforts of several countries, such as France, Egypt,
Jordan and the Russian Federation. It expresses high
hopes for the success of efforts already under way and
led by your country, Madam President. The observer
of Palestine just mentioned that President Mahmoud
Abbas will meet soon with President Trump. We also
have high hopes for that meeting. In the same vein, we
welcome the renewed focus on the Arab Peace Initiative
during the most recent summit of the League of Arab
States. It is an initiative that besides offering a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute based on the two-State
solution, advocates overall peace among Israel and the
countries of the region. It deserves our support.
My delegation encourages the steps being taken by
the United Nations, in conjunction with the competent
Palestinian authorities and the parties concerned, to
find a solution to the recurring problems of supplying
water, sanitation and electricity in Gaza, which
continues to face the most challenging humanitarian
and socioeconomic constraints. I would also like to
welcome the launching on 22 February of the Palestine
National Development Plan 2017-2022, which focuses
on citizens, because the development dimension
of the conflict is as important as the political and
security dimensions.

S/PV.7929

It is our responsibility, first and foremost, as
members of the Security Council, and the responsibility
of the Quartet and of countries in the region, to identify
and step up diplomatic efforts that foster a renewed
spirit of sharing to ensure that, like the Israelis,
Palestinians can have a viable, sovereign State, within
safe and internationally recognized borders, and
with — I repeat — East Jerusalem as its capital.
With regard to the Syrian conflict, which is entering
its seventh year, Senegal reaffirms its solidarity with
the Syrian people, who are broken and are facing
immense destruction and desolation. That is why
Senegal reiterates its unshakeable faith in a negotiated,
comprehensive, political solution that considers all
dimensions of the complex Syrian crisis, in particular
on the basis of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). The return of peace
in Syria should go hand in hand with the need to shed
light on the allegations of the use of banned weapons,
including chemical weapons, against civilians.
Similarly, my delegation encourages the Iraqi
Government, with the support of the international
coalition and other actors, to persevere in its efforts
to defeat Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The
significant military victories won against that
organization, particularly in Fallujah, combined with
the remarkable advances that we are witnessing in
Mosul, demonstrate that terrorism and its underlying
ideology can be defeated.
In our view, the priority is the protection of
civilians and national reconstruction, with particular
attention paid to the specific needs of people who have
suffered through two years of occupation, while also
taking due account of the necessary reconciliation
among the various factions of the country. I have no
doubt that the United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, will continue
to undertake activities that benefit the country with
respect to three dimensions: the political, security and
the humanitarian.
With regard to Yemen, we reaffirm our conviction
that only a negotiated political solution between the
parties, with due regard given to the legitimacy of
the Yemeni Government, and taking into account the
initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
implementation mechanism, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, will lead to peace and
stability in a country experiencing one of the worst

17-1062925/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/04/2017

humanitarian disasters. Such a solution would also
help to prevent terrorist organizations, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and the Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula,
from taking root.

functionality of State institutions. Let me recall the
importance that Italy attaches to the full implementation
of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) by all parties
in Lebanon, as a cornerstone for enduring national and
regional stability.

It is by taking up those challenges, using a holistic
approach based on justice and human rights, and by
developing a clear political outlook, that we Council
members will contribute to tackling terrorist and
extremist groups and helping the Middle East to become
a haven of stability, peace and security.

The gradual process of the consolidation of
Lebanese institutions still requires the full support
of the international community, especially the active
involvement of the United Nations. The United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is an example of
how valuable the work of the United Nations in the
Middle East can be. In times of widespread conflict,
UNIFIL has managed to provide its area of operations
with stability and security. Also, by enhancing
interaction with the population through specific
activities, UNIFIL has brought substantial calm to
southern Lebanon, ensuring long-overdue tranquillity
for Israel on its northern border.

Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy remains convinced that
a just and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine
needs to be based on a two-State solution, as the only
achievable objective resulting from direct negotiations
between the two parties. That is also consistent with
the position that the European Union has held for years.
In addition to the efforts by all relevant international
actors, including those of the Special Coordinator and
the Quartet, we have followed with optimism the latest
attempt by the United States to reach out to the parties,
which we trust can pave the way for concrete outcomes.
In that spirit, the positive involvement of regional
actors is of paramount importance, as well as that of
the rest of the international community. Against that
background, we are open to considering new diplomatic
schemes aimed at achieving a negotiated solution,
provided that they remain within the boundaries of the
Oslo framework.
However, constructive efforts could be derailed by
unhelpful steps on the ground. Unilateral actions are
to be avoided by all parties, if mutual confidence is to
be restored. In the meantime, we strongly support all
possible practical collaboration between the parties in
areas such as access to water and energy, sanitation and
security, in order to improve the living conditions of all
Palestinians. In that context, we commend initiatives
that are beneficial to all parties involved, such as the
Red Sea-Dead Sea project.
Turning to the recent developments in Lebanon,
Italy encourages the Lebanese authorities to keep
working towards the consolidation of institutions and
the economy. Following the election of President Aoun
and the establishment of the new Government under
Prime Minister Hariri, we encourage all Lebanese
political parties to spare no effort to reach an agreement
to hold parliamentary elections by the end of 2017. That
will be a crucial step toward the restoration of the full
26/65

Furthermore, as the Syrian conflict increased,
UNIFIL and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force have contributed to sheltering Israel
and Lebanon from the war, and have proved to be a
shield against the non-State actors active in the area,
whose actions continue to pose a serious risk of
escalation, particularly in the Syrian Golan. Averting
such escalation must continue to be a key priority for the
international community. That is especially supported
by countries such as Italy that contribute to the manning
of United Nations stabilization missions there.
Violence continues to plague Syria and cause
tremendous suffering to the Syrian people. It is our
collective responsibility to revitalize the chances
for peace. In that regard, the Group of Seven (G-7)
meetings last week, which was extended to some key
regional stakeholders, were timely. On both occasions,
which were convened by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. Al Fano, all countries conveyed a
strong message of support for the political process and
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, calling for the swift
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
At the G-7 meetings, efforts aimed at establishing
a nationwide ceasefire were also welcomed, while
concern was expressed at the violations of the ceasefire.
An effective cessation of hostilities, as well as full
humanitarian access, must remain our objective and
our priority, as they feed into the Geneva process by
creating an environment conducive to the political talks.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Accountability for gross and systematic violations
committed in Syria is also crucial for preventing
additional brutality and continued flouting of
international norms. All those responsible for such
breaches of international law will be held accountable
in that framework. We fully support the investigation
by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic into the Khan Shaykhun attack, and
we call upon the Syrian Government and all parties to
cooperate fully with the OPCW so as to allow for the
prompt conclusion of its investigation.
I would like to conclude with the mention of two
issues that have a regional dimension: the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham or Da’esh, and
the plight of refugees and migrants.
Da’esh is on the defensive and is losing territory.
However, two main challenges are now looming:
stabilizing liberated areas, which is needed in order to
prevent the resurgence of Da’esh, and countering the
remaining threats of the transnational terrorist network,
including the network of foreign terrorist fighters.
Finally, I turn to the issue of people on the move
in the Middle East. Being at the forefront of the
migration emergency in the Mediterranean Sea and
deploying countless resources to provide migrants and
refugees with life-saving assistance, Italy appreciates
the immense efforts undertaken by countries in the
region, such as Lebanon and Jordan, which bear the
burden of hosting hundreds of thousands of refugees
and which, consequently, need the unwavering support
of the international community. Any solution intended
to bring about sustainable peace in the Middle East
will also need to address promptly and pragmatically
the plight of those people, based on the two pillars of
security and solidarity.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The Middle
East is shaken by upheavals that are unprecedented
in modern history. There are long-standing and
escalating disputes.
We have spoken at length about the possibility
of preventing the slide towards widespread chaos in
the region. We have often warned of injustice against
Arabs caused by foreign interference or the occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine and Syria, saying that
it could cause the situation to spiral out of control, but
for decades those warnings have fallen on deaf ears.
The situation is still unresolved, and the management

S/PV.7929

of disputes has become an objective in itself without
there being a real attempt to resolve the situation or to
change the approach.
The item on today’s agenda — “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question” — has
been on the Council’s agenda for many years and is
fraught with meaning. That should also help us identify
points of reference. In fact, it reflects an awareness on the
part of the international body in charge of maintaining
international peace and security of the importance of
the Palestinian question and its influence on the Middle
East as a whole, as well as the implications of the
situation in the Middle East for international peace and
security. Indeed, despite the numerous conflicts that we
have seen recently, the injustice towards the Palestinian
people, who have been living without a State and under
occupation for more than half a century, remains the
oldest crisis, which reflects the dysfunction of the
international regime when it comes to achieving justice
in that critical region.
We must imagine the situation that has been
ongoing for many years. The Palestinian people have
lived without freedom and under colonization, their
homes have been destroyed, and they remain trapped
behind the separation wall in the West Bank or under
siege in Gaza. We have to imagine the influence of
those images on generations of young people who
have lived like prisoners without a political horizon
that would allow them at least to dream about a better
future. The endless continuation of the Middle East
question, without resolution, assaults the awareness
of the international community when it contemplates
its failure to achieve the necessary parameters for a
solution that is in accordance with the international
legal framework, international law, international
humanitarian law and the Charter of the United
Nations — the first Article of which draws attention to
people’s right to self-determination, an essential goal
for which our international organization was created.
We also recall that, in the framework of the United
Nations, we are not seeking any victory nor do we
wish to call into question the legality of any State.
We are also not seeking a solution that is logically
unacceptable or illegal under international law. We
must always remember that it is the Organization
that approved the creation of the State of Israel.
The recourse of the Palestinian people to the United
Nations implies a commitment to a legal and peaceful
solution and to achieving justice through the two-

17-1062927/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

State solution, which the international community
believes appropriate — two States, an Israeli State and
a Palestinian State reconciled in accordance with the
choice of the people. The Palestinian people aspire to
live in dignity in their homeland, and the Israeli people
also want to live in security within the framework of
good neighbourly relations in their own land. The twoState solution, pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
the most recent being resolution 2234 (2016), calls for
the 1967 borders, including East Jerusalem.
Some have tried to manage the Palestinian issue by
providing assistance, perhaps because of an unfounded
fear of dealing with the core issue and the mistaken
belief that managing the conflict would be enough to
assuage fears and satisfy the status quo. That approach
of easing the suffering has lost its importance over the
years. Maintaining the status quo can be regressive and
eventually explosive. We have undoubtedly lost control
of the situation.
That is Egypt’s position. Our treaty with Israel
constitutes the foundation for peace in the region and
reflects our position. The Arab States are also aware
of the situation, as has been reflected in their actions
pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative, which lays the
basis for overall peace in the region. Thus, we invite all
stakeholders to encourage that approach and to work
assiduously on resolving the situation and restoring
the rights of the Palestinian people. Those efforts must
go beyond the occasional appeasement, which has lost
its effect.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm the appeal launched
by Egypt, at the highest level, to the Palestinians and
Israelis to return to the negotiating table and to give
pride of place to serving the interests of their peoples.
Negotiations remain the best way to resolve the
conflict. We appreciate the commitment that we have
seen recently from international players, including the
friends of Israel, to achieving a comprehensive political
solution with a view to ensuring justice and overall peace.
Egypt will work with both Governments — Israeli and
Palestinian — and with international forces in order
to achieve that common objective, in keeping with the
two-State solution and the principles of land for peace
and international equality.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
28/65

20/04/2017

Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for this morning’s briefing.
The causes of the conflict in the Middle East are
difficult to define owing to its long-standing nature and
complexity, but we will try to enumerate a few. The
first cause is the unkept commitments of the Powers
that occupied the Middle East under a mandate by the
League of Nations after the First World War. The second
cause is the implementation of regime-change policies.
The third cause is the invasions in the region without the
authorization of the Security Council and in violation
of international law. Terrorism is, of course, another
cause, as is the competition for natural resources.
Jordan’s King Abdullah II, at the latest Arab
Summit, held in his country a few days ago, also
identified one of the causes of the tragic situation that
the region is experiencing. He said that:
(spoke in English)
“there will be no peace and stability in the Middle
East without achieving a just and comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine, the core issue
of the Middle East, based on the two-State solution”.
(spoke in Spanish)
We also wish to echo the words of Pope Francis
during a meeting with the accredited diplomatic corps
in the Holy See: “No conflict can become a habit
impossible to break.” Israelis and Palestinians need
peace. The entire Middle East urgently needs peace.
Similarly, on 29 November 2016, the SecretaryGeneral said the following:
“The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not just one
of many conflicts in the region. It is in many ways
a long-standing, gaping wound that has fed tension
and conflict throughout the Middle East.”
The Plurinational State of Bolivia comes to today’s
important open debate with the urgency of getting
reliable, first-hand information that would update us
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), and
once again, we are seeing acts that are undermining the
long-desired two-State solution.
A few days ago, on Thursday, 30 March to be
exact, the international community was informed of the
decision of the Security Cabinet of Israel to build the first
settlement in 20 years in the Emek Shilo zone, located
in the occupied West Bank. Such repeated conduct on
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the part of Israel defies the Security Council, whose
views have been set forth in numerous resolutions
since 1967, including resolution 2334 (2016), adopted
on 23 December 2016, and is in flagrant violation of
the demand that Israel immediately and completely
cease settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
It can seem a bit redundant that every time we
take up matters related to the situation in Palestine in
this body, I go back to the almost 50 years of Israeli
non-compliance with the unanimous demand of all
peoples that it stop its expansionist and settlement
activities. In these 50 years, the world has looked on,
perplexed and helpless, as day after day a Government
decides to act in collusion with purveyors of war against
a population that only wants to exercise its human right
to life and self-determination.
The States Members of the United Nations must
focus on this situation and on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). We reiterate our request that the
next quarterly report have a written format and contain
in detail an assessment of the status of implementation
of the resolution. Similarly, as we have done in the past,
we reiterate the need for the report to be enriched with
detailed maps of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We believe that it is an unavoidable
responsibility of the members of the Security Council
to act without delay to ensure that Israel cease its illegal
settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and refrain from acting
against the Palestinian people, including the inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip. The Government of Israel
must show its political will and commitment to the twoState solution.
We agree with some of our colleagues at today’s
important meeting who have said that the two-State
solution cannot and should not become the illusion
of two States. It is absolutely clear that there is an
occupying Power and an occupied territory, which is
the big difference compared to other conflicts in the
region. And that is why we have international law as
well as General Assembly resolutions adopted on this
matter, decisions of UNESCO, the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice and resolutions of this
very Council. Bolivia naturally supports all the peace
processes set up to resolve this issue in a political and
negotiated way and through dialogue, and we support
the framework of the Madrid principles and the Arab

S/PV.7929

Peace Initiative, which contribute to the fulfilment of
this objective.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and their right to have a free, sovereign and
independent State, with pre-1967 international borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly. It is crucial that the Council
work not only to recognize but to guarantee the right of
peoples to peace, the right of the Palestinian people to
peace and the right of the Israeli people to peace.
The President: I wish to inform all concerned
that we will be carrying on today’s open debate right
through the lunch hour, as we have a large number of
speakers. I would also remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, a topic to which the 120 member
States that comprise our Movement attach particular
importance, especially today as we celebrate the sixtysecond anniversary of the Afro-Asian Conference, held
in Bandung, Indonesia, which laid the foundations for
the creation of the NAM.
First of all, we would like to convey our gratitude
to Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
United Nations for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing.
During the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which took place in September 2016 on
Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and
Government reaffirmed their abiding solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as their unswerving support
for their just cause, while calling on the member States
of the Movement to renew their commitment and further
strengthen and coordinate their efforts to promote the

17-1062929/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

realization of justice and the rights of the Palestinian
people in the light of the prevailing critical situation
and diminishing prospects for a peaceful solution.
In this regard, we stress that a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects
remains a priority on the NAM agenda. In addition, we
reaffirm that the ongoing Israeli occupation and the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security. It
requires urgent attention and remedy, in accordance with
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions
and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations itself.
In this regard, NAM stands ready to contribute to the
achievement of a just, lasting and peaceful solution,
and we call for the intensification of international
and regional efforts in support of this objective, while
recalling the responsibilities of the Security Council and
the General Assembly in this regard, including as most
recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), which
set forth the essential requirements and parameters for
achieving such a solution.
Resolution 2334 (2016) was strongly welcomed
and endorsed by NAM in its communiqué dated
27 December 2016. The Non-Aligned Movement
continues to call for the resolution to be respected
and implemented, stressing that it remains central to
redressing the situation on the ground, de-escalating
tensions and fostering an appropriate environment for
the pursuit of peace. In this regard, we welcome the first
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as orally delivered to the
Security Council by Mr. Nikolay Mladenov (see
S/PV.7908). However, we reiterate the need for a
substantive written report to be presented in fulfilment
of the Council’s responsibilities and in support of its
duties to advance the resolution’s objectives, especially
in the light of Israel’s continued indifference towards
the Security Council and its resolutions.
Our Movement expresses its grave concern at
recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in particular the
continuation and escalation of illegal policies and
measures by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at
expanding its illegal settlement campaign and further
entrenching its half-century occupation since its
invasion of Palestinian lands and its violation of the
rights of the Palestinian people. Rather than cease its
violations, reverse the negative trends on the ground
and prove its commitment to the two-State solution on
30/65

20/04/2017

the basis of the 1967 lines, as demanded by the Security
Council and the international community as a whole,
Israel continues to act with contempt of the Council and
in breach of its legal obligations.
In this regard, the States members of the Movement
strongly condemn the recent provocative decisions
of Israel, the occupying Power, to proceed with its
settlement activities in grave breach of international
law and in direct and deliberate violation of relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). Moreover, we are alarmed by and deeply
deplore the flagrant contempt of Israel, the occupying
Power, for the unequivocal decision of the Security
Council in that regard, which clearly reaffirmed that
Israel’s settlement activities have no legal validity
and constitute flagrant violations under international
law and which called on Israel to immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
fully respect all of its legal obligations, including under
the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Movement further
recalls the call by the Security Council for an end to
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of
terror, as well as all acts of provocation, incitement
and destruction.
Regarding Gaza, the situation remains of great
concern to the Movement. The continuing obstruction
of the reconstruction and the extremely slow pace
of the recovery of Gaza, due to the ongoing illegal
Israeli blockade, has forced thousands of families
to remain displaced and homeless and prevented the
rebuilding of vital infrastructure, gravely impacting
humanitarian, socioeconomic, psychological and
environmental conditions. We reiterate our call for the
complete lifting of the Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip, while also stressing that the crisis in Gaza must
be comprehensively addressed, in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, and relevant United Nations resolutions, in
the context of the overall situation of the continuation
of the illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, since 1967, and of the unequivocal calls for
an end to this half-century occupation.
In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement reiterates
that it condemns in the strongest terms Israel’s systematic
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, inter alia, the wilful killing and injury of
civilians, including peaceful protesters; violent military
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

raids, including, in particular, in refugee camps,
terrorizing the civilian population; the imprisonment
and detention of thousands of Palestinian civilians,
including children and women; the confiscation of land
and property and the demolition of Palestinian homes;
the forced displacement of Palestinians, particularly
Bedouin communities; and settler terrorism and
violence against Palestinian civilians. We remind the
Council of its duties in this regard.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its calls for
strengthening international efforts aimed at achieving
without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967 and a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, and reiterates its readiness to cooperate and
support all relevant efforts, in line with the decisions
taken during the seventeenth Summit on the Island of
Margarita, which declared 2017 as the International
Year to end the Israeli occupation of Palestine.
The States members of the Movement also
condemn in the strongest possible terms the acts of
aggression committed by Israel against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 17 March and considers such acts a
grave violation of Syrian sovereignty and a breach of
international law, of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and of the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces
of 1974. In this regard, we request the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning
those acts of aggression and taking the necessary
measures to prevent its recurrence, and holding Israel
accountable for threatening regional and international
peace and security.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its condemnation of all measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.
In this regard and in line with our principled position,
we demand once again that Israel abide by resolution
497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I am sure that you, Madam
President, and all members of the Council would agree
with me that we in the Chamber all share the same
frustration of having the Palestinian question agenda
item discussed every three months. We all wish that

S/PV.7929

this item, the oldest and still ever present on the agenda
of this body since the creation of the United Nations,
were taken out, had a just and durable settlement to the
Middle East conflict been achieved and implemented,
based on the numerous resolutions adopted by the
Council and in particular the principle of land for peace.
Unfortunately, it must be recognized that such a
prospect keeps slipping away, and consequently the
Palestinian question keeps rooting itself deep in the
agenda of this body. Indeed, how can a just and durable
solution be achieved and an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State emerge when, first, the
construction of 6,000 new Israeli units in the occupied
West Bank and East Jerusalem has been approved by
Israel since the beginning of the year; secondly, a law
retroactively legalizing settlements built on the occupied
Palestinian territory was adopted last February; and,
thirdly, when only a few weeks ago Israel approved the
construction of a whole new settlement site?
Last January, during a debate on preventive
diplomacy (see S/PV.7857), my delegation reminded the
Council of Lebanon’s initiative in 2016 to seek, based
on the Charter of the United Nations and operative
paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006), the good
offices of the Secretary-General in the delineation of
the disputed maritime border and exclusive economic
zone between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that the
non-resolution of that issue shall remain a source of
conflict that threatens peace and security in our region.
And while we were looking forward to receiving, in
this regard, an update on the results of the efforts of
the Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Israel, in utter
defiance of international law and in a clear attempt
to undermine the Secretary-General’s good offices,
threatened, in a letter dated 2 February, that it would
“not allow” what it referred to as
“unauthorized economic activities, including,
inter alia, the granting of rights by another State
to any third party; exploratory activities, drilling
or exploration of natural resources in maritime
areas in which Israel asserts sovereign rights
and jurisdiction”.
In a letter to the Secretary-General, my Government
responded to these threats by reiterating Lebanon’s
long-standing commitment to international law and
in particular to the provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding the
delimitation of maritime borders.

17-1062931/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

However, these were not the only Israeli threats
against my country, as only few weeks later, Naftali
Bennett, Israel’s Minister of Education, threatened,
in an interview with Haaretz on 3 March, to launch
“a massive attack on the civilian infrastructure along
with additional air and ground action” targeting “the
Lebanese institutions, its infrastructure, airport,
power stations, traffic junctions” along “Lebanese
army bases” with the aim of “returning Lebanon to
the Middle Ages”. The least one can say is that those
are despicable words. Nothing is more barbaric than
threatening civilians. As to the outrageous threat to
return Lebanon to the Middle Ages, the only thing it is
reminiscent of is the darkness of the Middle Ages.
With all these threats, and Israel’s continued
violations of my country’s sovereignty, documented and
recorded in numerous letters addressed by my mission
to the Security Council, I would now like to ask if it is
not high time for the Council to condemn those actions
as blatant and deliberate violations of the Charter of
the United Nations, the basic rules and principles of
international law and humanitarian law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. But my Government
remains firmly committed to implementing resolution
1701 (2006) in its entirety and urges the Council, one
more time, to show leadership and compel Israel to
abide by its clear obligations under that resolution.
Lastly, do I need to remind the Council that Lebanon
has been commended for fighting terrorism? I would
like to thank your Government, Madam President,
along with many others represented on the Council,
for their greatly appreciated commitment to supporting
my country and strengthening our army’s ability to
address the multiple challenges that it is now facing,
ranging from combating terrorism to maintaining
stability and safeguarding Lebanon’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the President for her capable leadership
and presidency of the Council this month. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.
I am pleased to be addressing the Council today on
behalf of my own country, Jordan, and of the Group of
32/65

20/04/2017

Arab States, since Jordan is currently presiding over
the twenty-eighth session of the Arab Summit.
Today’s open debate is taking place in the wake of
the holding at the end of last month in Amman of the
Arab Summit, which released a message of peace that
stresses that Arabs want only peace and a settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as outlined in the
Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the Arab groups
at the Beirut Summit of 2002 and supported by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. It remains the
best and most comprehensive plan for achieving a
historic reconciliation between the two countries based
on Israel’s withdrawal from all the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories to the lines of 4 June 1967. It
addresses all the final-status issues and can help to
ensure stability in the Arab world. The message of the
Summit is another piece of proof that Arabs believe in
comprehensive and lasting peace as a strategic solution.
It should be met with a genuine expression of a desire
for peace on the part of Israel, the occupying Power.
We would like to emphasize our support for the
outcomes of the Middle East Peace Conference, held
in Paris on 15 January, which renewed the international
community’s commitment to a two-State solution as
the only way to achieve a lasting peace. We underline
our total rejection of unilateral Israeli measures aimed
at altering the reality on the ground and ending the
possibility of a two-State solution. We call on Israel
to implement the various legitimate international
instruments, of which the most recent is resolution 2334
(2016), which calls for halting all settlement activities
and ensuring peace between Palestinians and Israelis.
The international community must realize that
the region will never know peace and stability until
the Israeli occupation is ended and the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people — to establish an
independent, sovereign and viable State on Palestinian
national soil within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with
East Jerusalem as its capital — are met. The Palestinian
cause is key to stability in the region and beyond, and
ending the injustices that have been inflicted on our
brotherly people of Palestine continues to be a global
moral obligation. We emphasize our rejection of all of
Israel’s violations and the steps it has taken to change
the historical and legal situation in East Jerusalem,
as well as in Christian and Muslim holy places in
occupied Jerusalem.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is the Custodian
and sponsor of Muslim and Christian holy places
in East Jerusalem, and we will therefore continue to
shoulder our historical and religious responsibility for
them, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. From this Chamber, we call for the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
on Jerusalem, especially resolutions 252 (1968), 267
(1969), 465 (1980) and 478 (1980), which deem null
and void all Israeli steps taken to change the status
and identity of East Jerusalem. We urge the States of
the world not to move their embassies to Jerusalem
or acknowledge it as the capital of Israel, because
imposing a new geopolitical reality on Jerusalem would
have enormous repercussions for the effort to achieve
peace and put the region at risk of an explosion that
would have unpredictable consequences.
The current situation in Syria cannot take any
more postponements and crisis management. It is
high time that we took wise decisions and established
implementable common frameworks that in turn reflect
the will of the States and peoples of the region to reach
lasting and comprehensive solutions to the crisis. We
therefore emphasize once again the principled position
we have held since the start of the Syrian crisis,
which is that only a political settlement that meets the
Syrian people’s aspirations and protects the country’s
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity can ensure a
prosperous and stable future for Syria.
We should continue to move forward with the
Geneva negotiations, based on the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in order to start making
the four baskets of the transitional political process
a reality on the ground. We would like to emphasize
the importance of the Astana talks in ensuring a
comprehensive ceasefire in Syria. We also want to urge
the international community to share the burden being
carried by the States that are hosting Syrian refugees,
especially Syria’s neighbours, by increasing financial
support to them so that they can continue to provide
the services that refugees need, such as training them
and teaching them skills so that they can contribute
effectively to Syria’s reconstruction when the conflict
is over.
We stress our full support to the brotherly country
of Iraq in its efforts to eradicate terrorist gangs and
liberate Mosul from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. We hope that the international community

S/PV.7929

continues to support Iraq in its efforts to enable stability
to take hold in its liberated areas and achieve national
reconciliation through an inclusive political process that
leaves no one behind. We also support the efforts of the
Arab coalition in support of legitimacy in Yemen to end
the crisis in that country, based on the Gulf Initiative
and its implementation mechanisms, the outcomes of
the national dialogue conference and resolution 2216
(2015). It is essential that security and political stability
be achieved in Libya and its legitimate institutions given
support. And we emphasize our support to Somalia in
its efforts to rebuild and combat terrorism.
We are deeply concerned about the growing
phenomenon of Islamophobia and the attempts to link
tolerant Islam to terrorism. We warn that such attempts
only serve the terrorist organizations and their lies,
which have nothing to do with Islam and its tolerance.
Terrorism is a scourge that must be uprooted through
an inclusive approach in order to protect our people,
defend our security and ensure respect for life.
We want to emphasize that we are making efforts
to build good-neighbourly and cooperative relations
with the States neighbouring the Arab world. However,
we reject any attempt to intervene in our internal
affairs and condemn any attempt to destabilize our
region, feed sectarian strife and fuel conflicts. Those
practices violate good-neighbourliness, the rules of
international relations, the provisions of international
law, and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. True progress in solving the crisis
and ensuring security in the region hinges strongly on
sustainable development, and serious reforms must
be undertaken to promote education, human rights,
citizenship, equality and women’s empowerment.
If we succeed in those efforts and ensure
cooperation among the various spheres, namely,
security, sustainable development and human rights,
that will definitely shield our society against racial
and discriminatory practices and meet the aspirations
of our people to live in a secure and stable region. We
continue to stress certain factors, above all, empowering
youth, ensuring their education, providing them with
skills and increasing their self-confidence so that they
become positive actors in their society and contribute to
solving conflicts and to protecting and building peace,
instead of being attracted by obscurantist and extremist
ideologies. We cannot deny that those ideologies target
our youth, who are the cornerstone of our present
and future.

17-1062933/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, I thank and commend our
international partners for their support in ensuring
peace and security in the Middle East. We stand ready
to continue to work in cooperation with those who seek
to find effective solutions to the crisis and to build on
our common ground through more coordinated and
collective efforts, which should meet our common
objectives and interests to achieve stability, security
and prosperity in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to speak in
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The Council needs
to address a number of critical issues under this
agenda item. The prospects for a two-State solution
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict seem to be fading,
and hard-won security gains for both sides are in
jeopardy while settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories continue. Those settlements are
illegal, in particular under the Geneva Conventions,
and the Council has expressed itself accordingly in its
resolution 2334 (2016).
Liechtenstein shares the concern of many that we
are currently moving further away from a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. We call on all involved
to fully respect the international legal framework,
including the one established by the Security Council,
and to recommit to the two-State solution as the only
viable and sustainable avenue to peace in the region.
The crisis in Syria has again occupied the Council
throughout this month, once again without result,
unfortunately, for the people of Syria, who continue to
suffer mass atrocities in plain sight. The inability of the
Council to put an end to those atrocities, let alone to provide
some form of accountability, are in stark contravention
to its designated role to maintain international peace
and security, with particular responsibilities bestowed
upon the five permanent members. But the failure of
the Council to act, which comes at the expense of the
Syrian people, also constitutes a serious political and
institutional challenge for the United Nations. Recent
efforts, notably among the Council’s elected Members,
to bridge the political divide are a welcome effort to
help restore the functionality of the Council, so far,
unfortunately, without any tangible results.
34/65

20/04/2017

By signing the Accountability, Coherence and
Accountability code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, 112 States, including a
majority of the Council members, have committed
to preventing and ending mass atrocity crimes. The
Council was, however, unable to formulate any response
when one of the oldest and strongest norms of warfare
was repeatedly violated — the absolute prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons at all times and
in all circumstances — not to speak of the many other
instances of well-documented war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Syria. Liechtenstein
will continue its advocacy to broaden support for and
strengthen the implementation of the Code, which
we consider to be an important contribution to the
Secretary-General’s effort to put prevention at the
centre of the United Nations.
Since its beginning, the Syrian conflict has
been characterized by pervasive impunity, and such
impunity continues to fuel it. Within the United
Nations membership and among civil society there is
a growing momentum towards — finally — ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed in Syria. The
General Assembly has shown resolve by creating, on
21 December 2016, an accountability mechanism for
Syria, the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious
Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The need for
such a mechanism was illustrated even more forcefully
last week when yet another draft resolution on Syria
failed to be adopted because of a veto. The “Triple IM”
offers the only promising path towards accountability
for the crimes committed and towards justice for the
Syrian people and a sustainable peace for the country.
We call on all States to continue their political and
financial support for the Mechanism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for organizing
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace Process and the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing.
The Kingdom of Morocco associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the Kingdom
of Jordan on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
The international situation has been characterized
recently by events that have unfolded at incredible
speed and have had a very deleterious impact on the
Palestinian question, which is the main issue for our
region. The negotiations for a settlement have been
experiencing a real crisis. Under the auspices of the
United States of America, the negotiations have been at
an impasse since 2014, and the prospects are particularly
bleak. The situation is blocked, and the Israeli policy
of settlement expansion has continued on Palestinian
lands occupied since 1967.
In that context, the two-State solution is in serious
danger, and the negotiations could collapse. That is why
the major Powers in the Arab world and the friends of
peace, including the Kingdom of Morocco, have tried,
through the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, to present an Arab initiative to
put an end to the occupation. We have also made every
effort to promote peace and to uphold international
law. Indeed, settlement expansion prevents concrete
progress in achieving a two-State solution, and that has
been the case even after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) last December, which Morocco welcomed.
It is no secret that Jerusalem is extremely important,
not only for its inhabitants, but for all the believers of
the three monotheistic religions. That is why the city
should remain a symbol of tolerance. At one time,
1.5 billion Muslims used to turn to Jerusalem to pray
before turning to Mecca. Moreover, it is the third
holiest site for Muslims.
It is regrettable that breaches of international
law, in particular in connection with Jerusalem, have
generated such hatred and contributed to the terrorism
that we know today. Under the auspices of His Majesty
Mohammed VI, the Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation’s Jerusalem Committee, the Kingdom of
Morocco has been working to ensure that the rights of
the Palestinian people are upheld, chief among which
is the right to establish a State with Jerusalem as its
capital, as that is the only way to achieve peace in the
Middle East and strengthen international peace and
security. On many occasions, in both bilateral and
multilateral frameworks, His Majesty Mohammed VI

S/PV.7929

has called for an end to the colonization and Judaization
of Jerusalem. He has also called for implementing the
various initiatives that would enable the establishment
of a Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967 borders,
with the two States living side-by-side in peace.
In that regard, the international community must
fully assume its responsibilities and end the current
freeze in the negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis, which has resulted, to date, only in a
regressive situation marked by previously unseen
levels of violence. We must restart the initiative, and
there must be a genuine willingness on the part of the
Palestinians and Israelis to return to the negotiating
table and work for the two-State solution, which should
be realized within the framework of the 4 June 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
The various parties must come together armed with
the best intentions possible so that there is a return to
a feeling of trust and that the Palestine State can be
viable within the international legal framework.
Lastly, the Moroccan position is well known. We
support the Arab Peace Initiative and, above all, the
principles of international law for the establishment of
a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital
within the 4 June 1967 borders that would live alongside
Israel in peace. As we have always done, we will spare
no effort to push ahead on the path to peace so as to
reach a settlement that will lead to peace and security
in the entire region.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): As the Middle East continues
to be plagued by an array of ever-more daunting
and interconnected challenges, let me stress that we
continue to follow the very worrying developments
pertaining to the question of Palestine, which cannot
and will not become another forgotten issue on the
international agenda. We are deeply concerned by the
approval of what is known as the regularization law, as
well as the Israeli decision to build a new settlement in
the occupied West Bank for the first time in decades.
We join Secretary-General António Guterres in
regretting those measures, which constitute additional
impediments to the peace process. As the Council
reaffirmed most recently in resolution 2334 (2016),
all settlement activities are illegal under international
law and represent one of the main obstacles to peace
between Israel and Palestine.
Brazil has consistently advocated for the effective
implementation of the two-State solution. At the heart

17-1062935/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of that formula is the need to end the occupation and
work towards a Palestinian State that is fully sovereign,
economically viable and territorially contiguous,
existing side by side with Israel in peace and security
within internationally recognized borders based on
the 1967 lines. We therefore urge the parties and those
with an influence over them to seek a constructive
political environment conducive to a return to
meaningful negotiations.
The conflict in Syria continues to generate
harrowing developments, some of which have recently
been brought to the attention of the Council. Brazil
condemns in the strongest terms any use of chemical
weapons by any actor and under any circumstances.
We therefore expressed alarm and the utmost concern
upon receiving reports of the possible use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun, in Idlib province. Those
allegations must be subject to an international, impartial
and comprehensive investigation, which should lead to
holding those involved accountable.

20/04/2017

conditions for the continuation of the Geneva talks. We
commend the role played by the guarantor countries of
Russia, Turkey and Iran, as well as the host country,
Kazakhstan.
The humanitarian dimensions of the crisis should
never be neglected. Brazil has continued to welcome
refugees affected by the conflict since 2013 and recently
donated a large shipment of medicine and health
supplies to the World Health Organization in Syria. At
the recent Brussels Conference on the future of Syria,
we expressed our support for concrete actions aimed at
mitigating the plight of Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries, such as Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey.
Regarding Lebanon, we take note of the results of
the strategic review of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon conducted by the Secretariat and submitted
last month to the Council. In that regard, we emphasize
the vital role played by that mission and its Maritime
Task Force in stabilizing a highly volatile region.

We also express our concern about the military
escalation in Syria. We are convinced that the key to
ending the horrific bloodshed in Syria lies in the pursuit
of effective dialogue among the key actors, as well as
in full respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant international law under the clear mandate of
the Security Council. Effective dialogue is also needed
in the Council itself. We call upon the permanent
members to persevere in their efforts to find common
ground. Their cooperation is an essential aspect of the
search for a political solution in Syria. It is also key
to enhancing humanitarian access and addressing the
threat of terrorism. In that connection, we also praise
the efforts of some elected members of the Council
to bridge gaps and foster greater cooperation on that
fundamental issue.

Brazil reiterates its steadfast support to the
Government and the people of Lebanon on the road
towards stability and development.

The long-awaited resumption of the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva has enabled modest
progress with regard to the four key issues of governance,
elections, the Constitution and security. We renew our
full support for the tireless efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura. It is time for the entire international
community to send a unified message in support of an
inclusive political solution to the Syrian crisis based on
the parameters set forth in resolution 2254 (2015).

The settlement of the Palestinian issue is
central to lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East — not its incidental by-product — and the illegal
Israeli settlements lie at the heart of the matter. In
adopting resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
sent an unequivocal signal to Israel that the settlements
in occupied Palestinian territory have no legal validity
and remain the major stumbling block to achieving
a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, that resolution has been disparaged
by some as representative of the old bias on the part
of the United Nations against Israel. We have heard

While acknowledging that the current ceasefire
may be under pressure, we underscore the importance
of the Astana process in reducing tensions and fostering
36/65

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As
the Special Representative said earlier, the prospects
for peace in the Middle East remain grim. Central to
that sobering assessment is the plight of the Palestinian
people, who, for the past 70 years, have suffered
dispossession, displacement and deprivation at the hands
of the Israeli occupation. Israel continues to defy the
international consensus with impunity, while persisting
with its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory.

17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that familiar refrain all too often. However, it cannot
absolve Israel from its international obligations.
The Israeli decision to construct new settlements
in the West Bank is yet another dangerous provocation.
The so-called legalization bill aims to provide a veneer
of legality to an act that is internationally recognized
as illegal. Meanwhile, the blockade of the Gaza
strip continues in its tenth year. Such inhumane acts
must end. Human suffering cannot be mortgaged to
political ends.
It is our firm conviction that a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine, on the basis of
internationally agreed parameters, with the borders
of 1967, and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is
the only sustainable guarantee for enduring peace in
the Middle East. It is the strength of peace and not the
threat of force that offers the best hope for arresting the
rising tide of extremism in the region.
The seething fires of conflict in Syria rage with
unspeakable fury. The scale of human suffering in
Syria cannot be quantified in mere statistics. The road
to peace in Syria is through an inclusive, Syrian-led
and Syrian-driven process of political reconciliation.
That road must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. Those who seek military ends
threaten to extinguish any such hope.
In Iraq, as Iraqi forces consolidate their gains
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
affiliates, we are confident that the foundations of a
strong Iraqi State will be laid on the basis of an inclusive
vision that recognizes and reconciles the interests of all
Iraqi people.
With 7 million people facing the threat of famine,
the conflict in Yemen has become a humanitarian
catastrophe. A massive humanitarian response must
complement the political process. The forthcoming
High-level Pledging Event for the Humanitarian Crisis
in Yemen, to be held in Geneva on 25 April, will provide
an ideal opportunity to recalibrate our commitments
and ensure that they are commensurate with the needs
of the Yemeni people. In a spirit of solidarity with our
Yemeni brothers and sisters, my country has already
contributed $1 million of wheat in order to address
immediate needs.
Pakistan lends its support to all diplomatic efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East. We
are confident that well-intentioned efforts on the part

S/PV.7929

of the international community will restore the cradle
of civilization to its rightful place as the beating heart
of humankind.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to discuss the
question of Palestine as the centre of all conflicts in
the Middle East during the quarterly open debate of the
Security Council. We thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Maldenov for his briefing.
I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Israeli occupation has long been at the centre
of international discussions on Palestine in the Middle
East. By blaming all others but the occupying Power,
the United States seeks to erase the question rather than
address it. The United States and the Israeli regime
want to remove the Palestinian issue, which is central
to all of the conflicts in the Middle East that these open
debates focus on. The United States and Israel do not
like the reports of the United Nations that document
and expose Israeli apartheid and inhumane policies to
the world. When the latest report was presented, they
reacted by pushing for the report’s withdrawal and
proudly forcing the resignation of its author.
Today, we heard unsubstantiated allegations against
my country, which I categorically reject as part of a
misleading propaganda campaign against Iran and its
role in the region, designed and perpetrated hysterically
by Israel and certain countries in the region, including
those that fully supported Saddam Hussein’s aggression
against Iran.
The Israeli regime’s record is full of aggression
against its neighbours, including other countries in
the Middle East and beyond. We can count at least
14 instances of that since 1948. Israel continues to
flout all international regimes governing weapons of
mass destruction by refusing to adhere to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Chemical and the Biological Weapons Conventions. It
is the only obstacle in the way of establishing a zone
free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East. Indeed, nuclear weapons in the hands of the
Israeli regime pose the most serious threat to the
security of all States in the Middle East and to the
global non-proliferation regime, for which the Security
Council is primarily responsible.

17-1062937/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Israeli regime has flagrantly violated at least
86 of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
in response to the Israeli regime’s repeated acts of
aggression and illegal occupation. One can also cite
its well-documented atrocities, apartheid policies and
war crimes against the Palestinian people. Its violations
started with resolution 54 (1948) and, so far, have
extended to resolution 2334 (2016) on illegal settlement
activities. The regime enjoys total impunity.
The tragedy in Khan Shaykhun took place after the
Government of Syria had been verifiably disarmed of
all of its chemical weapons by the United Nations; the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front were not. The military action launched by the
United States against Syria happened without any
verification — either independent or by the United
Nations. The attack was a clear act of aggression
against a Member State and a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Such
pointless misadventures only serve to send the clear
and catastrophic message to the terrorists that if they
repeat their atrocities, such as the one carried out on
4 April, they will be rewarded with retaliation against
the Government by the United States. They did it
again in Al-Rashidin on 15 April, when at least 126
people, many of them children, were killed. Where
is the accountability for the perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of such shameful acts? Such
acts kill the innocent and spoil the Astana process.
In general, the world, and particularly the Middle
East, is still paying for the catastrophic unilateralism
of the past, which has been premised on self-serving
allegations. The world should not forget the events and
the allegations of weapons of mass destruction in 2003
in Iraq and the consequences of those allegations, which
now include the formation of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which continues to burden the world. It
has helped the terrorists and has destabilized the whole
region. Surprisingly enough, those who destabilized
the region and helped the emergence of terrorist groups
are now bashing Iran, which has played a big role in
containing and combating such global terror networks.
Those familiar with history know that peace cannot
be sustained without justice. Proudly introducing a
sheriff’s approach into the work of the United Nations
means relying on destructive power as the only option.
That will lead to nowhere but to a continued cycle
of violence.
38/65

20/04/2017

Accepting such a reckless and dangerous approach
would endanger all of the founding principles of
the United Nations, multilateral diplomacy and
its undeniable achievements for humanity and the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Gertze: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I wish to thank the United States for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on the issue
of the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has, at its heart, the need to address the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
self-determination.
It is clear that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains among the primary threats to international
peace and security. It presents a litmus test for the
credibility of the United Nations, including the Council.
Indeed, while the decade-long blockade in Gaza shows
no sign of ending, this year marks 70 years since General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) partitioned the Mandate
for Palestine into two States. It also marks 50 years of
the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. But the passage of time has not diminished
either the gravity or the urgency of resolving the issue.
How many more generations of Palestinians and Israelis
must pay the price of the occupation, and at what point
will we say “enough”?
The status quo is unsustainable and urgent steps
are needed to reverse negative trends on the ground,
which are eroding the two-State solution based on the
1967 lines that this Council has endorsed and which
constitutes the only viable path for Palestinians and
Israelis to realize their national aspirations in line
with international law. The Committee notes the
ongoing efforts by Egypt, France, Jordan, the Russian
Federation, the United States and other Member States,
as well as the reiteration by the League of Arab States,
most recently at the Arab Summit in Amman, of its
Peace Initiative to resolve the question of Palestine. It
emphasizes that any new efforts should maintain the
two-State solution.
In order to stand the test of time, any viable
solution will require a just peace: a set of conditions
under which Palestinians and Israelis can live side by
side, in peaceful coexistence, inside secure borders and
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7929

in charge of their own destiny. Those conditions require
respect for basic human rights — the right to live in
dignity with the freedoms of movement and expression.
The use of force or violence of any type, by anyone, or
its incitement, has no role in the search for peace and
must be rejected. The Committee also believes in the
utmost imperative of achieving intra-Palestinian unity.

The overwhelming support demonstrated by the
United Nations membership for efforts to realize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people has been
echoed during the course of all Committee activities,
most recently during the round table on the question of
Palestine, in February in Managua, with members of
the Palestinian diaspora in Central and South America.

The Committee reiterates the international
consensus that the illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are a major
obstacle to the attainment of a just peace on the basis of
the two-State solution. The announcement on 31 March
by the Government of Israel of the construction of the
Emek Shilo settlement deep inside the West Bank, the
first new settlement in the West Bank in two decades,
can only be seen as blatant defiance of United Nations
resolutions and disregard for international law. The
Committee notes with regret the spike in illegal
settlements and other activities cited in the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (see S/PV.7908) and expresses
its expectation that future reports will be in a written
format and include recommendations that will, inter
alia, hold to account those who violate the resolution
and compel compliance with its provisions.

In this fiftieth year of the illegal occupation, we
owe a just peace in Palestine not only to the Palestinian
people, but to our own citizens and to future generations.

The Committee would also like to draw the
Council’s attention to the shrinking space for human
rights defenders in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including access restrictions imposed on Israeli
citizens who speak in favour of peace, as reported
by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
(see A/71/554). Given the continuing forced transfers,
including of Bedouins, evictions, demolitions and the
obstruction of humanitarian assistance in the occupied
territory, the Committee calls upon Israel to meet
its obligations as an occupying Power and to desist
from imposing demographic changes on the occupied
Palestinian territory.
Other current issues requiring the Council’s
imminent attention should not eclipse the urgency to
resolve the question of Palestine and its occupation.
General Assembly resolution 71/23 states that:
“achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement of the question of Palestine ... is
imperative for the attainment of comprehensive
and lasting peace and stability in the Middle East”
(resolution 71/23, ninth preambular para.).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the convening of this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and thank Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.
We are deeply concerned over the continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground and
call on all stakeholders to take moderate steps
towards constructive dialogue, based on respect for
international law and international humanitarian
law. Peru encourages any initiative on the part of the
international community aimed at finding a solution to
the question of Palestine, such as the outcome document
of the recent Paris conference on peace in the Middle
East, which reflected international support for the twoState solution and the Quartet’s recommendations.
Given the broad consensus that the status quo
is unsustainable, strengthened efforts are urgently
needed to achieve and maintain peace. The United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, must at
least facilitate the framework of an understanding to
ensure the resumption of direct negotiations between
the parties. Since 1947, when Peru became a member
of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine,
we have clearly and consistently maintained our
position towards implementation of General Assembly
resolution 181(II). We support the solution of two
States, living side by side within secure and recognized
borders. We therefore underscore the importance of
compliance with Security Council resolution 2334
(2016), adopted last December, which is equally firm
against the acquisition of territory by force and any act
of provocation or incitement to violence or destruction,
regardless of its origin.

17-1062939/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We reiterate our appeal for an immediate cessation
of settlement activities, home demolitions and evictions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We condemn the continued launching of
missiles and the commission of terrorist acts and other
acts of violence against the population. We recognize
Israel’s inalienable right to safeguard its security and
existence, including through legitimate defence, but we
stress that such action must accord with the principles
of proportionality and legality.
Furthermore, we reiterate our resounding
condemnation of the crime of all crimes against
humanity, as witnessed in the recent use of chemical
weapons in Syria against the civilian population. We are
concerned over the persistent conflict in that country
and its devastating impact on the Syrian population
and have appealed to the members of the Council to
overcome their differences and take effective action,
as they did, for example, with the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015), which established the
foundation for dialogue among the Syrian parties, with
the aim of achieving a political solution.
In addition, we urge the permanent members of
the Council, in accordance with the code of conduct
prepared by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, of which we are a member, and
the France-Mexico initiative, to abstain from using the
veto in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity,
or flagrant violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.
Finally, Peru considers it an urgent matter for
the Geneva and Astana talks to resume, in order to
ensure a definitive end to the hostilities in Syria. We
firmly support the efforts to that end on the part of the
Organization, and especially the determined work on
the part of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Staffan de Mistura.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Palestine continues to suffer from illegal
occupation and the Israeli settlement activities, which
violate international law, including human rights and
international humanitarian law and the principles
40/65

20/04/2017

enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory are
unacceptable, as is the continuation and expansion of
the construction of such settlement units, in violation of
resolution 2334 (2016). It will not be possible to achieve
the two-State solution or a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement to the Palestinian question so long as
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations continue
to be violated.
We defend the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to a free, independent and sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the
pre-1967 borders and with the return of the Palestinian
diaspora to that State. We reiterate Cuba’s support for
the accession of Palestine to full fledged membership
in the United Nations, and call on the Security Council
to take a position on this issue.
The Council must adopt without further delay
concrete measures to put an end to the occupation by
Israel of Palestinian territory and other Arab territories;
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip; halt the construction
and expansion of settlements and of the separation wall
in occupied Palestinian territory; stop the confiscation
and destruction of Palestinian lands and properties; and
put an end to forced displacement and to the transfer of
settlers to occupied Palestinian territory.
Cuba reiterates that all measures or actions that
Israel has taken or will take with the aim of modifying
the legal, physical or demographic status as well as the
institutional structure of Syrian-occupied Golan, as
well as measures taken by Israel to exercise jurisdiction
and administration over this territory, are null and void
from a legal point of view.
We also reaffirm that all these measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
represent violations of international law; international
agreements; the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981); and the Fourth
Geneva Convention, as well as a challenge to the
international community.
Cuba demands that Israel withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan back to the borders of
4 June 1967.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Archbishop Auza (Holy See): Some heinous acts
have of late plunged some areas of the Middle East
further into violent chaos and new lows of barbarism.
The recent use of chemical agents in Syria once
again constitutes a gross violation of international
humanitarian law and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The Palm Sunday terrorist bombings
in Egypt and the attack on fleeing refugees were
abominable attacks against innocent civilians gathered
in prayer in sacred places or trying to escape violence
and, as such, were attacks against the very foundation
of human dignity and rights. My delegation extends
its sincere condolences to the families of those whose
loved ones have been slaughtered and offers prayerful
good wishes to those who survived the attacks and
their families.
Lebanon is heroically bearing the burden of hosting
millions of refugees from neighbouring countries and
territories in conflict. In addition to the impacts of this
heavy burden, its stability is also threatened by armed
groups. In order to stabilize Lebanon, the Security
Council adopted several resolutions calling for the
disarming of all armed non-State actors. Yet militias
and groups armed and funded by outside sources remain
active beyond the control of the Lebanese authorities.
Parallel situations exist in neighbouring territories
and countries, where terrorist groups and other
armed non-State actors operate, plunging the region
deeper into ungovernability, persecuting ethnic and
religious minority groups and trampling fundamental
human rights.
Since 1947, the Holy See has consistently supported
a two-State solution for the State of Israel and a
Palestinian State to exist side by side in peace. The
peace process between the Israelis and Palestinians can
move forward only if it is directly negotiated between
the parties, with the strong and effective support of
the international community. Leaders and citizens
on both sides must have the foresight and courage to
make fair concessions, because no agreement can be
reached as long as mutually exclusive and impossible
demands remain.
Pope Francis calls on both parties to listen to the
voices of dialogue, show goodwill and extend gestures
of encounter to give their peoples the peace for which
their hearts have yearned for so long now.
Twisted religious claims mixed with irredentist
ideologies contribute to the bloodshed in the region.

S/PV.7929

Unimaginably barbaric acts are being perpetrated
supposedly in the name of God or religion. Ethnic
and religious minority groups that for millennia
have peacefully coexisted with the Muslim-majority
communities have been targeted by extremists. Their
cultural and historical patrimony has been destroyed,
threatening to annihilate every trace of their longstanding presence in the region. The Holy See urges the
international community, through the Security Council,
not to forget them and to intensify efforts to spare them
from the genocidal scourge of violent terrorist groups.
The Holy See urges religious leaders to speak out
forcefully against such terror and to act to control
effectively their followers who are reprehensibly
claiming to act in God’s name by means of terror. No
religious leader should tolerate the use of religion as a
pretext for actions against human dignity and against
the fundamental rights of every man and woman,
above all, the right to life and the right of everyone to
religious freedom. In this regard, in February this year
Al-Azhar and the Holy See held a discussion in Cairo
on countering the phenomena of fanaticism, extremism
and violence in the name of religion.
Moreover, the Holy See calls upon arms suppliers
to act in accord with internationally agreed upon norms
for weapons sales. The blood of innocent civilians is
a testament to the need to end the unchecked flow of
arms into the region.
My delegation wishes to close its remarks with the
prayer of Pope Francis after recent attacks in Egypt
and Syria:
“May the Lord convert the hearts of the people who
are sowing terror, violence and death”
and
“may He grant the leaders of nations the courage
they need to prevent the spread of conflicts and to
put a halt to the arms trade”.
Pope Francis’s scheduled visit to Egypt on 28 and
29 April will be an opportunity for him to stress once
again that there is no greater antidote to violence and
hatred than dialogue and encounter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

17-1062941/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for this month. We welcome the convening of this debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Nicaragua endorses the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and that made
by Ambassador Neville Gertze of Namibia on behalf of
the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Government and the people of the Republic
of Nicaragua reaffirm its call for peace, solidarity
and mutual respect among peoples and for a peaceful
solution to disputes.
Nicaragua expresses its full solidarity with the
State of Palestine. We believe that a just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question is key for peace and
stability in the Middle East. That peace and stability
will come about only through the full implementation
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
on Palestine.
We must make particular mention of the urgent
need to implement Security Council resolution 2334
(2016) in order to ensure the viability of the twoState solution, which, after 70 years, would ultimately
restore the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Nicaragua supports the two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We hope that through dialogue, negotiation and
continuing efforts to seek a peaceful political solution,
and with the good faith of both parties, both peoples
can live in lasting peace, given that both States and
their peoples have the same right to peace, security and
sustainable development.
At this time, as we press ahead with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, Palestine has the same right as
everyone else to live in peace and receive assistance
for development, cooperation and investments in order
to ensure sustainable development. In our struggle for
global peace, which is the unswerving commitment of
the people and Government of Nicaragua, the solution
to the Palestinian question, in accordance with United
Nation resolutions, holds a special place.
In conclusion, we believe that peace in the Middle
East entails resolving the Palestinian question,
including the withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon, the
42/65

20/04/2017

Syrian Golan and, in short, from all occupied Arab
territories. Similarly, it is essential to put an end to
foreign interference and intervention in the region and,
finally, to achieve peace and security in the Middle
East for all peoples of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): For several years now, we have been warning
the members of the Security Council about the
seriousness of the destructive approach to modifying
the content of and references to agenda item pertaining
to the Middle East. That approach seeks to sway us from
our main objectives and to remove the real content of
the agenda item, which is the question of the occupation
by Israel of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories
and its ongoing violations of the various Security
Council resolutions calling for it to withdraw from
the occupied Arab territories, in accordance with the
4 June 1967 borders.
Nonetheless, of particular concern and abhorrence is
the fact that the representative of the Secretariat is again
heading down that very path, pointedly overstepping the
bounds of his mandate and deliberately neglecting to
speak about the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan.
The question of the Syrian Golan is at the very core
of the agenda item and a key part of Mr. Mladenov’s
mandate as Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process. We have pointed out to Mr. Mladenov
on several occasions the seriousness of this approach to
briefing the Security Council and his failure to address
the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan.
My country stresses its intransigent position in
support of the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to establish an independent State
that encompasses its entire territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital, as well as the right of return of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 194
(III). The continued, dubious silence of the Security
Council with regard to Israeli policies and practices
has encouraged Israel to pursue its policy of occupation
and colonization.
It has also encouraged Israel to violate the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and Security
Council resolutions pertaining to the Golan, especially
those related to combating terrorism. Moreover, it
has encouraged Israel to lend all kinds of support to
armed terrorist groups in the disengagement area in the
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupied Syrian Golan, including to terrorists of the
Al-Nusra Front, an entity that the Council considers to
be a terrorist organization and that receives assistance
from Israel in the occupied Syrian Golan. In addition,
Israel facilitates travel by Al-Nusra Front terrorists
across the demarcation line, treats them at Israeli
hospitals and returns them to Syrian territory to resume
their terrorist acts. The Qatari regime finances these
malicious acts. Israel has not only supported this group,
but has also launched several airstrikes, in flagrant
violation of Syrian sovereignty and the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, in order to support such terrorist
groups. Israel attacked Syria on 17 March in Palmyra
in support of the Da’esh terrorist group, which was
present there at the time.
Such events illustrate that Israel and terrorism are
two sides of the same coin. When we state that Israel
and terrorism are essentially two sides of the same coin,
we are talking about a long history of Zionist terrorism,
which is essentially based on a foundation of extremism
and intolerance. Its goal is to kill others, displace them
and violate their rights. It is based on a false myth
of a religious State that is illusory and has not been
accepted under any international laws and norms. It is a
State that does not respect freedom, equality or justice.
When the representative of the Israeli occupation
asks about root causes of terrorism and bloodshed in
the Middle East, we offer facts and evidence to him
and others who deliberately take exploit this forum to
distort facts and distract us from addressing the real
threats facing our region. An entity that occupies
territories and makes people refugees cannot claim
to be democratic or to adhere to human values. Its
representatives cannot speak about chaos and weapons
of mass destruction. The entity itself continues to distort
history by pilfering territories, building settlements
and carrying out massacres against the Arab peoples
who live under its occupation. It is the only party that
possesses an arsenal of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and that is protected by permanent members of
the Security Council that have even repeatedly rejected
any initiative to create a nuclear-free-weapon zone in
the Middle East.
The world cannot ignore the fact that the entity
was established on the basis of the Balfour Declaration,
which has had a serious impact on the history of
humankind by allowing, for the first time in history,
the establishment of a racist entity that excludes others
and is based on an extremist religious ideology, which

S/PV.7929

makes it no different from Da’esh and even worse. This
entity enjoys the support of permanent members of the
Council that claim to seek peace and the realization of
peoples’ interest and rights, yet still support the worst
occupation humankind has ever witnessed.
We reiterate Syria’s sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, in line with the 4 June 1967 borders. That
right is not debatable; it is an inalienable right on which
there can be no compromise. Our occupied territory
and usurped right must be restored and returned to their
legitimate owners. Settlers must leave our territory in the
Golan, sooner or later. Syrian authorities demand that
pressure be exercised on Israel, the occupying Power,
to immediately release the Syrian Sudqi Almaqt, who
is referred to as Syria’s Mandela, and Amal Abu Saleh.
Both have been imprisoned in Israel simply for taking
photographs that prove that the Israel, the occupying
Power, cooperates with the Al-Nusra Front in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Such photographs were taken
at the gates of the the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, whose forces are deployed throughout
the Golan. That is why those two Syrians were arrested
by Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
to you, Madam President, the appreciation of the
delegation of Indonesia for convening today’s quarterly
open debate of the Security Council on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
In the past few weeks, there have been significant
developments in the region. They include the decision
by Israel to proceed with its settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, in direct violation
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). In
that resolution, adopted last December, the Council
declared Israel’s establishment of settlements in the

17-1062943/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian territory, occupied since 1967, to be illegal,
a flagrant violation of international law, and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. To that
end, the Council demanded that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that
it fully respect all of its legal obligations. The Council
further stated in that resolution that the cessation of
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory is essential to salvage the two-State solution.
The Council therefore called for affirmative steps to
be taken immediately to reverse negative trends, such
as the settlements, which are imperilling the twoState solution.
In a rather cynical response on 31 March, just three
weeks ago, the Government of Israel announced the
construction of the first new settlement in two decades.
As if in mockery of the Council, the location chosen
by the Government of Israel for this new settlement
is Emek Shilo, well inside the West Bank. The policy
decision itself, and the site chosen for it, appropriately
capture the dismissiveness that has been demonstrated
by Israel with respect to international law and Security
Council resolutions for several decades.
In our statement at the open debate last January
(see S/PV.7863), my delegation joined those who, while
praising resolution 2334 (2016), affirmed that the real
challenge was in its implementation. We warned — a
warning we now reiterate once more — that the failure
to implement the resolution would ultimately frustrate
the hopes of all Palestinians, as well as of the Israeli
majority who simply want to live side by side in
peace with their neighbours. The implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) is the litmus test of the Council’s
commitment to peace in the Middle East, for it is the
test of its commitment to the two-State solution.
One of the landmarks that we observe in 2017 is the
fiftieth year of Israel’s occupation of Palestine. We call
on Council members to recognize the urgency of the
question of Palestine, which can no longer be ignored.
History beckons the Council to rise on the right side
of history, by standing up with courage and a sense of
mission to end this occupation and the grave injustice
that it embodies.
Allow me to briefly highlight three related
issues within the context of peace and security in the
44/65

20/04/2017

Middle East, namely the situations in Syria, Lebanon
and Yemen.
Indonesia is following the situation in Syria with
concern and is of the view that peace and security in
Syria can only be achieved through dialogue among all
relevant parties in the country, leading to a political,
rather than a military, solution. We therefore strongly
encourage current talks in Geneva and Astana to yield
concrete outcomes and agreements. As a party to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, Indonesia condemns the use
of chemical weapons on 4 April and considers that
an independent investigation must be carried out in
an objective, impartial and professional manner. It is
important to underscore that any multilateral action
and solution concerning Syria must be consistent with
the Charter of the United Nations.
On Lebanon, my delegation is encouraged by
the stable situation in the country and commends the
Government of Lebanon for its exceptional cooperation
with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which we believe contributes significantly
to the maintenance of peace and security, in accordance
with resolutions 1701 (2006), 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
We understand that a strategic review of UNIFIL
is currently being undertaken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In that regard, Indonesia
requests that the Council take into consideration the
vital role of UNIFIL in the maintenance of peace
and security in a country situated in a region where
hostilities and conflicts persist.
On Yemen, the special attention of the Council
is needed due to the grave humanitarian situation.
Approximately 18.8 million Yemenis are in need of
humanitarian assistance, while 2.2 million Yemeni
children are acutely malnourished. Indonesia supports
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in his efforts to
encourage the parties to commit to the rapid resumption
of a long-lasting cessation of hostilities.
In conclusion, Indonesia urges the Council to seek
peace, and to seek it now; to seek justice, and to seek it
now through impartial responses to the various issues
taking place in the Middle East.
Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the United States on
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

presiding over the Council for this month and thank its
delegation for holding this meeting.
Oman aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.
Oman believes that the Palestinian question is
essential to stability in the Middle East. Without a just
and satisfactory solution to such a question, it will be
very difficult to establish normal relations among the
States and peoples of the region. Unfortunately, we
now feel that the Palestinian question and other issues
in the Middle East are falling lower on the agenda of
the international community because attention is being
given to other, potentially more urgent issues. However,
we should not forget the plight of people who have been
living under occupation for more than 70 years and
still hope to attain their right to self-determination by
establishing an independent country within the borders
of 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international decisions and resolutions.
Israel is taking advantage of the extraordinary
situation in the region to establish and expand
settlements. That will complicate international efforts
to find a solution to the Palestinian question and will
kill hopes for peace and the two-State solution. We
call for serious negotiations to reach a comprehensive
and lasting settlement that will uphold the rights of all
parties to live in peace, side-by-side. We call on the
international community to support all efforts that
will help to achieve that noble goal, aspired to by all
peace-loving countries.
In Oman, peace and dialogue have been key
principles since the opening of Oman, which began on
23 July 1970. We believe that dialogue is the principal
means by which to deal with all disputes. Nations
can achieve rapprochement through joint visions. We
are fully convinced that dialogue is the best way to
resolve differences peacefully, as opposed to through
confrontation and conflict. Based on that principle,
and with respect to current issues in the region, such
as those in Yemen, Syria and Libya, Oman has been
working to achieve convergence and to encourage all
adversaries to renounce their differences and come to
the negotiating table. Oman has hosted many meetings
in that respect.
In relation to Yemen in particular, we have no
doubt that developments there have exacerbated
already deteriorating economic and security conditions

S/PV.7929

for the Yemeni people. We highly commend the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Yemen for his work to restore peace and stability
in that brotherly country. We call on all Yemeni
political parties to support such efforts by engaging in
a meaningful dialogue to reach a political solution that
would bring the crisis to an end.
I would like to stress that Oman is ready to assume
its role in attaining that goal by cooperating with all
parties concerned. I also stress that my country will
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to Yemeni
refugees and internally displaced persons. We call on
all regional and international entities and organizations
to support these efforts.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
Middle East suffers from a great many crises and new
conflicts. It cannot withstand any escalation. We believe
that dialogue on political and peaceful solutions is the
best way to find lasting and permanent resolutions to
all of those issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Since this
is the first time my delegation is speaking before the
Security Council this month, I would like to start by
commending you, Madam President, for your efforts
while presiding over the Council in April. We wish you
every success. I would also like to commend the United
Kingdom for presiding over the Council last month.
Kuwait supports the statements delivered by the
representative of Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States to the United Nations in New York and the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and that to be delivered
by the representative of Uzbekistan on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Today, we have heard of the latest developments
on one of the key issues on the agenda of the United
Nations — the Palestinian question. Many United
Nations resolutions have been adopted and international
initiatives launched but not implemented because of
hardline positions on Israel and its flagrant and blunt
refusal to implement resolutions of international
legitimacy. For its part, the international community is
unfortunately unable to compel the occupying Power
to implement them. What is more worrying is the

17-1062945/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/04/2017

occupying Power’s contempt for the Council and its
resolutions, which should be binding on all.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.

The illegal and illegitimate policies of Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territories, in particular in
East Jerusalem, continue unabated. The best proof of
that are Israel’s inhumane practices, which constitute
serious and grave violations of human rights and
grave international humanitarian law. Those practices
include the confiscation and destruction of properties
and homes, as well as illegal settlement activities at
unprecedented levels — with new settlements being
built and existing ones expanded, leading to the forced
displacement of the Palestinian owners of the land. It
is well confirmed that expressions of regret over those
settlement policies and pronouncements warning of the
consequences of those practices on the peace process
have not deterred Israel from pursuing them. Instead,
Israel has undermined the United Nations by failing to
implement resolution 2334 (2016).

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Nikki Haley on her appointment as the United States
Ambassador to the United Nations. I have no doubt that
our two States will be able to strengthen our bilateral
relationship based on our common interests. I would
also like to congratulate the United States on acceding
to the presidency of the Security Council this month.
We have seen a critical and fresh outlook on many of
the issues under consideration, which is commendable.

The continuation of such aggression and attacks,
as well as of the inhumane blockade of Gaza, is the
unavoidable outcome of the Council’s failure to call on
Israel to stop its repeated aggression and to abide by its
international obligations as an occupying Power under
the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
A just, lasting and comprehensive peace will not
be achieved by calling for the resumption of futile
direct negotiations without a timetable, or by remaining
silent over Israeli practices and policies. The desired
peace should be based on resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the road
map to a permanent two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the Arab Peace Initiative.
That will enable the Palestinian people to attain their
fundamental rights, including their rights to selfdetermination and to establish an independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital.
Kuwait supports the outcome document of the Paris
peace conference on the Middle East, held on 15 January,
which renewed the commitment of the international
community to the two-State solution as the only way
to achieve lasting peace. In that connection, we call on
the Council to shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and to take the necessary measures
to achieve a lasting solution and peace.
46/65

I thank the United States for organizing this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, and
in particular on the Palestinian question — an issue
that is at the very heart of the conflicts in the Middle
East and a very deep and historical injustice endured
by the Palestinian people. That injustice has become
a wall of tears used and exploited by terrorists to play
the Palestinian card and to further their own ends. It
is also used by certain corrupt regimes, such as the
Iranian regime and the Al-Assad regime, as well as by
Hizbullah, which supports them.
Saudi Arabia reiterates its position of full support
for the Palestinian people in their effort to regain their
sovereign rights, including the right to an independent
State throughout the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, in line with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We call on Israel to withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan,
Lebanese territories and any other occupied Arab land.
My country has not been content merely to
proclaim its support for its Palestinian brethren; it has
also supported the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted at the
2002 Summit of the League of Arab States in Beirut,
which constitutes the primary Arab contribution to the
peace process. The Initiative marked a new chapter
towards the achievement of a just and lasting peace, if
only Israel and all the other States of the region that
seek peace and prosperity would support it. I also note
the Amman declaration, adopted at the Arab League
Summit in March. The declaration strengthens the Arab
Peace Initiative and could enable serious negotiations.
However, the Israeli side must also accept that offer
of peace.
One dangerous aspect of the conflict in Palestine
are Israeli plans and measures to judaize the city of
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem and to change its demography and ArabIslamic identity, as well as the status of Christian and
Islamic holy sites in Israel. Saudi Arabia rejects all
such changes. Jerusalem was the first city — the first
Qibla — to which Muslims once turned when praying.
We cannot accept that the legal status of Jerusalem
could be changed. Jerusalem cannot be recognized as
the capital of Israel, and countries should not transfer
their embassies to Jerusalem. International law should
be respected, and all attempts at political manipulation
must cease.
The international community met in Paris for the
Middle East peace conference, where it demonstrated
its commitment to the two-State solution, which is the
only solution that will make it possible for us to achieve
peace. My delegation has clearly stated that the path to
peace is very clear. We need to follow the mechanisms
that already exist to put an end to occupation and create
a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the pre-1967 borders.
We have seen extremely worrying developments in
the Syrian tragedy over the past few weeks. We have
seen the Syrian authorities continue to use chemical
weapons against their own people, and the Iranian
Republican Guard and the various militias, including
Hizbullah, continue to undermine the lives and dignity
of the Syrian people. Syrians are killed, displaced
and besieged in an unacceptable way, even as the
international community has made repeated calls for
an end to these hostilities.
The Security Council has yet to bring those
responsible for these acts to justice. We cannot accept
impunity, even if it should happen to prevail today.
However, we are convinced that justice will triumph
in the end. We must support the Syrian people in their
aspirations to freedom and dignity. We will eventually
achieve peace and dignity, however long it takes.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports the military
operations of the United States against military targets
in Syria in response to the chemical weapons attack
in Khan Shaykhun. The Kingdom insists on the
need to put an end to the barbaric actions, including
murder and ethnic cleansing, targeting certain Syrians.
These unacceptable actions perpetrated by the Syrian
authorities give terrorists such as Da’esh and Al-Nusra
Front an excellent opportunity to fill the void that is
left by the authorities in this situation. We insist on
the need to strengthen international efforts to weaken

S/PV.7929

the grip of these terrorist organization on parts of the
Syrian territory.
My delegation supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his mandate,
established pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). We
need to make progress and implement the first Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and move towards
the creation of a transitional authority in Syria that is
able to welcome all of its people without distinction and
reject terrorism, violence and intolerance.
We had hoped that the nuclear agreement with Iran
would make it possible to end the nuclear programme
in that country and push Iran to abandon its nuclear
ambitions. We had hoped that Iran would finally choose
a policy of good-neighbourliness, based on strict respect
for international law, and cease to interfere in the
affairs of neighbouring States. However, what we are
seeing on a daily basis is endless proof that Iran has no
respect for these principles or for diplomatic customs,
in particular. You probably saw, Madam President, that
the diplomatic missions of Saudi Arabia in Iran were
attacked. Such actions are unacceptable.
Furthermore, Iran continues to back militias in Iraq
and Yemen, which is an absolutely unacceptable form
of interference. What we are seeing is the reproduction
of the Hizbullah model in other countries. Iran is also
interfering in the Kingdom of Bahrain. All of this is
unacceptable. Iran should content itself to respecting
international law rather than undermining security and
stability in various parts of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the United States presidency for organizing today’s
quarterly debate. We take note of the useful briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
statement to be made by the representative of Uzbekistan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Bangladesh remains concerned over the fratricidal
conflicts raging in many parts of the Middle East
region with grave implications for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The growing

17-1062947/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

involvement of non-State actors, including terrorist
groups, has compounded the situation in most cases,
having a dire impact on civilians. We appreciate the
Security Council’s sustained engagement on these
conflict situations, including on the political and
humanitarian tracks.
In line with precedents, we wish to maintain our
focus on the Palestinian question, which we believe
remains a central preoccupation for the international
community. As we witness wilful provocations to
further diminish the prospects of a two-State solution,
the urgency of restoring the political horizon with a
view to resuming the Middle East Peace Process cannot
be overemphasized. There is every reason for the
States Members of the United Nations to collectively
question and re-examine the untenable status quo
on the Palestinian question. The international peace
conference held in Paris on 15 January bore witness
to that sense of urgency shared by the international
community. The message has been clear — the quest
for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question must be earnestly pursued,
particularly against the backdrop of a volatile regional
security situation.
There is near unanimous agreement in the
international community that the continued expansion
of illegal settlements, including the recent legislation
and announcements, constitutes one of the most blatant
manifestations of injustice perpetrated against the
Palestinian people, and poses a serious impediment to
the resumption and pursuit of the peace process. The
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
reaffirmed the illegality of the settlements and prevailed
upon Israel to halt further expansion of settlements and
cease attempts to legitimize the existing ones. We urge
the Council to remain seized of the matter and pursue
efforts to ensure cessation of all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in and
around East Jerusalem.
Bangladesh remains concerned at the ongoing
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has seriously
undermined its recovery and reconstruction efforts.
We underscore the critical importance of addressing
systematic human rights violations against the
Palestinian people by the occupying Power and the
need for compliance with the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law. We note with concern
the ramifications of the hunger strike by Palestinian
48/65

20/04/2017

prisoners and call for addressing their grievances,
including the illegal detention of children.
When Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
visited Bangladesh in January, Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina told him that the Government and the
people of Bangladesh remain steadfast in advocating
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right of return, self-determination and
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We continue to support all
constructive efforts of the Security Council and the rest
of the international community aimed at finding lasting
political solutions to the different conflict situations in
the Middle East and at working towards addressing the
various root causes and drivers of conflicts with a view
to sustaining peace in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Shadiev (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my
capacity as Chair of the OIC Group.
This meeting takes place in a climate overburdened
by the increasingly unstable and volatile situation in the
Middle East, with the unresolved and festering question
of Palestine remaining at the heart of unrest in the
region. The OIC is very concerned about the contempt by
Israel, the occupying Power, for the Security Council’s
authoritative decisions and demands, in contravention
of international law and in total obstruction of a
political horizon for a peaceful solution.
The escalation of illegal Israeli settlement activities
in the last few months through the establishment of
a new colonialist settlement, along with the adoption
of the Israeli regularization law, an illegal scheme
aimed at entrenching so-called settlement outposts,
are of grave concern and must be condemned. The OIC
reaffirms that the continuation of Israeli settlement
policy would undermine the territorial integrity,
viability and contiguity of a future Palestinian State, let
alone the fact that settlement activities are illegal acts
constituting flagrant violations of international law
and United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), which unequivocally demanded an end
to all such activities. The OIC therefore calls upon
the Security Council to ensure the full compliance of
Israel, the occupying Power, with its legal obligations
under international law.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Council must act to uphold its responsibilities
to halt Israeli settlement acts, which have been
manifestly and deliberately escalated in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem. We further appeal for the international
community’s sustained engagement, as also called for
by resolution 2334 (2016), and its full support at this
critical period for sponsorship for a timed multilateral
political process that would lead to the enforcement
of United Nations resolutions aimed at finally ending
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land, in
effect since 1967, and achieving the internationally
endorsed two-State solution, to which the OIC remains
unflinchingly committed.
The OIC also continues to view with profound
concern Israel’s frequent provocative violations and
assaults against holy places, especially Al-Aqsa
mosque, and its policies to change the Arab character,
status, landmarks and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem, including through the
building of settlements in the city, excavating beneath
the Al-Aqsa mosque, desecrating Islamic and Christian
sites, including by extremist Israeli settlers and
religious fanatics, and demolishing homes and evicting
Palestinian residents, with a view to isolating occupied
East Jerusalem from its Palestinian environs.
All such actions continue to raise tensions and
sensitivities and are alarmingly aggravating the fragile
situation on the ground, with the potential to spark grave
consequences. The Security Council must demand that
all such illegal acts cease and that Israel, the occupying
Power, abide by its obligations under international law
and United Nations resolutions regarding Jerusalem.
In this regard, the OIC reiterates its firm commitment
to the rights of the Palestinian people in occupied
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.
The OIC remains firm in its conviction that the
Security Council must not be absolved of its role in this
regard and should act to ensure the realization by the
Palestinian people of their right to self-determination,
sovereignty and independence in their state of Palestine
in the territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as a just solution for the plight
of the Palestine refugees in line with United Nations
resolutions and international law.
I must also, at this meeting, reiterate the concerns
of the OIC regarding the grave humanitarian suffering

S/PV.7929

being endured by the Palestinian people throughout
occupied Palestine, including in the Gaza Strip, where
the Palestinian civilian population continues to suffer
from the inhumane, illegal Israeli blockade, now in its
tenth year. We reiterate the call for an end to this massive
form of collective punishment of the Palestinian people
and for urgent efforts to reconstruct, rehabilitate and
revive Gaza, which also remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.
Today, we must also reiterate the call for attention
to the plight of Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli
detention centres. We call for respect of their rights,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
and international human rights law, and for an end
to their abuse and captivity by the occupying Power.
The hunger strike recently undertaken by thousands of
prisoners is a cry for attention to their critical plight and
for action to resolve it, and we appeal for international
compassion and responsibility in this regard.
The OIC stands ready to address and to cooperate
for the resolution of the many other critical issues in
the Middle East, including the grave situations in the
region, at the appropriate meetings in the Security
Council dedicated to the review of those specific
situations, with the aim of ending the human suffering
and crises in those countries and of contributing to
the establishment of peace and stability in the Middle
East region.
The OIC firmly believes in addressing the root
causes of conflicts, including foreign occupation, the
lack of opportunities, politically motivated agendas and
political alienation and aggression, in order to create
space for improving international peace and security.
There is no doubt that the conflicts in the Middle East,
including the tragedy of the Palestinian question and
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with the occupation
now in its fiftieth year and what seems to be chronic
divisions within the Security Council, have allowed
menaces, such as violent extremism and terrorism, to
flourish in the region and reach the proportions we
must contemplate today, as we collectively grapple with
the elusive search for viable solutions. Therefore, the
multifaceted dimension and root causes of the region’s
conflicts must be addressed without exception and in
the context of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and with adherence to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the guarantors for peace and security in the
Middle East and globally.

17-1062949/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to express my appreciation to the United States
presidency for convening this open debate. My thanks
also go to United Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his informative briefing.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Together with people all over the world, Viet Nam
is deeply concerned about the current critical situation
in the Middle East. The outbreak of terror caused
by terrorism and extremism, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the protracted conflict in Syria and Yemen,
tension and violence in Iraq and other places in the
region have led to the vast loss of lives, the widespread
violation of human rights, unprecedented displacement,
a refugee crisis and mass destruction, even of cultural
heritage, causing misery and suffering to millions
of people and posing a grave threat to regional and
international peace and security.
Despite the tireless efforts of the international
community, international cooperation and response
to the complex issues in the region are still not up to
the level of the danger posed. It is regrettable that the
Security Council, the United Nations powerful body
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, still lacks unity and
political will in seeking a peaceful and comprehensive
solution to the conflicts that rage across the region.
The Palestinian question remains at the heart of the
instability in the Middle East. The continuing cycle of
violence, military and settlement activities, and land
confiscation have cast a shadow over the ever fragile
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Thousands of families
have been displaced and homeless. The Palestinian
people continue to endure pains and hardships. We call
for the cessation of Israeli settlement activities. We urge
all parties concerned to immediately stop actions that
may further escalate tensions, refrain from any action
of hostility, incitement or violence and strictly abide by
international law, especially international humanitarian
and human rights laws.
Viet Nam has always supported the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their fundamental
rights, especially the sacred right of self-determination
50/65

20/04/2017

and the establishment of an independent State. We
advocate a peaceful settlement of the decades-long
Israeli-Palestinian conflict through constructive
dialogue and diplomatic negotiations, in accordance
with relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016) and the Arab Peace Initiative,
aimed at achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution and ensuring the legitimate interests of all
parties concerned. We call for an early resumption of
negotiations and welcome all intensified efforts by the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries to achieve a two-State solution
on the 1967 lines with a vision of two States — Israel
and Palestine — living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition.
Viet Nam has been following recent developments
in Syria with great concern. We strongly condemn the
use of chemical weapons and are opposed to any action
against innocent civilians. We urge all the parties
concerned to refrain from any actions that could escalate
tensions, swiftly implement resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex) and work together to seek a political solution to
the Syrian conflict through negotiation. We believe that
only a peaceful settlement based on the fundamental
principles of international law, particularly as outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations and the Chemical
Weapons Convention, including no use or threat of
use of force and respect for Syria’s independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity, can bring
sustainable peace and stability to Syria and end the
suffering of the Syrian people.
Having endured tremendous hardships and losses
as a result of wars in their own country, the Vietnamese
people sympathize deeply with the people of the Middle
East. I would like to conclude by stressing that it is
high time for the Security Council to spare no effort to
shoulder its responsibilities and respond collectively to
the serious security challenges confronting the region
and the whole world. We are only as strong as we are
united and as weak as we are divided.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I would
like to begin by acknowledging the presence of Special
Coordinator Mladenov and thanking him for his good
work and his excellent briefing this morning.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its 28 member States. The candidate
countries Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.
The Middle East peace process continues to be a
top priority for the European Union, and our policies on
the issue remain clear and consistent. We believe that
it is more important than ever to uphold international
consensus on the key principles underpinning the
Middle East peace process, which are the indispensable
cornerstones for a just and enduring peace for Israelis
and Palestinians, based on a two-State solution, with
the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
There is no viable alternative to a negotiated twoState solution, based on the parameters set out in the
European Council Conclusions of July 2014, that fulfils
the legitimate aspirations of both parties — including
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty — ends
the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent status issues. On 23 December 2016, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which
reiterates some of the key threats to the viability of a
two-State solution that were also identified in the July
report of the Quartet, including continued settlement
activities and acts of violence, terror and incitement.
The European Union would like to recall that
settlements are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. The European Union
will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed on by the parties. The EU will continue to
distinguish, in its relevant dealings, between the territory
of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since
1967. As for Jerusalem, the EU will continue to respect
the international consensus embodied in resolution 478
(1980). A way must be found through negotiations to
resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
both States.
Unfortunately, actions on the ground continue to
imperil the prospects for a two-State solution. Since
January, the Israeli authorities have advanced plans
and tenders for nearly 6,000 settlement units in the
occupied Palestinian territory. In late March, the
Israeli Government decided, for the first time in more

S/PV.7929

than two decades, to establish a new settlement deep
inside the West Bank. It also declared further land deep
inside the West Bank to be State land. The EU is deeply
concerned about the enactment in February of the socalled regularization law, which would mean crossing a
new threshold, even under Israeli law, for the settlement
enterprise in the West Bank. We urge Israel to end all
settlement activity and dismantle the outposts erected
since March 2001, in line with prior obligations.
The EU is also deeply concerned about the
significant increase in Israeli demolitions and
confiscations of Palestinian structures, including EUfunded projects, in Area C, which is critical to the
viability and contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
Many affected communities, such as Khan Al-Ahmar,
are at imminent risk of eviction and forced transfer.
The EU remains committed to protecting the rights
of Palestinians, including their human rights, and to
providing assistance to people in vulnerable situations
in their current place of residence in Area C. We urge
Israel to meet its obligations under international law,
including human rights and humanitarian law, allow the
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid and accelerate
the approval of master plans and building permits for
Palestinians in Area C.
The EU firmly rejects terror and any acts of
violence that take innocent lives, as well as any
incitement to hatred and violence, which we see as
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
settlement. It will be critical to uphold commitments
to acting effectively against violence and incitement
if mutual trust is to be rebuilt and another escalation
avoided. Alleged violations and abuses of human rights
by all sides must be investigated in accordance with
international standards. The European Union would
like to emphasize that the compliance of States and
non-State actors with international humanitarian and
human rights law, including their accountability, is
fundamental to peace and security in the region.
We call on Palestinian leaders to consistently and
clearly condemn terrorist attacks and take all steps
within their capacity to end incitement to hatred and
violence. We also urge Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process, which is an
important element in reaching an eventual two-State
solution. The European Union urges all parties in the
West Bank and Gaza to advance that process with a view
to holding democratic elections in the West Bank and
Gaza. A single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian

17-1062951/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

authority, with full control over Gaza, is critical to
achieving a viable Palestinian State. To that end, the
EU calls on all Palestinian factions to find common
ground and work together to address the needs of the
Palestinian people.
Last but not least, the situation in Gaza is
unsustainable. All parties must act swiftly to produce
a fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip in accordance
with resolution 1860 (2009), including ending the
closure of the crossing points and opening them fully,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU stands ready to support the consolidation of
Palestinian State capacities and efforts to strengthen the
Palestinian economy, both in the West Bank and Gaza.
To make progress, we need the parties to
demonstrate, through policies and actions, their
genuine commitment to the two-State solution in order
to prevent the irreversible loss of this solution and to
find a new path to successful final status negotiations.
The EU will support all serious peacemaking efforts
and will continue to work closely with the parties and
with partners in the region and beyond, including
within the framework of the Quartet.
As reflected in discussions at the Summit of the
League of Arab States in March, the Arab Peace
Initiative provides key elements for the settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the opportunity
for building a regional security framework. The EU
strongly believes that further dialogue on that basis will
bring results. A comprehensive resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict could provide a new impetus for
peace and security throughout the wider region, and
therefore that opportunity must be seized.
I would like to say a few words about Syria. Syria
has been the geostrategic link between Europe and
the Middle East. It was the core of the Mediterranean
civilization that shaped our culture, our traditions and
our way of thinking. That role as a bridge between
civilizations and continents is what has made that
country so important throughout its entire history.
Today Syria is at war — a war that is killing its people
and destroying its cultural heritage. We condemn the
systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses
of human rights and all violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties, particularly the
Syrian Government and its allies. The EU continues
to call for full unhindered humanitarian access and for
52/65

20/04/2017

accountability for all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The historic bridge is collapsing, and we cannot
simply wait for the conflict to end while we spend
billions to contain the crisis and keep the refugees
fed and sheltered. The United Nations — the Security
Council — can build bridges, and Europe is here to
help. That is why the European Union endorsed the
strategy for Syria in early April, aimed at promoting
a political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). We are focused on putting all our
weight behind achieving a framework agreement in the
United Nations-mediated intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
that will contain a political package so that a negotiated
transitional political process can be implemented, in
line with the previously mentioned resolution.
Earlier this month, we hosted in Brussels a
conference on the theme “Supporting the future of Syria
and the region”, together with six co-chairs — Germany,
Kuwait, Norway, Qatar, the United Kingdom and the
United Nations. It was a very successful conference, on
which I briefed the General Assembly yesterday.
The EU condemns in the strongest terms the
chemical attack on the town of Khan Shaykhun in Idlib
province on 4 April, which had horrific consequences,
causing the deaths and injuries of scores of civilians,
including children and relief workers, with many
victims displaying symptoms of gas poisoning. The
use of chemical weapons or chemical substances as
weapons amounts to a war crime. Their use, including
by the regime and Da’esh, must stop, and identified
perpetrators must be held accountable for that violation
of international law.
We strongly support the investigation by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in Syria, which is in
the process of gathering and analysing information
from all available sources, as a precursor to further
investigations by the United Nations-OPCW Joint
Investigative Mechanism. The European Union is
united behind their work and committed to bringing
impunity to an end.
We strongly condemn the horrific attack in
Rashidin on 15 April, which killed at least 126 persons,
many of them children, and injured dozens.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Accountability for gross and systematic violations
perpetrated in Syria is paramount. Any inability to
ensure accountability of the perpetrators can result in
additional brutality and in the continued flouting of
international norms. The EU calls on all parties to the
conflict to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
In concluding, I would also like to speak briefly about
Lebanon. The European Union welcomes Lebanon’s
recent progress to end the political stalemate, with the
election of a president and a new Government in place.
The next important milestone for Lebanon’s democratic
process is an agreement on a new electoral framework
before the expiration of parliament’s mandate on 20 June
and the holding of timely elections. The EU reaffirms
its commitment to the unity, sovereignty, stability,
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It
reiterates the importance of an ongoing commitment to
a policy of disassociation from all regional conflicts, in
line with the Baabda Declaration.
The European Union stresses the importance
of Lebanon’s continued commitment to the full
implementation of its international obligations,
including Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006), 1701 (2006) and 1757 (2007). The EU
also commends Lebanon’s extraordinary efforts in
continuing to host more than 1.1 million refugees from
Syria until conditions for their return are met, and
stresses the importance of living up to commitments
with regard to rights and protection of refugees. As
confirmed at the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, the EU is determined
to continue its support to Lebanon’s stabilization and
development and calls upon the regional partners and
the international community to do the same.

S/PV.7929

years has deteriorated, and it has not been possible to
achieve peace and security in the region. It is urgent that
we succeed in putting an end to the humanitarian crisis
confronting us and seek a prompt political solution.
The crisis has become a humanitarian tragedy of
scandalous proportions, an affront to all of humankind.
We therefore once again urge the Security Council to
fully exercise its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, as clearly set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations.
My country regrets the recurrent terrorist
attacks that have taken place in the Middle East. We
categorically condemn all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism and violent extremism in all their
manifestations, wherever they take place and whoever
the perpetrators are, regardless of their motivation. That
includes condemnation of financial, material or political
support for terrorism as unjustifiable under applicable
international law, given its detrimental effects on the
enjoyment of human rights and on democratic societies.
Such acts are a threat to the territorial integrity and the
security of States. Those activities must be addressed
and tackled through multilateralism, in accordance with
the provisions of international law and in full respect for
human rights. In the same spirit, Costa Rica condemns
unilateral actions carried out in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We reaffirm the primary responsibility of States to
prevent and combat violent extremism, but we appeal for
a human rights approach in combating it. That approach
should encompass the whole of society, including the
participation of Governments, civil society, local and
religious leaders and the private sector.

Mr. Castro Córdoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Mission of the United States of America on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. We also welcome the statement
made by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process.

With regard to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Costa
Rica reiterates the urgent need to resume negotiations
between the parties on the core issues of the conflict
that still exist, based on the obligations already made
and on previously signed agreements. We must find
a political solution to that conflict and create as soon
as possible a new peace architecture for resolving
the differences, one that will lead to the achievement
of the objectives set by the international community:
harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State of Israel.

Millions of human beings live every day in anguish
and despair and with the painful memories of armed
conflicts. Costa Rica deeply regrets the spread of
conflicts in the Middle East. The situation in recent

With regard to the conflict in Syria and the
insufficient action taken by the Security Council,
Costa Rica urges all States members of the General
Assembly to take on their share of responsibility and

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.

17-1062953/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/04/2017

assume their roles as set out under Articles 11, 12 and
14 of the Charter of the United Nations. The General
Assembly must act decisively on issues pertaining to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a collective responsibility. We cannot continue
to ignore the suffering of the millions of people who
have fallen victim to that political and military game.

(2016). We regret the fact that that briefing on the
implementation of the landmark resolution was not
officially published and circulated in writing as per
standard practice. We believe that it is crucial to have
this report secured in writing to ensure the effective
monitoring and accountability of the parties to the
conflict, in line with the goals of resolution 2334 (2016).

I therefore urge members that we carry out our work
and put multilateralism into practice so that solidarity
prevails. along with the commitment to satisfy the
interests of the entire international community and not
just those of one group of nations. The United Nations
must play its role as the epicentre of global governance
based on mutual respect and the collective search
for solutions.

As one of the sponsors of resolution 2334
(2016), which was adopted last December with the
overwhelming support of Council members and the
international community, we reject any attempt to
undermine its implementation. We also oppose any
attempt to dilute or sideline the question of Palestine
in the Council, including in today’s open debate. We
believe that if the Council is sincere in fulfilling its
mandate for maintaining international peace and
security, it should not turn a blind eye to the undeniable
realities on the ground. In fact, the Council should pay
more attention and take effective action on the longstanding Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We believe that we must urgently join forces in
investigating and condemning those responsible for the
most heinous crimes so as to halt any act that results
in the death of innocents, bring about justice and end
the suffering and losses of more innocent civilians.
The only thing worse than this human tragedy is that
impunity succeeds instead of justice.
Costa Rica reiterates its concern about the growing
tension generated by the conflicts in the Middle
East and vigorously calls on a united international
community to achieve peace in that region. We make
this call specifically to all permanent members of the
Council so that, in accordance with code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, they commit to refraining from the use the veto
when we are faced with the commission of the most
heinous crimes, so that the Council can act swiftly to
ensure the protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his in-depth briefing
and assessment.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of Venezuela and
Uzbekistan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
Last month (see S/PV.7908), we listened to
Mr. Mladenov present the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2334
54/65

As Mr. Mladenov, the Special Coordinator,
reported, the settlement expansion by Israel continued
in the first quarter of 2017. That is in total disregard
of international law, the 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and various Council
resolutions that have clearly defined Israeli settlements
as illegal. Furthermore, settlement activities threaten
the territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State and
undermine the two-State solution and, consequently,
peace in the region.
Only a week after the briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), Israel announced its decision
to build a new settlement on the occupied Palestinian
territory — the first new settlement in two decades. We
commend the Secretary-General’s swift condemnation
of Israel’s decision in that regard. The decision also came
on the heels of the passing of the so-called regularization
law by the Israeli Parliament on 6 February, which
effectively legalized illegal outposts built on privately
owned Palestinian land in contravention of relevant
international law. Once again, those actions put into
question Israel’s sincerity about working together with
Palestine towards a two-State solution. But the Security
Council remained silent despite the flagrant breach of
its own resolution. Malaysia reiterates it call for the
Council to shoulder its responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations and act accordingly to maintain
international peace and security by taking effective
actions against illegal settlement activities.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In anticipation of a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), Malaysia
looks forward to a report that is objective, independent
and free from intimidation or attempts to obscure facts
and evidence on the ground. The report should be based
on international law, international standards of human
rights and the relevant United Nations resolutions, as
well as the values and principles of the Charter.
Lastly, as this year marks a half-century of Israel’s
illegal occupation of Palestine, Malaysia stresses the
urgent need for the Council to address the root cause
of the problem and end the occupation rather than
continuing to focus on the symptoms of the conflict.
The Council needs to go beyond condemning sporadic
attacks and acts of violence and should address the
bigger question of what generates, fuels and breeds such
anger, frustration and despair — all of which threaten
international peace and stability — in the first place.
Malaysia reiterates its firm commitment to working
together with the international community to push for a
just, comprehensive and final settlement to the conflict
that would see the establishment of an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and thank you for
convening this important open debate. Indeed, we
must take advantage of the opportunity that holding
this meeting at such a fragile time affords us to move
forward on the path to peace and stability in the Middle
East and in the world. We would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.
Today, tensions around the world are increasing,
and that is particularly true with regard to the Middle
East. That has a serious impact on the region and the
world in general. Every day we see the horrifying
and painful images that are the result of those crises
and their intensification, as well as of non-respect for
international law and human rights. International action
today does not keep pace with events on the ground, and
that has given rise to the spread of terrorism. The Middle
East, as well as the world in general, is consequently

S/PV.7929

paying a high price. We therefore believe that this open
debate must help the Security Council move forward
on the path towards peace in the Middle East and that
it is absolutely necessary to save the region’s resources
and people, who are in dire need of international peace
and security.
The State of Qatar understands full well what the
international community’s responsibility is. We are
actively working in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations to strengthen
international peace and security and addressing the
challenges confronting us. But that is also tied to the
commitment of the concerned parties, who must uphold
and follow international law, as well as human rights law
and international norms in general. The international
community has established mechanisms and criteria
that we must respect so as to reach a just and lasting
solution to the crisis in the Middle East.
There is no doubt that our effort to achieve peace
must have an effective impact on a number of crises,
in particular on terrorism. We have a great deal to gain
if we manage to overcome terrorism. The crisis has
continued for several decades, and to overcome it we
need to try to stop wanting to impose certain realities
and to go against international law. In fact, that type of
actions only undermines international efforts aimed at
reaching peace in the Middle East. If we want to strictly
adhere to international law, then it will be possible for
us to make progress.
The State of Qatar would like to express its
profound concern about the current impasse in the
Middle East peace process. We have made significant
efforts in trying to relaunch the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine so that those States can coexist
side by side — especially the Palestinian State, which
should exist within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the various
resolutions of the Security Council and also on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative. However, to achieve that,
the Israeli occupation of various Arab territories must
end, particularly in the Syrian Golan. Additionally.
settlement-building has to end. The blockade of
Gaza must end. Palestinian refugees must be allowed
to return.
My country is aware of the complexities and
dangers related to the Middle East situation. We believe
in peace and the need to make every possible effort to
achieve it.

17-1062955/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The use of chemical weapons against civilians in
Khan Shaykhun in Syria has only deepened the crisis
that our Syrian brethren have been experiencing for six
years. The impact of the attack has been very serious,
and it has proven that the international community is
powerless and incapable of changing the situation, even
as crimes against humanity are committed on a daily
basis. The State of Qatar condemns in the strongest
terms those unacceptable acts. Such barbarism needs to
be ended. and we support the American military action
against military targets in Syria.
We call on the international community to shoulder
its responsibility for putting an end to the crimes
committed by the Syrian regime. The attack using
chemical weapons clearly proves that the situation in
Syria is a danger to the international community. So
far, we have failed to find a solution to the Syrian crisis,
even as the Syrian regime continues to commit crimes
and to attack civilian populations and civilian targets.
The regime creates obstacles in order to block the
delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance to the
Syrian people. That has had an impact on demographics
and has allowed terrorism to spread in the country.
There is a real problem of impunity in Syria, which
encourages criminals to continu committing their
crimes. It is a real problem because we have not been
able to prevent those criminals from committing those
crimes. That is why the international community must
understand its responsibility. The State of Qatar has
tried, with the help of Liechtenstein, to establish an
international independent mechanism that could make
it possible to prosecute those responsible for the serious
crimes in Syria. It is an important step forward, and
Qatar has offered $1 million for that mechanism.
In the tragedy experienced by the Syrian people,
and in particular the attack in Khan Shaykhun, we see
that they are alone in facing such terrible violence. We
want to try to contribute in some way to to resolving
the crisis. On that point, we believe that the use of
chemical weapons, as exhibited in Khan Shaykhun, is a
particularly serious crime. We ask the Security Council
to take necessary steps to put an end to those very
serious violations. We need to reach a peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis in order to allow the Syrian people
to realize their legitimate aspirations, particularly in
accordance with the first Geneva communiqué. We
need to set up a transitional Government.
56/65

20/04/2017

In conclusion, Qatar reiterates its principled
position to support all international efforts to achieve
peace and security in the Middle East and strengthen
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank the United States of America in its capacity as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
quarterly open debate in connection with the agenda
item on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
Following the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) — a significant and welcome step forward
in the Security Council to address the predicament
of the Palestinian people — it is with great concern
that my delegation joins this timely debate. While
resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to take steps to
cease all settlement activities in the occupied territory
of Palestine, the occupying Power, Israel, continues
to blatantly violate international law, including by
disregarding resolutions of this very Council, through
its continued expansion of illegal settlements, as well as
through its demolitions of structures on a large scale in
the occupied territory of Palestine. By doing so, Israel
is flagrantly hindering the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, further undermining any
credible solution towards peace.
The Maldives strongly condemns the recent
decision by the occupying Power, Israel, to create a
new settlement in Geulat Tzion. That development is
extremely worrying, as it threatens peace and may
exacerbate tensions on the ground. The Government
of Maldives calls on the occupying Power, Israel, to
respect its international obligations, particularly with
respect to resolution 2334 (2016).
The Maldives also welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), delivered orally to this Council by the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov (see S/PV.7908), and supports
the call for a substantive written report in support of the
Council’s duties to advance the resolution’s objectives.
We believe that it is critical to build on the momentum
generated by the resolution and take further concrete
measures to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and
ascertain a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7929

conflict, which has continuously overshadowed peace
and security in the region.

welcomed recent initiatives to revitalize the Middle
East peace process.

The Syrian conflict, the deadliest conflict that the
twenty-first century has witnessed thus far, has now
entered its seventh year. Hundreds of thousands of
people have been killed, millions have fled, hospitals
and basic infrastructure have been annihilated and
cities have been destroyed, along with cultural heritage.
Yet the suffering of the Syrian people does not seem
to be coming to an end. We call on the international
community, as well as the members of the Security
Council, to make progress on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on issues relating to the
Middle East and to address them in a concrete manner,
in order to maintain the credibility of this Council.

We all know that those steps will make a difference
only if they are fully implemented in good faith.
Resolution 2334 (2016) placed on record once again
the destructive effect of Israel’s illegal settlement
activities on lasting peace. The recent, notable increase
in settlement activity not only hampers the possibility
of a viable Palestine, but also eliminates the hope for a
possible future coexistence.

The Maldives would like to reiterate its call for a
two-State solution that recognizes the sovereign and
independent State of Palestine and that is based on
the borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only through
political will, international cooperation, tangible
actions and a united Security Council. The Maldives
stands ready to support the collective efforts of the
international community in securing a more peaceful
future for the Middle East and maintaining international
peace and order. The right to life in peace is a right for
each and every individual in such conflicts as much as
it is for each one of us here.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his presentation.
While brutal oppression of people, sectarian
and divisive policies, terrorism and humanitarian
catastrophes sweep through the Middle East, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains a major source
of instability. It continues to undermine the prospects
for lasting regional and global peace. Failing to address
the dismal reality of 50 years of occupation deepens
the sense of injustice, breeds desperation and creates
fertile ground for extremist groups to exploit. Turkey
is determined to continue undertaking efforts to
contribute to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
leading to the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is the only way to ensure peace
and security for both sides. In that regard, we have

The Paris peace conference in January provided an
opportunity for the international community to reaffirm
its strong commitment to the two-State solution based
on established parameters, including relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Israelis are expected to listen to those calls, take the
hand extended with the Arab Peace Initiative, end the
occupation and step into a future of harmony with their
neighbours. The preservation of the historic status and
sanctity of Al-Haram al-Sharif and the prevention of
provocative steps in relation to Jerusalem are of the
utmost importance to that end.
Fully aware of the dire humanitarian situation in
Palestine, especially in Gaza, Turkey is pursuing its
efforts to improve the living conditions of Palestinians
through development assistance and reconstruction
projects. Currently our technical teams are working in
cooperation with the authorities of the State of Palestine
on possible ways to remedy the grave scarcity of water
and electricity in Gaza. In addition, we are supporting
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in view of its
essential role in the lives of the Palestinian refugees. In
February and March, Turkey, together with Switzerland,
led broad consultations on the financing of the Agency
in response to the Secretary-General’s request. We hope
that Member States and key stakeholders will give due
consideration to the recommendations outlined in the
Secretary-General’s recent report (A/71/849), which
was drafted based on those consultations.
Since the very beginning of the crisis in Syria,
Turkey has emphasized the need to address the root
cause of the problem, which is the fact that the Syrian
regime has waged war against the Syrian people. The
failure to do so has led to mass atrocities, terrorism
and the forced displacement of millions of persons.
The use of chemical weapons, which constitutes a
crime against humanity and a war crime, has been one

17-1062957/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the most horrendous aspects of the conflict. The
brutal attack in Khan Shaykhun is the latest example.
Despite the previous reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, confirming the regime’s
failure to fulfil its obligations, lack of a timely and
decisive response encouraged the regime to continue
its relentless attacks with impunity.
We have been closely following the developments
in the aftermath of Khan Shaykhun. We offered
emergency medical assistance to those affected by the
chemical attack, facilitated the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
mission in Turkey and engaged with the World Health
Organization. In accordance with resolution 2235
(2015), we shared the findings of our national analysis
on the victims of the attacks, which point to the use of
sarin gas, with the relevant United Nations authorities.
We will continue to support the investigation conducted
by the OPCW, as well as steps to prevent the repetition
of such brutal attacks. In that regard, the operation by
the United States targeting the Shayrat air base was
a proportionate and timely response to the regime’s
appalling acts.
Turkey has been undertaking intensive efforts to
end the violence in Syria and reach a political solution
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex),
as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). While a genuine
political transition is the only way to end the Syrian
conflict, negotiations to that end will not bear fruit
if the fighting continues. That is why we facilitated
and became the guarantors of a nation-wide ceasefire
agreed with the Russian Federation and Iran. The
Astana meetings, which are complementary and
supportive of the United Nations-led general political
process, aim at strengthening the ceasefire and adopting
confidence-building measures.
However, the process remains fragile and requires
all the relevant actors to assume their responsibilities
and use their influence. It is crucial to maintain the
momentum achieved in the latest round of the Geneva
talks. The regime representatives should not be allowed
to poison the upcoming talks either by violations on the
ground or by using threats at the table.
It takes a multidimensional strategy to achieve
to the dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey’s resolve to fight Da’esh and
other terrorist organizations in Syria remains firm.
58/65

20/04/2017

Operation Euphrates Shield — launched on 24 August
2016, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations — was successfully concluded on
29 March 2017. The operation not only eliminated the
strike capabilities of Da’esh in northern Syria, but also
contributed to the preservation of Syria’s territorial
integrity and unity. The Free Syrian Army, supported
by the Turkish armed forces and coalition air forces,
cleared an area of 2,015 square kilometres, creating
in practice a terror-free zone. Nearly 50,000 Syrians
returned to areas liberated by the operation. More will
return if their safety can be ensured.
Turkey, together with its partners, will continue
its efforts to address the plight of the Syrian people
and find a solution to the conflict that will meet their
legitimate aspirations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Today I will focus on three
themes: the situation in Syria, the protection of religious
minorities and the Middle east peace process.
In Syria, only a political solution can provide lasting
peace. The Council must fulfil its role in promoting
a peaceful solution to the conflict. In the upcoming
rounds in Geneva, we will underscore the importance of
involving civil society and women’s representatives. At
the Syria conference in Brussels, which we co-hosted,
donors committed to sustaining their support to the
Syria crisis response. We encourage donors to deliver
on their promises. Norway will deliver on our four-year
pledge of $1.16 billion.
Secondly, Norway is deeply concerned about
the deteriorating situation for religious minorities in
the Middle East. The unacceptable atrocities against
Christians, Yazidis and other religious minorities in
Egypt, Iraq and other parts of the region are creating
deep divisions within local communities. We, the
international society, must do our part in protecting the
minority populations. The concerned countries must
also do theirs.
There is a strong international consensus on how
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be resolved. A
negotiated two-State solution is the only way to achieve
a durable peace. Therefore, Palestinian State-building
and strengthening of the Palestinian economy must
continue. It is critical to the viability of the twoState solution.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7929

Norway chairs the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC). This is the only existing
international mechanism in which both parties meet
regularly and engage in a serious dialogue to resolve
outstanding issues, with the assistance of the major
donor countries. As a State-building project, the AHLC
is actively underpinning the two-State solution.

unanimity, on this issue. The only way to achieve peace
is to implement the resolution.

The next AHLC meeting will be held in Brussels
on 4 May, with the European Union as host. There
has been a significant drop in budget support from
donors, which has led to a serious financial gap for the
Palestinian Authority. Norway calls on the donors to
reconsider their aid commitments and to disburse the
pledges made at the Cairo conference in 2014. With
respect to the meeting, Norway calls on the parties
to progress on resolving outstanding fiscal issues and
implementing the electricity agreement from last fall.
Norway encourages the parties and the donors to move
faster on key infrastructure projects on water and
energy, especially in Gaza.

In addition, the Syrian crisis continues unabated,
and the tragedy of the Syrian people is ever-growing.
A crime was recently perpetrated that runs counter to
international law: the chemical-weapons attack in Khan
Shaykun. The attack caused the deaths of hundreds
of people and many injuries. This should push the
international community to find a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Syria so that the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people can be addressed and terrorism,
which is a problem in various parts of Syria, combated.
Today crimes are being perpetrated, indirectly or
directly, all of which prevents the Syrian people from
fulfilling their aspirations.

We also call on the parties to demonstrate
commitment to the two-State solution and to take
credible steps to reverse the current negative trends on
the ground, including settlement activity and acts of
violence. Only the parties can resolve this conflict, but
the international community must remain engaged and
contribute actively to the peace efforts.

Here we would like to underscore the need to
ensure compliance with the ceasefire throughout the
country and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population in Syria so as to
alleviate their suffering.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Madam President, I should like at the outset to thank
you for having convened this meeting at a time when
the Middle East is witnessing numerous challenges and
crises that are having a serious impact not only on the
region but also on the entire world.
For a just and lasting peace to prevail in the region,
the Palestinian people must recover their inalienable
rights, including the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. There must be an end to the
Israeli occupation throughout the Palestinian territory.
In this context, resolution 2334 (2016) was a historic
turning point, as it calls on Israel to put an end to the
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territories.
This was indeed a victory for the Palestinian people,
as well as evidence of international consensus, even

The international community must shoulder its
responsibilities and oblige Israel to uphold international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. This
is the only way to ensure a peaceful future of tolerance
for the entire Middle East and the world as a whole, as
this is a threat to all.

I turn now to Yemen, our neighbour, which is
experiencing serious interference today from certain
foreign forces. That is why progress must be made in
the framework of the Arab coalition that is working
in the country today, of which Bahrain is a part. Let
us enable the legitimate Government, led by President
Mansour, the opportunity to exercise all of its functions.
In addition, all political stakeholders and parties must
work together in a concerted manner so as to achieve
the legitimate aspirations of the Yemeni people and
achieve a lasting peace. Full support must be provided
to the Special Envoy, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
We call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to comply
with the principles of good-neighbourliness, uphold
the sovereignty of the States of the region and halt its
interference in neighbouring States.
Finally, the conflicts under way today in the region
and the backsliding in the peace process show that the
current situation is untenable. That is why the Kingdom
of Bahrain continues to work alongside the international
community to tackle the challenges facing the Middle

17-1062959/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East region and to combat all of the threats looming on
the horizon. We wish to see a future of peace, stability
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
convened and for presiding over this meeting on
the agenda item on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Chile wants to see peace in the Middle East,
especially between Israelis and Palestinians, and
supports the two-State solution so that they may live
in peace and security within internationally recognized
borders. The members of the international community
should foster, individually and collectively, the peace
process by promoting the relaunch of negotiations
and responsible conduct by the parties during
such negotiations.
Chile warmly welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council in December of resolution 2334 (2016), on all
measures aimed at changing the character or status of
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We agree that the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in Palestinian territory
jeopardizes the viability of the two-State solution,
which is based on the 1967 borders. We therefore
welcome the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). It is
now a matter of ensuring the full implementation of the
resolution and of all prior agreements.
Chile takes note with disappointment of the Israeli
announcement at the end of March of the construction
of new settlements in occupied Palestinian territory.
We reiterate that this is illegal under international law.
We trust that the Secretariat will substantially report,
in writing, on the implementation of the resolution and
any violations thereof.
We also reiterate the importance of the parties
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence through
education and public outreach, as stipulated in General
Assembly resolution 61/271.
Chile takes this opportunity to reiterate its
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The recent pictures that showed clearly the suffering of
women, children and other civilians were shocking and
harrowing. Now more than ever, the United Nations
must play a key role, as must its relevant institutions.
60/65

20/04/2017

Any response to violations of the international
Chemical Weapons Convention must always take place
in the framework of international law and in line with
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Syrian conflict, as we have stated on many
occasions, can have only a political solution, towards
which the Council must work in the context of its
decision-making. In that respect, we stress that the veto
is not a right but, rather, a great responsibility. For this
reason, Chile reiterates its call for a limited use of the
veto in relation to Palestine, Syria or any other conflict,
on the basis of the code of conduct developed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
with regard to Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, as
well as on the basis of the Franco-Mexican initiative,
which we deem complementary.
Finally, the Syrian conflict and its ramifications,
despite their extreme gravity, should not divert the
Council’s attention from the Palestinian question or
from the need for the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s quarterly debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Allow me to also thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
The Middle East region remains in a state of turmoil.
Complex internal conflicts have led to displacement and
suffering on a massive scale, with famine looming in
many areas, including in Yemen. The work programme
of the Security Council is heavily charged with issues
of the region, with separate meetings and reports on
various aspects of Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq.
Iceland participated in the Brussels conference
on Syria earlier this month. Along with many others,
we have committed significantly increased funds to
alleviating the humanitarian impact of the Syria crisis.
We have also welcomed Syrian refugees in Iceland,
in coordination with Office of the United Nations
Commissioner for Refugees. The continued targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure by the Syrian
Government and rebel forces, particularly medical
facilities, is completely unacceptable, and the use of
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

chemical weapons at the beginning of this month, with
strong evidence pointing to the Syrian Government,
is outrageous. The perpetrators of that and other acts
which violate international law must be brought to
justice. That is why the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is of key importance and why
Iceland supports the Syria accountability mechanism.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to end the conflict in Syria and pave the way for a
political solution — the only way forward. All parties
to the conflict have a responsibility for making peace
negotiations work. In particular, that responsibility lies
with the Al-Assad Government and its State backers,
Russia and Iran. The hopes raised by the Astana process,
and the energy put into the main United Nationssponsored Geneva peace process require concerted
political energy and will. The failure to establish a
proper political peace process will cause continued
suffering among the Syrian people and allow for the
violence to further spread into neighbouring States,
such as Lebanon.
Despite the bleak outlook in much of the region, there
is one conflict that should be amenable to resolution and
where preventing further conflict should be possible. I
am referring to the Israel-Palestine conflict. The twoState solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict is the only
viable peace plan, and it has been on the table for years.
It should therefore be a key priority of the Security
Council to protect and nurture the two-State solution,
even when both parties to the conflict seem, at times,
hell-bent on tearing that plan up. On the one hand, we
have violent acts by individual Palestinians against
Israeli citizens and the frequent firing of rockets into
Israel and that is totally unacceptable. On the other
hand, we have Israel’s constant undermining of the basis
for a two-State solution through illegal settlements.
The Security Council took important damage
control measures when it adopted resolution 2334
(2016) last December. The resolution aims to safeguard
a key prerequisite for the two-State solution — the
possibility of a viable territory for the Palestinian State.
We welcome the first quarterly report by the SecretaryGeneral, delivered orally on 23 March. The monitoring
of the implementation of the resolution must continue.
Finally, in line with paragraph 9 of resolution
2334 (2016), we would urge an intensification and
acceleration of international and regional diplomatic

S/PV.7929

efforts and support aimed at achieving, without
delay, comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to
the United States for convening today’s open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
South Africa aligns itself with a statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Nevertheless, my delegation wishes to make
remarks on six critical issues.
First, South Africa is of the view that this quarterly
debate should not stray from the core Israel-Palestine
issue that has been on the Security Council’s agenda
for over 70 years. While several Security Council
resolutions have been previously adopted — including
most recently resolution 2334 (2016) last December,
condemning the establishment of Israeli settlements
in Palestinian territory — the Council has failed to
act decisively on the matter. It remains a stain on the
Council’s record. Therefore, while there has been no
progress on the matter in the Security Council, today’s
open debate, at the very least, should provide the wider
United Nations Membership with an opportunity to
express their views on the conflict.
Secondly, on 3 April my Government issued a
press statement through which it expressed its deep
concern at Israeli plans to continue with its illegal
settlements, in defiance of resolution 2334 (2016). That
resolution affirmed that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity
and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law.
We hold the view that this development by Israel will
undermine the conditions for successful final status
negotiations and for advancing the two-State solution
through those negotiations.
Thirdly, we note with disbelief that 2017 will mark
the fiftieth year of Israel’s military conquest of Gaza,
the West Bank and East Jerusalem. In his speech to
the General Assembly in September (see A/71/PV.14),
Palestinian President Mr Abbas urged the international
community to exert greater effort than before to

17-1062961/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

establish a truly independent Palestinian State, and
called on Israel to recognize the State of Palestine
and put an end to its occupation, so that the State of
Palestine can coexist alongside the state of Israel in
peace and security as good neighbours. He said that
in the context of the fiftieth anniversary this June of
Israel’s occupation. According to reports, during that
period over 48,000 homes and related structures were
demolished in West Bank and Gaza; 586,000 acres of
Palestinian land confiscated, and 300,000 Palestinian
refugees created. On that score, South Africa remains
committed to working with Israel and Palestine, and
with the international community, to find a lasting and
durable solution to the conflict within the parameters of
international law.
Fourthly, my delegation is of the view that it may
also be useful to note in today’s debate that, as there is
increasing focus on a more effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) pertaining to women and peace
and security, the reports from the Secretariat to the
Council on the situation in the Middle East should also
regularly include a specific focus on the impact of the
conflict on women, who face specific challenges under
the occupation.
Fifthly, with regard to the central stance reflected
in the concept note (S/2017/305, annex), the upsurge
in acts of terrorism globally and in the Middle East
reaffirms that terrorism continues to be a threat
not only to international peace and security but also
to fundamental rights and freedoms. South Africa
condemns in the strongest terms possible terrorist
acts wherever they occur and by whomsoever they are
committed. We support the approach that continues to
place the United Nations at the centre of multilateral
efforts to counter terrorism. We remain firm in our
belief that no country can address the challenging and
complex threat on its own, and that terrorism will not
and cannot be defeated by military means.
Last but not least, we wish to highlight the plight
of Palestinian prisoners, especially during this time
when, according to reports, 1,100 of the 6,200 in eight
prisons in Israel are on hunger strike, in protest over
conditions in Israeli prisons. They are calling for
improved conditions, including regular family visits,
improved medical care and an end to the practice of
holding hundreds of detainees without charge.
In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes that
dialogue and negotiation remain the only way forward
62/65

20/04/2017

to finding a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Furthermore, I would like to reiterate my
delegation’s commitment to continue working within
the United Nations and other multilateral structures to
seek ways of countering the threat posed to international
peace and security by terrorist acts in an effective and
efficient manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates,
I congratulate the United States on acceding to the
presidency of the Council and appreciate its presiding
over this quarterly debate. I want to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing earlier today.
The United Arab Emirates associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. I should now like to make the following brief
points in my national capacity.
The United Arab Emirates is gravely concerned
about the violence and counter-violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and the absence of a
just solution that grants the Palestinian people their
inalienable rights. The plight of the Palestinian people
has endured for nearly seven decades, and it must stop.
To that end, we call on the international community and
the Security Council to take all measures necessary to
reach a two-State solution. Such an outcome must allow
for the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, based on the June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, pursuant to relevant resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Madrid principles.
Finding a resolution to the Palestinian question remains
a fundamental priority for the United Arab Emirates.
To that end, we echo the call in resolution 2334 (2016)
for Israel to cease its illegal settlement activities, which
pose a major obstacle to the two-State solution.
The paramount aim for the United Arab Emirates is
the promotion of security and stability in our region. In
Syria, we are particularly alarmed by the continued and
heinous use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime,
and we express our full support for the United States
military operations against military targets in Syria.
We call on all parties to work to ensure that non-State
actors and extremist militias are not in control of the
country. The international community must work
to create a space conducive for the Syrian people to
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

determine their own future. To that end, we urge the
United Nations-brokered peace talks to move forward
towards a positive outcome.
In Yemen, the Houthi militias are endangering not
only peace and security in the country, but also the peace
and security of the region, particularly through attacks
across Saudi Arabia’s borders. The only way to resolve
the conflict in Yemen is through the United Nations-led
peace process, based on the resolutions of the Security
Council, the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council
and the outcome of the National Dialogue. Until lasting
peace is achieved in Yemen, ensuring humanitarian
access to civilian populations must be the priority.
The conflicts in Syria and Yemen share one
common denominator — Iran. Iran has increasingly
caused tension and instability in our region, posing
an existential threat to the Middle East through its
expansionist policies, export of its revolution to
other countries, flagrant violations of international
sovereignty and constant interference in the internal
affairs of neighboring countries. We stress that Iran is a
State sponsor of terrorism in our region, from Hizbullah
in Lebanon and Syria to the Houthi militias in Yemen,
and terrorist groups and cells in Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait,
and Saudi Arabia. The list goes on.
The United Arab Emirates offers three proposals
with the aim of promoting security throughout the
Middle East:
First, in light of Iran’s rampant interference in the
region and flouting of numerous relevant resolutions, we
urge the Security Council and its sanctions committees
to pursue their best efforts to investigate, report and act
on Iran’s sanctions violations.
Secondly, we call for special attention to be paid to
the plight of youth across the region as a key priority.
In the absence of economic opportunities, the young
people of the region are being exploited by terrorist
organizations. This is especially true for the youth of
Palestine, who are the future and would give new life to
the peace we all seek.
Finally, in order to build the necessary momentum
for a peace process, we call for greater engagement with
regional organizations and actors, especially through
multilateral forums, such as the United Nations. In this
regard, respect for international law is key to stability,
and we call on all Member States to comply with the

S/PV.7929

decisions of the Security Council, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations.
To conclude, the United Arab Emirates confirms
the importance of these quarterly debates and the urgent
need for efforts to drive peace in the region. I wish the
United States continued success in stewarding the work
in the Chamber for the remainder of the month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s open debate, which
provides an opportunity for reflection on the situation
in the Middle East. We commend Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his very lucid briefing and for sharing his
perspective in the search for peace in the Middle East.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Uzbekistan
and Venezuela on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement,
respectively.
For too long, the situation in the Middle East has
remained a matter of concern to the international
community. Today’s debate opens against the backdrop
of a tense situation in Gaza, where a new energy crisis
is now unfolding. Nigeria recognizes the fact that
reform of the Gaza Electricity Distribution Company
is essential to improving revenue collection and
transparency, in line with international standards.
The authorities in Gaza must ensure that collection
rates are improved and that revenue collected in Gaza
is judiciously utilized in order to keep the fuel and
electricity supply flowing.
Indeed, the social, economic and political
consequences of the impending energy crisis should not
be treated with levity. Palestinians in Gaza, who live in
a protracted humanitarian crisis, can no longer be held
hostage by disagreements, divisions and closures. It is
imperative for all parties, including the international
community, to act in concert and ensure the early
resolution of the vital issue of energy for Gaza. The
United Nations must play a vital role in achieving
this objective.
Our unequivocal message, today as always, is a
simple one. There should be an independent State of
Palestine existing side by side with a secure State of
Israel, free from threat and intimidation. 1 have no doubt
that the entire Council is united on this. Speaking with

17-1062963/65

S/PV.7929

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

one voice, it is important for the Council once again to
call on the parties to resume direct negotiations without
further delay on all the permanent status issues, in
particular borders, security, the status of Jerusalem and
the return of Palestinian refugees.
Each of the parties can play an important role
in fostering peace. To that end, we call on Israel to
take concrete steps to freeze all settlement-related
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem as a
confidence-building measure. On their part, Palestinian
leaders must also signal their readiness to return to the
negotiating table by making enhanced efforts to forge
unity and deal with militancy and other internal security
challenges. It is beyond doubt that neither military
might nor militancy will resolve the protracted conflict.
It is obvious that the current stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both
sides must take concrete steps to return to negotiations
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant agreements between
them. Nigeria supports the efforts of the international
community towards establishing an environment
conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations to end
the occupation and resolve the long-running conflict.
Another phenomenon that compounds the situation
in the Middle East is the threat of terrorism. It is
expanding and intensifying, affecting a greater number
of countries in the region. Terrorist groups have laid
claim to territory and set up administrative structures.
They are gaining access to significant funding streams,
which they use to support their destablizing activities.
Criminalizing the financing of individual terrorists
and terrorist organisations, impeding the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters, implementing relevant United
Nations sanctions regime and taking multilateral action
are some of the most potent weapons in the arsenal
of the international community in the war against
extremism and terrorism. It is imperative to strengthen
international cooperation in order to effectively combat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
terrorist groups. A comprehensive approach within the
scope of the rule of law and due process, respecting
all principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international human rights and humanitarian law, is
essential. This calls for urgent action.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Haiti.
64/65

20/04/2017

Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Government of Haiti, I should like to congratulate
the Security Council on taking the initiative to meet
in open debate, which reflects the sense of urgency
aroused by the current situation in the Middle East. I
have noted with great interest the themes addressed
in the concept note (S/2017/305, annex)of the United
States presidency of the Council for April, as well as
the very relevant points raised by the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and the speakers who
have preceded me.
From one summit to another and one conference to
another, the calls for action resound everywhere, giving
new impetus to the peace efforts in the Middle East. The
hope of a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that were raised by the
1993 Oslo accords has gradually faded over the years,
undermined by the increasing mistrust between the
parties, the temptation of fait accompli and unilaterism.
Against this backdrop — marked by the total absence
of any political and diplomatic progress, new crises,
the rise of violent extremism, civil and regional wars
with their terrible human of 500,000 deaths in Syria,
their processions of horrors and their humanitarian
challenges — the current situation on the ground is no
longer sustainable, as the Special Coordinator rightly
pointed out.
The Israeli-Palestinian peace process is clearly
at an impasse. The two-State solution appears to be
more threatened every day. In addition, from Syria to
Yemen via Iraq and Libya, the region has been plagued
by a succession of crises that, by their magnitude and
severity, have eclipsed the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and obscure the continuing threat to peace in the region
and in the world.
The Republic of Haiti, faithful to the cardinal position
that it has held unwaveringly since 1947, reaffirms its
support for a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, believing as it does
that the only way to achieve that goal is through a
negotiated solution, with two States living in peace
and security within secure, recognized and guaranteed
international borders. It therefore adds its voice to all
those raised in favour of innovative initiatives aimed
at placing the Israeli-Palestinian issue at the heart of
international concerns so as to allow a rapid resumption
of negotiations in the spirit of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
17-10629

20/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The purpose of this special meeting is to highlight
the fundamental issue of peace and security in the
Middle East for the entire international community.
At the same time, it also raises the question of the
capacity of the United Nations — and, consequently,
the responsibility of the Security Council, which is
the principal guarantor of international peace and
security — to ensure its preservation, particularly in
the Middle East region.
Indeed, it has become almost a commonplace
to evoke the deadlock in the Security Council, in
particular in the light of the abusive use of the right of
veto. This paralysis is often perceived as one of the main
institutional obstacles to international peace efforts in
the Middle East. There was a striking illustration of
this in the recent debate of the Council following the
use of chemical gases against civilian populations in
Syria (see S/PV.7922). That was further proof — if it
were still needed — of the need to remedy this recurring
impasse and to provide innovative solutions to the
Council’s decision-making process so as to enable it
to fully undertake its mission of addressing the root
causes of conflicts, identifying potential threats and
acting expeditiously when circumstances require
urgent action.
It was in that spirit, moreover, that the Republic
of Haiti supported the recent French initiative, the
merits of which remain undeniable, aimed at limiting
the right of veto, particularly in the case of mass
atrocities. Here, we must salute the tireless efforts of
Liechtenstein and Mexico to that end, for it must be
emphasized that, beyond the privilege attached to it,
the veto imposes above all, for those who exercise it,
a duty and a special responsibility with regard to the
international community.
In the explosive current context of the Middle East,
where the suffering inflicted on the civilian population
by extremism, terrorism and civil wars has become

S/PV.7929

incommensurable, the Council cannot shirk its stark
obligation to address the root causes of the conflicts
in Syria, Yemen and Iraq, which are tearing the region
apart, decimating religious and ethnic minorities, and
threatening international peace and security. With
particular reference to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
the time has come to recapture the initiative and create
the conditions for a resumption of negotiations between
the parties in the light of the convergences emerging
from the relevant Council resolutions, and the steps
taken by various bodies, including the Quartet or the
recent Paris conference on the Middle East. The status
quo cannot take the place of a solution.
It is time to revive the peace process in the Middle
East. Everyone has responsibilities. In particular, each
member of the Security Council must rise above its own
biases and transcend its own interests in order to help
the parties concerned to resume the path of negotiation
and move forward on the road towards a sustainable
and comprehensive solution on the basis of a mutually
agreed framework.
The Republic of Haiti has always condemned the use
of war as a method of conflict resolution. It considers
that, in the face of the risk of heading down the slippery
slope of violence and widespread conflagration, a
dogged search for peace in the Middle East is what is
needed. The ability of the Council to adequately play its
role as an irreplaceable player in this process depends
strongly on the individual commitment of each of its
members to the ideals of peace, security, solidarity,
cooperation and development on which the United
Nations was built.
Today’s meeting could signal a new beginning,
where the destructive dynamics prevailing on the ground
are reversed and a genuine peace process based on law,
justice, security and mutual respect is undertaken in
the Middle East. Let us seize such an opportunity.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

17-1062965/65
