asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6936

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6936th meeting
Wednesday, 20 March 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Carrera Castro
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Salifou
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2013/139)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26505 (E)

*1326505*

S/PV.6936

modernization, which, if achieved, will enable
MINUSTAH to continue the process of consolidation
on which it has already embarked.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2013/139)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Haiti, Japan, Mexico, Peru, Spain and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of His Excellency Mr. Fernando
Carrera Castro, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Guatemala.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nigel Fisher,
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Interim Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/139, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fisher.
Mr. Fisher: I am pleased to have this opportunity to
provide the Security Council with an update on the most
recent developments in Haiti and to join this discussion
of the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council (S/2013/139) outlines the
MINUSTAH consolidation plan, as agreed with the
Government of Haiti. The plan outlines key objectives
for the next three years to strengthen security, the
rule of law, elections administration and institutional

2

As outlined by the Secretary-General in his report,
the period under review has been a challenging one
for Haiti, both at the political level and for the people
of Haiti. The annual economic growth rate fell well
below forecast levels. High unemployment rates
were compounded by two severe tropical storms and
regional droughts that exacerbated the high levels of
food insecurity facing many households. Agricultural
production was particularly hard-hit.
The Government responded promptly by
establishing a state of emergency to accelerate the
disbursement of funds to address emergency needs.
A modest emergency appeal was launched with the
support of the United Nations and other partners, to
which the response was encouraging. In addition, the
Government announced agricultural production and
environmental protection as national priorities for 2013.
Progress continues in finding alternative
solutions for displaced Haitians remaining in camps.
Displacement numbers continue to decline, although
conditions for residual camp populations worsen
as humanitarian resources shrink and international
operational partners end operations.
The cholera epidemic continues. Fatality and
infection rates are much reduced from peak rates,
although a recent spike in outbreaks gives cause for
concern. The Government has launched the national
eradication plan, supported by the Secretary-General’s
initiative, but significant additional financing is
required.
The Government also continued to deploy efforts
to attract investors and to stimulate economic growth
and job creation. Most recently, a new initiative was
launched to significantly reduce the time required to
register new businesses.
The security situation, in overall terms, remained
relatively stable. Nevertheless, difficult socioeconomic
conditions contributed to an increase in public protests.
The number of kidnappings declined, but homicide rates
increased, in particular driven by inter-gang violence in
parts of Port-au-Prince.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General,
the period under review was one of impasse in the
political domain, epitomized by the lack of progress

13-26505

S/PV.6936

in creating the electoral commission that would
oversee partial legislative and local elections, which
are now 16 months overdue. Despite the 24 December
agreement brokered by the religious coalition Religions
pour la Paix, and subsequent intense debate, significant
differences remain among the executive and legislative
levels and the high judicial council.

challenges. But Haiti faces many challenges beyond
the electoral process alone. Recognizing the
interdependence of security, stability and development,
the Government of Haiti and MINUSTAH have
agreed upon a conditions-based consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH, which is annexed to the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

It is worthwhile recalling the reason that elections
are now so crucial in Haiti. At the local level, the
municipal and local elections were to have been held in
November 2011. In the absence of those elections, over
the past year we have seen the replacement of some
130 elected municipal Governments with presidential
appointees.

The consolidation plan sets out four core-mandated
tasks to be achieved with the Government and, of
course, in collaboration with other national and
international partners. Those are, first, the accelerated
development of the Haitian National Police; secondly,
the strengthening of a permanent electoral commission
once it is created; thirdly, strengthening of the rule
of law and respect for human rights, with a priority
on reinforcing basic accountability and oversight
mechanisms; and, fourthly, supporting key national
and local governance reforms, as well as helping key
national stakeholders to achieve consensus on inclusive
political processes and institutional reforms — all as
necessary conditions for socioeconomic development,
which will benefit the majority of Haitian citizens.

At the legislative level, the mandate of one
third of Haiti’s Senators expired in May of last year,
considerably impairing the functioning of that body.
The issue of whether the mandates of an additional
third of the Senators expire in early 2014 or in early
2015 remains acrimonious and unresolved.
(spoke in Spanish)
The holding of credible elections in 2013 is
crucial, making it possible to bolster Haiti’s democratic
institutions, strengthen the rule of law and respond to
the urgent needs of Haitian citizens in crucial areas
including social protection and employment.
Yesterday, through one of his advisers, the President
committed to establishing a temporary electoral council
before Easter. However, establishment of the electoral
council will constitute only a first step towards holding
credible and inclusive elections.
MINUSTAH, like all of Haiti’s partners on the
ground, is urging all political actors to unite in a spirit
of strengthened collaboration to achieve an agreement
on a minimum set of necessary measures to ensure
the holding of elections before the end of the year.
That would include an agreement on the type and
date of the elections, clarification on the deadline for
senatorial terms, the adoption of an electoral law and a
law on political parties and their financing, as well as
an agreement on the modus operandi of the electoral
council.
(spoke in English)
Progress on elections has become the barometer for
measuring progress towards a more inclusive political
culture and for addressing institutional and development

13-26505

For each of the four areas, the plan sets out a
limited number of benchmarks that could realistically
be attained by 2016. The plan is of course subject to a
number of conditions, including a graduated transfer
to Haitian authorities of responsibility for maintaining
security, as well as increased independence of the
judiciary.
On the issue of good governance, I am encouraged
by the recent steps taken by the Prime Minister to
fight corruption. The early passage of anti-corruption,
procurement and tendering procedure laws that is now
before parliament would also strengthen due process
and encourage investment.
Finally, the consolidation plan foresees the further
reduction of MINUSTAH’s uniformed strength, as
part of MINUSTAH’s overall consolidation, within a
progressively smaller and less costly Mission footprint
in Haiti.
At the start of my presentation, I mentioned the
ongoing cholera epidemic and the recent spike in cases.
I also mentioned the recently launched national cholera
elimination plan, supported by the Secretary-General’s
initiative announced in December. We in the United
Nations family are committed to continued support for
the national plan and, with partners, to redouble efforts
to mobilize the significant additional resources needed

3

S/PV.6936

to fight cholera, to improve water and sanitation and to
strengthen the national health-care network. Haitians
expect no less.
MINUSTAH’s leadership is also committed
to ensuring that the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse by
our personnel is respected and enforced. It is essential
to our reputation that the conduct of our personnel
be in conformity with the highest standards and that
prompt and decisive action be taken to prevent abuse,
to investigate allegations and to impose disciplinary
measures where warranted.
(spoke in French)
The stabilization process in Haiti has encountered
a number of difficulties during the time period under
consideration. However, I remain convinced that
Haiti can and will make great progress in overcoming
political divisions by undertaking necessary and
important reforms in the institutional arena, as well as
in the area of the rule of law, and to meet the urgent
economic and social needs of its citizens.
Moving beyond the current political impasse
is crucial to consolidating democracy in Haiti.
MINUSTAH — the consolidation plan of which was
approved by the Haitian Government — is prepared
to support Haiti in assuming increasing responsibility
for its national security and the security of its citizens,
and to assist in creating consensus on an inclusive,
democratic process and institutional reforms and a
conducive environment for economic development and
the well-being of the majority of Haitians.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Fisher
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Interim Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Fisher, for his
briefing, and Ambassador Gaspar of Haiti for joining
us today. We value his engagement and partnership.
Last October (see S/PV.6842), we gathered in
this Chamber with relative optimism about the great
strides being made by the Haitian people in rebuilding
their country, including the appointment of a new
Prime Minister, the increased roles for women, and

4

constitutional amendments to strengthen the rule of
law and democracy, to name but a few. Today, Acting
Special Representative Fisher has shared the SecretaryGeneral’s observations that Haiti has missed an
opportunity to achieve meaningful progress over the
past six months. His candid findings remind us all of
the hard work that remains to be done.
As the Council noted in January, holding free, fair,
inclusive and credible local, municipal and senatorial
elections by the end of 2013 is critical. The absence of
such elections impedes stability and socioeconomic
development. The Haitian Parliament’s designation of
its three representatives to the transitional permanent
electoral council last week is an important step forward,
and we hope that it will be followed swiftly with the
actions necessary to schedule overdue elections.
Progress on that front will reassure the international
community and the Haitian people of the Government’s
commitment to democracy, transparency and good
governance. Attention can then turn in earnest to
creating jobs, fighting food insecurity and preparing
for the next natural disaster.
Another area of concern is security. Without
question, the capacity and sustainability of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) should be the single
highest priority for MINUSTAH. The ability to
transfer full security responsibility is a precondition
for further reductions in MINUSTAH forces and its
eventual withdrawal. We are encouraged by the robust
partnership between MINUSTAH and the HNP, and
support efforts on that critical priority.
Turning to reconstruction, we are encouraged by the
progress made since the 2010 earthquake. In particular
we note that the total number of displaced persons who
have sought shelter in camps has fallen to 357,000.
We expect MINUSTAH to continue working with the
Government of Haiti and international partners to find
durable solutions for the sheltering and protection of
those vulnerable individuals that remain in the camps.
With regard to efforts to eradicate cholera, we
commend the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to the issue and support the appointment
of Mr. Paul Farmer as the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser for Community-based Medicine and Lessons
from Haiti.
The United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
conditions-based consolidation plan 2013-2016 (see
S/2013/139, annex) and its focus on a core set of

13-26505

S/PV.6936

mandated tasks to be executed in partnership with the
United Nations country team, international partners
and, most importantly, the Government of Haiti. The
plan is a living document that will evolve in response
to developments on the ground, as well adjustments to
the MINUSTAH mandate. We look forward to working
with Council members to refine the plan in the coming
months.
Finally, I would like to underscore our appreciation
and support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Every day, those serving in MINUSTAH
are working side by side with the Haitian people and
Government to strengthen the country’s institutions,
provide security, protect human rights and tackle
challenges, such as forced evictions and sexual and
gender-based violence. MINUSTAH carries a heavy
responsibility, and we are grateful for the Mission’s
tireless work.
We nevertheless insist that any instance of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
is unacceptable. We expect sustained actions by
MINUSTAH’s leadership to ensure that such abuses
will not be tolerated.
We cannot let setbacks cause us to lose sight of the
most important objective — to achieve a self-sustaining,
stable and secure nation in which all of its citizens have
democratic freedoms, the protection of human rights
and the assurance of food, shelter and basic services.
Serious problems persist, but Haiti is gradually moving
forward with the help of MINUSTAH, international
partners and the hard work and determination of the
Haitian people. The United States remains firmly
committed to helping Haiti build a brighter future and
reach its full potential.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate. We thank
the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his insightful briefing.
Pakistan fully supports efforts to move Haiti
towards peace and progress, which is the collective
objective of the Haitian people, the Council and the
international community. The brave and resilient people
of Haiti have made important strides towards stability
and development. The devastating earthquake of 2010
reversed the gains achieved over many years. It is
heartening that a new and promising Haiti is emerging
from the ashes of that tragedy. Challenges persist, but

13-26505

the resolve of the Haitian people to take collective
action to rebuild their country is stronger.
Last year, Haiti achieved important political
milestones by forming a new Government, issuing
constitutional amendments and establishing a Superior
Council of the Judiciary. This year, elections of
Presidents of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies
are significant developments. Improvement in relations
between the executive and the Parliament will lead to
further political progress in the country.
We welcome the pledge made by the President
of Haiti to hold elections in 2013. The elections will
help revitalize the country’s democratic institutions.
Haiti needs international assistance in managing the
electoral process. We support assistance by the United
Nations for the Haitian authorities to progressively
assume full responsibility for the management of the
electoral process by 2016.
Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. At present,
one formed police unit from Pakistan comprising
139 personnel is serving in Haiti. All components
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) are implementing a challenging
mandate under difficult circumstances. We hope that
the drawdown of the MINUSTAH military component
will not impact the security situation in that country.
Disturbances in some areas of the country underscore
the necessity for the Mission to remain agile and capable
against an emergent situation.
The Secretary-General’s report under consideration
today (S/2013/139) has presented a condition-based
consolidation plan for MINUSTAH. It entails a
narrowing of MINUSTAH activities to core mandated
tasks in the areas of security, governance, the rule of
law and the respect for human rights. We agree with
the approach of working around a set of stabilization
benchmarks to gauge the overall progress. One of
the most significant aspects of the benchmarks is the
development of the Haitian National Police (HNP).
The success of the five-year training programme and
the strengthening of the HNP is a prerequisite for
MINUSTAH’s eventual withdrawal from Haiti.
Today’s debate should underscore the challenge
of addressing the humanitarian situation in Haiti.
The ongoing cholera epidemic, food insecurity and
extreme vulnerability to natural disasters augment the
humanitarian challenge. We urge greater coordination

5

S/PV.6936

and cohesion among different actors engaged in
humanitarian work. We also caution against donor
fatigue, which can result from a protracted crisis such
as that faced by Haiti.
Pakistan supports the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Haiti. We
remain a sincere partner of the people of Haiti in their
quest for peace, security, stability and progress.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel
Fisher, and thanking him for his informative briefing
and presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/139). At a time when we are focusing on his
work at the helm of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), we also hope to see
the appointment of a new Special Representative who
can continue working with the Haitian Government to
coordinate the ongoing efforts to establish security,
ensure peace, restore justice and respect for human
rights, and achieve sustainable development in this
beloved country. It would be an honour for Latin
America for that responsibility to go to a representative
of the region.
I would also like to emphasize that my delegation
fully subscribes to the statement to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.

along with other countries of the region and the regional
organization the Union of South American Nations, was
involved in more than 172 projects promoting the social
dimensions of cooperation. The majority of these were
aimed at improving food security and access to basic
rights in the areas of education, health care, water and
sanitation, the political and social arena, housing, and
the rights of children, young people and the disabled.
Economic cooperation has also been significant,
with projects supporting technology and production,
mainly in the agricultural sector, and in strengthening
the socioeconomic infrastructure. In the wake of the
devastation caused by the 2010 earthquake, SouthSouth cooperation in the region expanded, not only
in terms of increased funding for Haiti but also in
addressing the coordination challenges posed by the
Latin American presence there. Argentina agrees
with the Secretary-General when he says in his report
that MINUSTAH continues to be a decisive factor in
establishing a secure and stable environment in Haiti
that is conducive to a definitive momentum towards
development. For that reason, we support the Mission’s
continuing presence on the basis of its mandate from
the Security Council, as long as that presence is still
desired by the Government of Haiti.

I would like to reaffirm Argentina’s firm
commitment to Haiti’s institutional reconstruction,
democratic stability and development. While Argentina
has a long tradition of support for Haiti’s democratic
Governments, 2004 was a turning point. That year,
the social, institutional and infrastructure challenges
posed by the structural poverty from which the country
suffered culminated in the political and institutional
crisis resulting from President Aristide’s expulsion.
That led the international community to launch
MINUSTAH — a mission made up entirely, for the
first time, by the countries of our region. Argentina
contributes 573 military personnel and 14 police
officers to the Mission.

I would like to address some major issues.
First, we wish to highlight the efforts of Haitian
society and Government in tackling the effects of
the 2010 earthquake. That unprecedented disaster
added new and unique problems to the country’s
existing challenges. The earthquake and its human,
economic and environmental consequences affected
more than 3.5 million people — one third of the
population — of whom 222,570 died, 350,000 were
injured and 2.3 million were left homeless, including
more than 300,000 children and young people, leaving
thousands in camps for the internally displaced and
massive destruction of administrative, education and
health facilities. Since then, Haiti has had to deal with
the destructive effects of Hurricane Sandy and Tropical
Storm Isaac, which have caused considerable damage
to the country, especially in the farming sector, and
continue to pose enormous challenges.

Similarly, since the first South-South cooperation
activities began at the regional level, aimed at stabilizing
Haiti within the framework of MINUSTAH, the
countries of the region have put together wide-ranging
initiatives in the area of technical cooperation in various
fields of activity. Between 2005 and 2012, Argentina,

Nonetheless, despite these adversities, affirmed by
the United Nations Development Programme in its most
recent report, Haiti continues to make progress. Some
examples of this can be seen in construction; some
80 per cent of the 10 million cubic metres of rubble has
been cleared from houses and 20 per cent of it recycled.

6

13-26505

S/PV.6936

In two years, 1 million people have returned to their
homes and 400,000 jobs have been created, 40 per cent
of them for women. Many students and community
leaders have been trained in natural disaster mitigation
and reduction activities. Environmental protection
efforts have been channeled through programmes,
particularly in vulnerable regions, an area in which
women continue to play a key role in that they are
directly involved in reforestation projects.
However, as the former Head of MINUSTAH,
Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui, said in his
briefings, democracy and good governance continue
to be serious issues in Haiti. The current political
situation in Haiti is in the process of being stabilized;
while still fragile, it is promising, but it must be
strengthened. Political capacity must be strengthened,
State institutions rebuilt, socioeconomic development
promoted and investment attracted. In that context,
holding credible, fair and transparent elections this
year, in 2013, is vital to rebuilding State capacity and
restoring the rule of law, at the local level as well as
nationally.
There is no doubt that progress has been made in
standards for protecting the most vulnerable groups,
for example through a law to integrate people with
disabilities, which has been enacted in Parliament and
approved by the President. Draft legislation agreed
to by all the political parties aimed at eliminating
violence against women is pending before the
Government, which has also ratified the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. An
inter-ministerial committee on human rights has been
created and has presented a report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child in Geneva.
However, the Haitian National Police, while
gradually continuing to consolidate, does not yet
have the capacity to assume full responsibility for
providing and ensuring internal security throughout
the country. In that context, MINUSTAH, its military
and police personnel play a vital role in maintaining
security and stability in the country. The United
Nations, working with the international community in
Haiti, must continue to provide the financial, technical
and logistical capacity needed to allow Haiti to make
progress towards definitive stabilization. As the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
reported, beyond the progress made in recent years,
Haiti continues to grapple with a critical number
of needs and with the importance of building State

13-26505

capacity, without which the people’s needs cannot be
met. To cite only one figure, a seriously important issue
is the deterioration in food security, affecting at least
2.1 million people, who will be at genuinely severe
nutritional risk if steps are not taken to address the
problem in time.
We understand that the time has come to
consolidate progress in the area of resettlement. To that
end, we believe that the international community must
renew its efforts to support the Haitian Government
in ensuring decent living conditions for those who are
still living in camps and in promoting programmes of
return. According to the Secretary-General’s report,
however, the 2012 consolidated appeal finished the year
at 46 per cent of its funding level, with the number of
international non-governmental organizations present
in Haiti declining by 57 per cent since 2010. Those
figures are truly in contradiction with our regional and
international responsibility to promote social, economic
and institutional development in Haiti.
In recent days, we have heard the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights welcome the
initiative in Port-au-Prince to try the ex-dictator of
Haiti, Jean-Claude Duvalier. Duvalier, who was also
known as “Baby Doc”, has been indicted for crimes
against humanity, including the murder or exile of more
than 30,000 people during his reign. Furthermore, in his
report to the Human Rights Council, the Independent
Expert Mr. Michel Forst identified, among the factors
threatening the establishment of effective democracy in
Haiti, political or partisan considerations in appointing
magistrates, the weakness of the judiciary and the reign
of impunity. In that respect, he reported that prison
conditions have not improved and that the treatment
of prisoners continues to be inhumane, degrading and
cruel. The Expert noted that incidents of police brutality
and harassment occur frequently, and he expressed
his belief that the impunity of human rights violators
indicated a return of fear among the population and that
the authorities needed to act decisively to resolve this
problem.
Moreover, we are concerned that the financing
available for the development of the Haitian National
Police remains insufficient. The Police is a key
institution for progress in the area of stabilization, as it
is responsible for maintaining security. Similarly, it is
important to strengthen Haitian institutions with a view
to improving the process of formulating policies and

7

S/PV.6936

relations between the State and citizens, which have
been undermined in recent months.
With regard to the future and the social and political
situation in Haiti, we understand the complexity and the
difficulty of the issues at hand. We are concerned about
the reduction in financing available for humanitarian
assistance, because it puts all that has been achieved
at risk. However, we also have encouraging news. One
million displaced persons were able to leave the camps
between 2010 and early 2013, which reflects a general
reduction of 77 per cent. According to the report,
that reduction can be attributed largely to the return
programmes undertaken by the Government with the
support of the United Nations. However, it is alarming
to note that 84 per cent of the population remaining
in the camps are people who were displaced by the
earthquake, a great number of whom remain dependent
on assistance for basic survival.
We underscore the commitment that should
be undertaken by all Haitian political and social
actors to a frank dialogue to lay the foundations
for an agreement that will allow the transition from
transitional to permanent electoral council to be
completed and elections to be held this year. In parallel
to the agreement on the appointment of members to
the legislative and judiciary branches, it is important
to designate representatives of the executive branch
as soon as possible. The commitment of Haitians to
their own legislative mandates can only encourage
the international community to continue supporting
the strengthening of the country. In that regard, we
welcome the Haitian Government’s commitment to
contributing almost half of its electoral budget and
the decision of the United Nations to provide support
for the upcoming elections and to help the Haitian
authorities over the next three years to progressively
assume full responsibility for managing the electoral
process in 2016.
We believe that progress in the area of stabilization
should be accompanied by growth and development in
the country based on priorities set by the Government
and people of Haiti. With regard to the Mission’s
activities, we welcome the presentation of the first
draft of MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan and the fact
that the plan enjoys the support of the Government of
Haiti. We understand that the plan must be developed
within the framework of the Mission’s mandate on
the basis of the evolution of conditions on the ground.
In that connection, we believe that actions related to

8

governance should contribute to consensus-building
without overstepping the functions of Haitian
institutions. We hope that the plan will continue to be
developed in close coordination with the Government
and people of Haiti, pursuant to their own priorities.
I conclude by reaffirming Argentina’s unshakeable
commitment to the people of Haiti, democracy, human
rights and the country’s development. That commitment
will continue to be manifest within the Security Council,
to which Argentina has belonged as a non-permanent
member since January 2013. We have been supported
by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
in promoting the interests of our region. In that context,
promoting human rights, democracy and development
in Haiti are all priorities.
I would like to honour the work of the peacekeepers
in Haiti, and especially the Argentine peacekeepers,
whose conduct has been impeccable. We are proud
that our country has not received a single complaint of
misconduct or the commission of crimes.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2013/139)
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and to the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fisher, for his briefing.
I would also like to commend the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
country team, which continue to play a crucial role in
supporting the recovery and stabilization of Haiti.
In resolution 2070 (2012), the Security Council
recognized that Haiti had continued to make
considerable strides since the tragic earthquake of
January 2010 and had achieved over the past year a
number of political milestones indicative of progress in
the process of stabilization. We note that in the period
under review, the overall security situation in the
country remained relatively stable, that the performance
of the Haitian National Police (HNP) continued to
improve and considerable results were achieved in
fighting crime. Significant strides were made regarding
the resettlement of persons displaced by the 2010
earthquake, and the Government initiated measures to
respond to grievances linked to the increased cost of
living and food insecurity. We also note the signing of
the finalized integrated strategic framework for 20132016 between the United Nations and the Government of
Haiti, which captures comprehensive shared objectives
for the long-term development of Haiti.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

At the same time, as the Secretary-General notes
in his report, the period under review posed numerous
challenges to the stabilization process in Haiti. Indeed,
more should be done by the national authorities and the
international community in the broad interest of the
Haitian people. Needless to say, political stability in
the country is a key priority for the stabilization and
development of Haiti. The tension in relations between
the country’s executive branch and Parliament remains
one of the major obstacles to greater stability and
prosperity. It is therefore important that all political
actors in Haiti redouble their efforts to preserve
the progress achieved over the past year and take a
responsible approach to engaging in constructive
dialogue to address their differences in a spirit of
compromise. Such dialogue is particularly important
for launching the long-overdue electoral process and
holding free, fair, inclusive and credible elections as
soon as possible.
It is essential that the international community
continue to encourage political dialogue among the
branches of Government and other key political actors.
The United Nations should support the upcoming
elections and progressively strengthen the capacity of
the Haitian authorities to assume full responsibility for
national ownership of the organization and conduct of
elections. Further efforts are also needed to strengthen
key rule of law institutions, reform the security sector,
attract investment, promote sustainable development
and advance the democratic agenda.
The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti continues to
show signs of improvement as the number of internally
displaced persons living in camps declines. However,
significant humanitarian challenges remain. Continued
strong international engagement and efforts by the
Haitian authorities are crucial to ensuring that all
pressing humanitarian needs are met. We note in that
regard that, in consultation with the Government, the
United Nations and the humanitarian actors in the
country further developed a humanitarian action plan
for 2013, focusing on food insecurity and cholera.
The role of MINUSTAH in the maintenance of
overall security and stability remains vital, and the
improvement and the performance of national parties is
partly attributable to support provided by Mission forces.

13-26505

Close cooperation between the HNP and MINUSTAH
is critical to effectively addressing security challenges
and to ensuring that the police move forward to reach
the capacity necessary to handle its full responsibility
for the provision of internal security. The continued
assistance of the international community and funding
remain critical to supporting professional, reliable and
accountable police forces.
In concluding, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for submitting a conditions-based consolidation
plan for MINUSTAH in response to the request of the
Security Council in its resolution 2070 (2012). We
believe that the plan will enable MINUSTAH to operate
more efficiently and cost-effectively, that is, to focus
on the most critical aspects of stability, a progressive
transition of functions to national authorities, and the
provision of assistance to international partners.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to join
others in thanking Mr. Nigel Fisher for his insightful
briefing. I congratulate him for the work he is doing as
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti.
Rwanda commends the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for the role it is playing
in assisting Haitians to rebuild their country. We renew
our support for its work in various areas, including the
maintenance of public order, the promotion of human
rights and the strengthening the rule of law.
We fully support the Haitian people on their road
to reconstruction, democracy and development. We
are convinced that Haitians can overcome the current
challenges through the solidarity and active support
of the international community. However, political
progress requires the Government and all political actors
in Haiti to come together and form a broader political
pact based on a common set of national priorities, in
accordance with the country’s Constitution.
The success already achieved in rebuilding the
country runs the risk of being eroded by the lack of
progress in establishing key Government institutions,
especially the Electoral Council. Free, fair and credible
elections are paramount if a Government that can answer
to the many challenges being faced by Haitians is to be
established and if trust in Government institutions is
eventually to be restored. It is therefore imperative that
all stakeholders within the legislative and executive
branches of Government make the necessary concessions
to ensure that agreement is reached to establish the

9

S/PV.6936

Electoral Council, reinforce good governance and set
in motion the reforms needed to rebuild and consolidate
stability and encourage outside investment. In that
regard, support and assistance from the international
community, the United Nations and the international
financial institutions remain indispensable and critical
to enabling the country to meet the aspirations of its
people.
We note that the security situation remains
relatively stable and that the number of kidnappings
has decreased. However, we express concern over the
increase in the number of homicides and continued
civil unrest, particularly regular anti-Government
demonstrations. As one of the police-contributing
countries in MINUSTAH, with a formed police unit
of 160 police officers, we recognize the importance
of professionalizing the Haitian police force in order
to tackle those security challenges. We call upon the
international community to continue providing support
in that regard.
We emphasize that security must be accompanied by
socioeconomic development. Therefore, our collective
reflection on Haiti today should take into account the
interlinkages between security and development as key
components of sustainable peace. It is therefore essential
that efforts on the security front be accompanied by
even stronger support by the international community
to socioeconomic development and the strengthening of
institutional capabilities.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, we of
course remain concerned by the prevalence of cholera
and we commend the Government of Haiti for its
national eradication plan against the disease. We are
alarmed by the aftermath of the earthquake and the
deteriorating food security situation in the country,
which has been aggravated by drought, hurricane
Sandy and tropical storm Isaac. We take note of the
humanitarian action plan for 2013, which requires an
estimated $144 million. We call upon the international
community to continue to extend solidarity to the
Haitian people. Rwanda also expresses concern over
the human rights situation in Haiti, particularly with
regard to sexual and gender-based violence, and we
urge the Government to establish mechanisms that
protect women and children against such violence.
In conclusion, the recent report on the current
conditions on the ground reflects a country that has made
progress (S/2013/139). However, a strong commitment

10

by the Haitian Government and political forces, as
well as continued support from the international
community, is needed to accompany that progress
towards sustainable peace, stability and socioeconomic
development for Haiti.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing. We applaud the entire
team of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its valuable contribution
towards promoting stability and development in Haiti.
More than three years after the devastating
earthquake, Haiti continues to face significant political,
economic and other challenges. The hard-won progress
in the political arena in past years has been giving way
to setbacks and uncertainties. The continued stand-off
among political actors and the lack of trust in the rule
of law in society are a source of serious concern.
The socioeconomic situation in Haiti also remains
fragile, with its food insecurity, cholera epidemic, and
weak health-care and humanitarian-relief systems. The
social and economic grievances have often led to civil
unrest and rising crime, which put a heavy burden on the
country’s stabilization process. Given the complexity of
the challenges Haiti faces, a comprehensive approach
still remains important.
On the political front, it is imperative that the
long overdue elections be held soon in order to enable
the Haitian people to have a credible and broadbased political mechanism at hand. The agreement
on the establishment of the transitional college of the
Permanent Electoral Council is welcome. However, it
is disappointing that the body has yet to materialize.
We encourage all the political stakeholders in Haiti
to step up their efforts with a view to finalizing the
appointment of the members of that electoral body and
hold fair and inclusive elections within the earliest
possible time frame this year.
The strengthening of the rule of law and the
relevant institutions is a prerequisite for the protection
and promotion of human rights in the country. We are
particularly concerned about the continuing sexual
violence against women. Despite the growing awareness
of its seriousness, a number of women and girls are still
being victimized through such crimes. What is worse is
that the victims’ acute suffering often goes unreported,
while perpetrators are not properly investigated and
prosecuted.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

The police and judicial response to sexual violence
must be strengthened. MINUSTAH needs to further
enhance its training programme for the National Police
in the field of sexual violence and in respect to broader
human rights concerns. Moreover, education and
awareness campaigns in society could help break the
culture of silence and impunity on the issue.
To ensure better security and a long-term basis for
development in Haiti, capacity-building of the police is a
vital requirement. Despite the continued improvements
in its performance, we note the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the current capacity of the
National Police is not yet sufficient for it to assume full
responsibility for security throughout the country.
As MINUSTAH moves to a more focused and
action-oriented phase of its operations, it is noteworthy
that the consolidation plan for the Mission identifies
the capacity-building of the police as one of its highest
priorities. Indeed, the readiness of the National Police to
ensure the security of the country will be a precondition
for MINUSTAH’s eventual withdrawal from Haiti.
We appreciate the role of MINUSTAH in assisting
Haiti in the areas of recovery, political stability and
development. In that regard, we fully support the
ongoing reconfiguration and consolidation process
of the Mission. The international community should
continue its support for and engagement in Haiti, so
that the country can overcome the current challenges
facing it and achieve recovery and stabilization in the
near future. The Republic of Korea will continue to
give its support to the Government and the people of
Haiti in their endeavour.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I am pleased to join the Council for today’s
debate. This provides me the first opportunity, since I
took office several weeks ago as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, to take part in a debate of the
Council and thereby renew the political support of my
Government for this body.
Moreover, the issue that we have gathered here
today to address — the future of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) — holds
a special place in our own foreign policy agenda.
MINUSTAH is the only peacekeeping operation in our
region — Latin America and the Caribbean — and,
as a troop-contributing country, we feel a deep sense
of connection with the people and the Government of
Haiti.

13-26505

We thank the Russian Federation for having
convened this debate, and we commend the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nigel Fisher, and all the staff of MINUSTAH for
the important work they are doing in Haiti in the face of
major challenges. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2013/139), which informs our debate
today.
We have mixed reactions to the content of the
report. On the one hand, it reports gradual progress
in certain areas and presents us, in the annex, with
an encouraging plan for the period 2013-2016. On
the other hand, we note with concern the persistent
uncertainty surrounding the pending elections, which
are 16 months overdue. We note also that there is a lack
of political consensus for a national unity dialogue and
that, as the report stresses, rule-of-law initiatives have
yet to produce significant and sustainable change. For
instance, the Haitian National Police is not yet in a
position to assume full responsibility for the provision
of security throughout the country, and food insecurity
poses a serious threat to social stability.
More specifically, we note, first, that the key
short-term priority is the holding of local, municipal
and legislative elections. Postponing them yet again
could jeopardize the Haitian rule of law. That is why
we welcomed the Security Council’s press statement of
28 January 2013 (SC/10901), and we call once again for
the urgent holding of credible, inclusive and transparent
elections, in accordance with the Constitution. We
note with appreciation the recent designation by
the legislative branch of its representatives to the
transitional college of the permanent electoral council.
We hope that this process will be completed as soon
as possible and that, once established, it will show the
necessary independence.
Secondly, we support the development of a
political agreement, and we are concerned that key
decision-making on the issue is being undermined
by the lack of consensus at the national level. In
Guatemala, our Government has been able to work
in an inclusive manner through the identification of
shared priorities and by obtaining commitments from
major stakeholders for the approval of an agreement
for justice and security in Guatemala. My country is
prepared to share its experience in that regard with the
sisterly Republic of Haiti.

11

S/PV.6936

Thirdly, we agree with the Secretary-General that in
order to reverse the rising trend of major crime in Haiti,
especially those mentioned earlier by the Republic of
Korea, including sexual violence against women and
children, it is important that the Government continue
to strengthen rule-of-law institutions and step up its
efforts to combat impunity. The establishment of sound
rule-of-law institutions, including the police and the
judiciary, requires that they be allowed to operate as
independently as possible.
Fourthly, we continue to be concerned about the
situation of the more than 300,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) living in camps. We encourage the
Government, with the support of the international
community, to improve conditions in the remaining IDP
camps and to continue advancing with reconstruction
efforts.
In addition, I wish to express our full support for
the Secretary-General’s initiative of 11 December 2012
for the elimination of cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we
deem particularly suitable the appointment of Dr. Paul
Farmer, as the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser
for Community-based Medicine and Lessons from
Haiti. Let me also express our satisfaction at the recent
signing of the new integrated strategic framework for
the period 2013-2016. In that context, we are concerned
that last year’s Haiti’s flash appeal is still far from
meeting its goals.
Turning now to the consolidation plan, we welcome
the concise version that we have received, which is
still being examined by our national authorities. We
note the natural assumption that the Mission marks
2016 as its horizon. While that assumption is a step
in the right direction, we believe that the criteria to
be taken into account for an exit strategy include the
objective conditions that will enable the United Nations
to withdraw responsibly from the country. Those
conditions for the strategy need to be flexible and
adapted to the realities on the ground in Haiti.
In that respect, we would refer to paragraph 17 of the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General. We have
some doubts about the usefulness of projecting figures
involving uniformed personnel, and their budgetary
implications, on the basis of hypothetical scenarios.
Therefore, we would appreciate more information about
the criteria used to propose a 30 per cent drawdown,
since the implementation of such a proposal could be
premature in relation to the realities on the ground. We

12

make this point because we deem it very important that
MINUSTAH be provided with adequate resources to
fulfil its mandate.
Likewise, we think that there is a sequence that
must be corrected with regard to the mandate of
MINUSTAH, since the budget is approved in May and
the mandate is renewed in October. A more logical
approach would be for the mandate to determine
the budget, and not the other way around. With the
consolidation plan still under development and as we
cannot be certain of electoral logistical requirements,
we trust that there will not be any further reductions in
the number of uniformed personnel.
Finally, we believe that progress in Haiti will
depend on the convergence of several factors: adequate
resources; the effective leadership of MINUSTAH;
and the political will of Haiti, the country hosting, and
benefiting from the support of, the Mission. We deem
the latter — the political will and the political efforts of
the Haitian Government — the most important.
If the necessary basis for such convergence is
lacking, then any involvement of the United Nations will
face major obstacles, both in terms of achieving success
and of maintaining a secure environment. Guatemala
is proud to have been part of MINUSTAH since its
inception, and we will continue our commitment to
the people and the Government of Haiti as long as
necessary.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me also to thank the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing
to the Council and for his commitment at the head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), whose significant work we commend.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.
Over the three years since the tragic earthquake of
January 2010, Haitians have begun the long and difficult
reconstruction of their country with the support of
the international community and the United Nations.
Significant progress has been made. The number of
displaced persons living in camps has decreased by
77 per cent. Rebuilding has moved forward thanks
also to the activity of the MINUSTAH military
engineering units and the many quick-implementation
projects led by the Mission. Thanks to the combined
work of MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police,

13-26505

S/PV.6936

characterized by greater information-sharing and
an increased number of joint operations, the security
situation has stabilized. On the political front, the
President and the elected Government have been able
to take up their functions.
However, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/139) notes that, over the past six months, the
stabilization process has encountered many difficulties.
The country again suffered serious damage in the wake
of Hurricane Sandy. The socioeconomic situation
continues to be characterized by poverty, which
affects three-quarters of the population. The human
rights situation leaves much to be desired. Despite the
praiseworthy work of the MINUSTAH child protection
team, many forms of violence, including sexual
violence, have been perpetrated against children. We
also note with concern the reference in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the recruitment of children by armed
gangs in Cité Soleil.
Building the rule of law is moving forward with
difficulty. In that regard, the appearance of former
President Jean-Claude Duvalier before the Court
of Appeal in Port-au-Prince on 28 February was a
significant test. As the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, recalled, the State has the
obligation to ensure that there is no impunity for the
serious human rights violations perpetrated in the past.
The continuing differences between the executive
power and the opposition parliamentarians continue to
affect the country negatively. That structural paralysis
of the institutions is certainly one of the root causes
of the problems facing Haiti today. The holding of
elections, initially set for 2012, is essential in order
to move forward the necessary reforms. I can only
echo the Secretary-General, who urgently calls on the
Haitian authorities “to spare no effort in ensuring a free
and fair environment for the holding of credible and
inclusive elections as soon as possible”. (S/2013/139,
para. 61) Following the agreement of 24 December
2012, it is crucial to finalize the establishment of the
temporary Electoral Council so as to launch an electoral
process that has been too long in coming.
Luxembourg remains committed to helping Haiti
to overcome the challenges linked to the humanitarian
situation and the reconstruction of the country.
The commitments that we undertook in 2010 will
be honoured and we encourage the international
community to remain fully mobilized. Food security is

13-26505

worsening. A high number of children under 5 continue
to suffer from malnutrition. The scourge of cholera
continues to claim victims and requires decisive action
as the rainy season approaches. In that regard, we
commend the initiative to eliminate cholera launched
by the Secretary-General on 11 December 2012. The
international community has the moral responsibility
to help the affected population.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm Luxembourg’s
support for the conditions-based consolidation plan for
the stabilization of Haiti, which provides for focusing
MINUSTAH’s efforts on a limited number of core tasks,
achievable in four areas within a reasonable time frame.
They are police training, electoral capacity-building,
the rule of law and human rights, and governance.
However, we would like to underscore, as indicated
in the plan, that such objectives can be achieved only by
Haitian officials being even more resolutely committed
to working for the good of the country and with a longterm partnership between the international community
and Haiti. In that connection, we commend the
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016, drawn
up by the United Nations and the Haitian Government.
We hope that it will soon lead to tangible developments.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Fisher, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/139). I
express our support to him for the success of his task. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Fernando Carrera Castro,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, at this
debate.
As we have seen over the past months, the Republic
of Haiti remains vulnerable, in particular with regard to
climate. While the country continues to struggle against
the devastating effects of the 2010 earthquake, it has
suffered in the wake of Hurricane Sandy and tropical
storm Isaac, which affected more than 2 million people.
Moreover, three years after the 2010 earthquake, it is
clearly noticeable that the international community’s
humanitarian support in Haiti is diminishing despite
the fact that the stabilization process has not yet been
finalized. This quarterly debate of the Council on the
developing situation in Haiti should enable us to draw
attention to the various plans and strategies under way
that are not always supported by adequately funding
from the international community. We must ensure that
the achievements of these past years are sustained.

13

S/PV.6936

On the political front, Morocco welcomes the many
positive developments towards finalizing the necessary
institutional reforms to strengthen the rule of law in
Haiti. At the same time, as the Secretary-General notes,
complications linked to establishing the temporary body
of the Permanent Electoral Council continue to push
back the date for the legislative, local and municipal
elections — a phase that remains crucial.
On the security front, the situation remains stable
despite an increase in demonstrations and some civil
disputes. In the light of the consolidation plan and the
gradual drawdown of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) troops, we must
continue to underscore in parallel the strengthening of
the police force. In that connection, we commend the
increased effectiveness of the Haitian National Police,
which continues to build its capacities with the support
of MINUSTAH. Moreover, the rate of recruitment
could be significantly sped up in order to achieve the
objectives of the 2012-2016 plan, namely, incraeasing
the force to 15,000 police officers.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, despite
the fact that the number of people living in the camps
continues to fall, partly thanks to the programmes
launched by the Government with United Nations
support, the Secretary-General’s report notes with
concern the worsening humanitarian situation in the
country. With the withdrawal of more than half of
the non-governmental organizations present in 2010
and many partners following the fall in available
funding, the provision of basic services in the camps
has considerably lessened. That is further exacerbated
by the risk of a food crisis, which cannot be ignored,
all the more since the recent Hurricane Sandy had a
significant impact on the country’s agricultural land.
Combating the risk of food insecurity is, moreover, a
core aspect of the humanitarian plan for 2013, which
requires $144 million in funding.
Another key aspect of that plan is the fight against
cholera and better sanitary conditions. Despite a
decrease in the number of infected persons, there is a
real risk of a new outbreak since the departure of many
humanitarian groups and the lack of financial resources
prevent the existing infrastructure from functioning.
In order to optimize MINUSTAH’s presence in
line with the country’s needs, while keeping in mind
the transition phase of the Mission, a consolidation
plan for its withdrawal must be drawn up. We thank

14

the Secretariat for the report’s annex, which clearly
present a concise and strategic version of that plan,
which holistically addresses the main difficulties still
to be overcome.
I should like to revert to one of the essential
elements that will affect of the withdrawal schedule
of MINUSTAH, which is the ability of the Haitian
National Police to guarantee security throughout
the country. We are encouraged by the fact that the
various operations under way to respond to the recent
resurgence of organized crime are being led by the
National Police, with the support of the Mission’s police
and military components. We call on MINUSTAH to
maintain its support in order to ensure that the Haitian
National Police attains the objectives set down in the
consolidation plan. We also welcome MINUSTAH’s
support in other key security sectors, such as capacitybuilding in the judiciary and penal sectors.
Morocco has always stood by Haiti and its people.
Morocco is committed to continuing to help the country
to strengthen its capacities and build a prosperous future.
More than three years after the terrible earthquake that
shook the country, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Haitian authorities in various key areas for the
reconstruction and stabilization of the country. The
support and assistance of the international community
and the United Nations remain essential to allowing
Haiti to restore normalcy and meet the aspirations of
its people.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Allow
me to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Fisher, for his briefing.
The security situation in Haiti has been stable
of late. The development and reconstruction process
has moved forward. China welcomes the Haitian
Government’s successful hosting of an intersessional
meeting of the Caribbean Community in February.
At the same time, Haiti faces political, economic and
humanitarian difficulties and still has much to do to
return to the path of development. To that end, Haiti
needs the international community’s support.
We hope that the Haitian Government and the
international community, as well as the Haitian
political parties, will pursue the democratic process
through reconciliation so as to guarantee the smooth
conduct of free, fair and credible elections by 2014 and
to consolidate the country’s acheivements to date.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

Hurricane Sandy ravaged Haiti, but the country
is also encountering difficulties in improving living
conditions, creating employment and promoting
sustainable development. We call on the international
community to pay close attention to the reconstruction
efforts in Haiti, uphold its aid commitments, and improve
the effectiveness of assistance so as to contribute
constructively to the rebuilding and development of the
country.

Political fragility is the most likely source of instability
for Haiti. Efforts to support the political process must
continue to be a priority. The appointment of a permanent
electoral council will be a crucial step towards securing
future stability. This needs to be completed quickly
so that the long-overdue Senate and local elections
can take place. It is vital that the permanent electoral
council be able to act independently and that it be given
the funding to do so.

China supports the Secretary-General’s initiative
to eradicate cholera in Haiti. We welcome the efforts
and contributions of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti to peace and stability in the country. We
note the consolidation plan 2013-2016 for MINUSTAH,
submitted by the Secretary-General, and we hope that
MINUSTAH will continue to carry out its Security
Council mandate by helping Haiti to move forward
with the political process, maintaining the security and
stability of the country, and bolstering the rule of law
and institutional stability.

The second area of concern is security, and
specifically the capacity and capability of the Police.
We continue to believe that building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police, both operational and
institutional, should be MINUSTAH’s highest priority.
Therefore, we are concerned to see that recruitment to
the Haitian National Police is below the levels required
to meet the target of 15,000 police officers by 2016.
We would be interested in understanding why this is
the case. Is there a lack of volunteers? Is it because the
training infrastructure needs to be improved, or is it
that MINUSTAH is not giving sufficient priority to
the task? If recruitment and training continue at the
current rate, how far below the target would we be in
2016? What annual recruitment rate is now going to
be required to hit the target, and is that realistic and
achievable?

Regarding the Mission’s drawdown, we need to
hear the views of the various parties involved so as to
better guide this process.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fisher
for his briefing.
At our last Security Council discussion of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in October 2012 (see S/PV.6842), I
was cautiously optimistic about progress in Haiti and
noted the important contribution that MINUSTAH had
made to that progress. I tempered that with concern
about politicial inertia blighting the decision-making
necessary to the country’s development.
Since then, we note that some important steps have
been taken. In particular, the uniformed component of
MINUSTAH has been reduced without any negative
impact on the overall security and stability of the
country, and MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan has
focused the Mission’s activities on a number of core
objectives. The final aim of the consolidation plan is for
Haiti to have sufficient capacity to tackle its challenges
itself. If the Government of Haiti takes the necessary
concrete steps, we believe that that goal is attainable.
Notwithstanding this progress, there are two
important areas of concern where we do need to see
urgent progress. The first is the political situation.

13-26505

We urge MINUSTAH to focus its resources on
this effort in order to support the recently adopted
Haitian National Police development plan. The Haitian
National Police must also meet appropriate human
rights standards if it is to win the confidence of the
Haitian people. Effective oversight, transparency and
zero tolerance for corruption will all be essential. The
National Police should be able to rely on the support of
all political parties.
Capacity-building in the justice sector, regionally
and at the institutional level, is also necessary to
complement the development of the police. We call
on the public authorities to fulfil their constitutional
obligations and duties, including the efficient and
transparent operation of the judicial process, with no
impunity, and an improvement in the management of
the prison service.
In conclusion, MINUSTAH continues to achieve
some encouraging results, but we have outlined two areas
of concern — politics and police recruitment — that
must be addressed. I would welcome the views of the

15

S/PV.6936

Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on those points.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Fisher, for his intervention. I endorse the
statements to be given by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends.
I share the doubts that were just expressed by
my British colleague on the topics of elections and
the police. At our most recent debate in October (see
S/PV.6842), I noted the progress that had been made on
the political and institutional levels. Unfortunately, the
Secretary General’s report before us today (S/2013/139)
reminds us that not all the hopes we had formed have
materialized. I would especially like to recall the
words of the press statement issued by the Council on
28 January adopted by this same Council on January
28. The local and partial legislative elections have
been postponed for too long. I1 is essential that they
be held this year and that they be free, inclusive and
credible. We call on all parties concerned to appoint
without delay all members of the transitional board of
the permanent electoral council.
We are also concerned by other information
contained in the report on the proliferation of contested
appointments, recent statements concerning the freedom
of the press, and more generally systemic deficiencies
in the area of human rights. We also note the relatively
disappointing economic and fiscal forecasts that,
coupled with difficulties related to climate — as noted
by a number of my colleagues — may also explain
the alarming multiplication of demonstrations of an
economic and social character.
MINUSTAH has provided Haiti with 10 years of
relative calm without political violence. However, this
calm, in large part due to the deterrent presence of the
Mission, does not reflect real, fundamental progress
allowing the Haitian National Police to ensure security
and stability on its own. We support the guidelines
proposed by the Haitian authorities for the period 2012
to 2016, including the goal of increasing the number of
police officers from 10,000 to 15,000. However, there is
reason to doubt how realistic that goal is. MINUSTAH
must remain engaged in that collective effort.
Lastly, we support the commitment of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General’s personal efforts to
help Haiti eradicate cholera. We believe that is not an

16

unattainable goal. We also think that, in the short term,
that could include the targeted measures on which we
are currently working with the Haitian authorities.
MINUSTAH must continue to adapt to
developments in the situation, both in terms of nature
and scope, so as to fulfil its dual objective, namely, to
contribute to the maintenance of peace as well as to
promoting Haitian national ownership by strengthening
the rule of law and its major instruments, that is, the
police and justice sectors.
Obviously, we must avoid a hasty departure of
the Mission. However, the indefinite continuation of a
peacekeeping mission of this magnitude is not an option
either. The departure of MINUSTAH should not be a
taboo, but that prospect should serve as a catalyst. We
must define and create the conditions for its success.
When must contemplate a withdrawal date, along with
a desired end result and a post-MINUSTAH presence
for the United Nations.
In that regard, we welcome the consolidation plan
set out in the report of the Secretary-General. That
plan provides for the Mission a credible time horizon,
for we owe Haitians clarity as to what we can achieve
in a reasonable time frame. We fully endorse the four
priority areas that have been identified, as well as an
approach based on metrics for calibrating the evolution
of the Mission.
I should like to conclude by commending
МINUSTAH staff for their dedication. I also commend
the Acting Special Representative for his energetic
efforts in this period of transition in the Mission.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also thank Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fisher for his
briefing on the situation in Haiti. I would like to convey
Australia’s deep gratitude to all the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for their hard work in consolidating stability in Haiti.
We acknowledge the efforts made towards recovery and
stabilization in Haiti over recent years, in particular
in the face of a range of complex challenges and the
impact of natural disasters such as Hurricane Sandy
and Tropical Storm Isaac.
In order to address the difficult challenges ahead,
it is vital that Haiti build, with the continued support of
the international community, a system of Government
that functions effectively and can build the capacities of

13-26505

S/PV.6936

the country, and thereby serves the needs of the Haitian
population. In that context, we share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General and others about
the ongoing political stalemate in Haiti, including in the
establishment of the provisional electoral council. The
stalemate erodes confidence in the political system,
could undermine the prospects for making further
development gains and could potentially undermine the
valuable progress achieved so far. Credible, free and
fair elections in 2013 are critical for Haiti’s recovery,
reconstruction and development. We urge that there
be progress in appointing members to the provisional
electoral council, so that partial legislative, municipal
and local elections can be organized and then a
permanent electoral council established.
Acknowledging the close link between political
stability and economic development, we welcome
Prime Minister Lamothe’s statement that Haiti is open
for business. But we note that political stability will
strengthen that prospect.
The support that MINUSTAH is providing to
prepare for elections must continue, including the
technical assistance provided to electoral council staff.
However, responsibility for overcoming the political
impasse rests with Haiti’s leaders themselves and will
require new patterns of political consensus-building
across key issues.
While we welcome the overall stable security
situation, the marked increase in major crimes in the
second half of last year is a concern. Efforts to support
the protection of vulnerable groups in Haiti therefore
remain an important part of the work of MINUSTAH. In
particular, as others have mentioned, sexual and genderbased violence continues to have a devastating impact
on vulnerable groups, particularly women and children
in impoverished districts, displaced persons camps and
remote areas. It is important that the capacity of both
the Haitian National Police and the judicial system be
built to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of sexual
and gender-based violence.
More broadly, a functional legal system is vital
to ensuring accountability, upholding human rights
and delivering access to justice — and to building
confidence among citizens in the institutions of the
State. We support the Secretary-General’s proposal
to develop a national justice development plan to
strengthen the rule of law and build judicial capacity.

13-26505

Although there has been a drop in cholera infection
rates, we remain concerned about the epidemic and
the increasing cholera mortality rates. Following the
devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy, Australia
we wre pleased to contribute to the the Caribbean
Community progreamme for the provision of drinking
water, sanitation, et cetera for Haitians at risk from
cholera. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
initiative for the elimination of cholera in Haiti and the
leadership of Dr. Paul Farmer as his Special Adviser.
We welcome the work that is beeing done to
develop a plan for MINUSTAH’s reconfiguration and
conditions-based consolidation, as well as the inclusion
of the consolidation plan in the annex to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/139). The definition of core
tasks for the Mission will enable it to take forward its
work in partnership with Haitian authorities in areas
in which it can have the most positive impact. In our
view, the four areas of focus constitute an appropriate
consolidation of MINUSTAH’s efforts. An important
aspect in taking forward the plan will be to identify
and review appropriate measures for assessing progress
against key benchmarks, especially as we continue to
review MINUSTAH’s mandate and force levels.
Policing is particularly important, as is often the
case with stabilization missions — in this case, building
the capacity of the National Police to gradually assume
full responsibility for security throughout the country.
We recognize the joint efforts of the international
community and MINUSTAH in assisting the Haitian
National Police to meet major benchmarks set out in its
five-year development plan.
Creating durable and transformative change such as
that being undertaken by Haiti takes time. Strengthening
institutions and establishing good governance to
the stage of providing security, justice and jobs and
breaking cycles of poverty and violence is a long-term
effort. The challenge for the international community,
therefore, is to sustain its collaboration with Haiti. The
recent finalization of the integrated strategic framework
for 2013 to 2016 between the United Nations system
and the Haitian Government is a very welcome step
forward in that continuing partnership. We welcome
the alignment of the framework with Haiti’s strategic
development plan, and we encourage the continued
close collaboration between MINUSTAH, the United
Nations system, the Haitian Government and Haiti’s
other international partners to ensure a congruence of
focus and effort.

17

S/PV.6936

Mr. Salifou (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish,
like other delegations, to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher for
his presentation of the interim report (S/2013/139)
on the United Nations Mission for Stabilization in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also congratulate him on his
appointment as Acting Head of Mission and assure him
of the full support of my country in the performance of
its new duties.

had been pending since June 2011 and the establishment
of the Superior Council of the Judiciary should pave
the way to an end to the crisis. All of those events
seemed to indicate that the political partisan divisions
of the Haitian political class had been overcome and a
collective commitment had been undertaken to quickly
organize elections, thereby making it possible to gauge
the true democratic progress achieved in Haiti.

I shall focus my statement on the security, political
and humanitarian situations.

Unfortunately, that dynamic was slowed by the
failure of the political class to come to an understanding
on the composition and designation of the institution that
would organize the elections. In that regard, we applaud
the work carried out by the Religions pour la paix
coalition, which led the representatives of the executive
branch and Parliament to sign, on 24 December 2012, an
agreement on the modalities establishing a temporary
electoral council. We welcome the information provided
on the designation of the members of the three branches
of Government that will have a seat in that body — an
important step towards the holding of elections in Haiti.

Efforts in the security sector have been among
the achievements of the cooperation between the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH. The SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates that the security situation
remained stable despite the upsurge in civil unrest and
a rise in crime. My country welcomes that stability
and urges the Haitian authorities to continue the
process of strengthening the operational capacity and
modernization of the National Police, as well as to
effectively fight against armed gangs, which are the
main sources of insecurity in the country.
We therefore welcome the adoption by the Council
of the National Police development plan for the period
2012 to 2016, which defines the strategic vision,
objectives and means for implementation. We encourage
Haiti’s partners to continue to support the country so
that the funding gap is bridged in order to allow for
the achievement of all the objectives. We also call upon
the competent authorities to carry out crime prevention
and repression efforts in strict observance of the rule
of law. In that regard, we encourage them to continue
with the modernization of the legal and institutional
framework of the security, judicial and penal sectors.
However, we remain concerned by the gender-based
and sexual violence highlighted in the report, especially
against children. We commend the work undertaken by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police aimed
at raising awareness among potential victims of the
remedies available to them.
With respect to the political situation, Togo
welcomes the progress achieved by Haiti in stabilizing
and building the rule of law, even though the positive
dynamic set in motion last year by the Haitian
political class might have led one to expect much more
significant progress. Parliament’s approval, in May
2012, of the appointment of Mr. Laurent Lamothe as
Prime Minister, which put an end to months of political
crisis, the enactment of constitutional amendments that

18

We welcome the commitments undertaken by the
President of the Republic and the National Assembly
on 14 January, at the opening of the Assembly’s first
ordinary session of the legislative year, to organize free
partial legislative, municipal and local elections this
year and to see to it that the country takes responsibility
for over half of the electoral budget. In that regard, we
urge all Haitian political stakeholders to work on the
basis of consensus so that preparations for the elections
can be undertaken and the latter can take place in an
inclusive and transparent manner. Moreover, Togo
calls on Haitian authorities to continue the necessary
reforms to restore the State’s legal framework, establish
and strengthen public institutions and improve their
people’s lives.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains a
source of serious concern for my country. With the
gradual withdrawal of humanitarian agencies, the
living conditions in the camps, where there is still a
very high number of internally displaced persons,
continue to deteriorate. The Secretary-General’s report
also notes that there was a significant decrease in the
provision of basic services owing to a decrease in the
level of funds available, and Togo fears a return of the
cholera epidemic, the beginnings of which have already
been announced. My country therefore calls on the
international community to further help the Haitian
authorities to invest in the provision of drinking water
and sanitation infrastructure in order to counter the

13-26505

S/PV.6936

resurgence of the epidemic. My country believes that,
in the absence of clear legal responsibility incumbent
upon it, the United Nations should continue to fulfil
its moral responsibility to help the Haitian authorities
to eradicate that disease, the source of which is well
known.
I would like to conclude by calling upon the
entire political class and people of Haiti to face the
significant obstacles and challenges before them
in terms of improving governance in their country,
stimulating growth and reducing poverty in order to
stop the fruitless political infighting that impedes their
country’s path towards progress. My country believes
that the international community should remain at
Haiti’s side, but that it is up to Haitians themselves to
face their own challenges and find the most appropriate
solutions to them. To that end, their political institutions
and structures responsible for upholding the rule of law
must be reinforced, and the electoral process must be
free, transparent, peaceful, credible and legitimate in
order to contribute to the consolidation of democracy
in the country. Finally, my country hopes that the plan
for restructuring and reorganizing MINUSTAH and its
activities and its progressive withdrawal from Haiti will,
rather than weakening support to the Haiti, contribute
to refocusing its efforts on the areas of priority interest
to the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing on
the situation in Haiti. Overall, in spite of the country
having recently been put to the test, its Government
and people, with the active support of the international
community, have been able to progressively stabilize
the situation.
Unfortunately, the political process in Haiti
continues to be shaky. There has been rising political
rhetoric recently, which certainly has not served to
eliminate the differences between the executive branch
and Parliament. An important step in achieving stability
and moving towards democracy could be the holding
of partial parliamentary and municipal elections. We
hope that the Government will continue to work on the
process for national dialogue and hold elections this
year. The United Nations must provide all the necessary
support to Haiti’s electoral process. All political forces

13-26505

in the country should demonstrate the utmost calm and
restraint and resolve disputes exclusively through legal
mechanisms.
We were concerned to learn that the situation
with respect to crime in the country continues to be
troublesome. It is clear that stabilization is impossible
without putting an end to violence, ensuring that
the rights of all citizens are upheld and effectively
combating organized crime and corruption.
Without a doubt, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti plays a leading role in all of those areas,
as underscored in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/139). Peacekeepers have much work to do in
vigorously and dynamically assisting the Government.
In the future, Haiti must continue to be supported in
enhancing the rule of law and law enforcement so that,
in the end, security is ensured by the national forces
alone.
The social, economic and humanitarian situations
continue to be of concern. Along those lines, there
must be active participation by United Nations funds
and programmes in the rebuilding of the country,
peacebuilding activities and coordination among
donors.
It is worrisome that, in spite of large-scale
international assistance, the cholera epidemic has not
yet been eradicated. While the number of cases are
falling, they still remain numerous. In that respect,
we welcome the active and sustainable results-based
initiatives of the Secretary-General to combat that
illness.
With respect to the consolidation plan for the
Mission, we feel that the basic criteria for adjustments
to the mandate and configuration must continue to be
based on the actual security situation. That is directly
tied with the level of readiness of the National Police.
On the whole, we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal to focus the mandate of the Mission on a
number of objectives that could be successfully attained
over the course of four or five years. However, we must
recognize that the announced goals and measurement
indicators are ambitious and require future discussion
among Council members.
We agree that the internal political mechanisms in
Haiti are of the utmost importance at this time. Currently,
without them, security, stability and sustainable
development cannot be achieved, and therefore no

19

S/PV.6936

changes can be made to the configuration of the
Mission. The current situation shows that the Haitian
Government and the international community — in
particular the United Nations — face a host of complex
challenges in resolving crucial peacebuilding issues for
the country, such as achieving national consensus and
consolidating society, including on the humanitarian
and economic fronts. The Haitian Government must
play a leading role. It bears responsibility for the
effective implementation of international assistance and
must play an active role in coordinating that assistance.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Gaspard (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the President of the Council for
having convened this debate. I welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/139), and I congratulate
his Acting Special Representative for his briefing. I
also thank the various speakers for their constructive
comments.
Today’s debate in the Council, five months after
the adoption of resolution 2070 (2012), allows us
to take stock of the progress made in Haiti and the
main challenges that remain. Along those lines, it is
important to briefly recall the strategic guidelines and
core objectives of the Government’s activities.
First, on the humanitarian front, for the Haitian
authorities it was a matter of facing emergency issues,
in particular the situation of those made homeless
by the earthquake, as well as to launch far-reaching
projects to rebuild the country based on six core
priorities, namely, education, employment, the rule
of law, the environment, energy and children. In that
respect, the objective is to place the country sustainably
and irreversibly on the path of development.
Today it is clear that Haiti has made significant
progress. On the humanitarian front, as noted in the
report, between 2010 and early 2013, thanks to the
Government’s measures and the backing of the United
Nations and other humanitarian partners, 1,178,000
displaced people have been resettled. That represents a
basic reduction of 77 per cent of the homeless population
in terms of the initial figures.
In combating cholera, despite a reoccurrence in
some parts of the country, the results of cross-cutting
efforts are encouraging. Cholera-related mortality was

20

reduced from 5.3 per cent in 2010 to 1.2 per cent by
the end of 2012. The cholera prevalence of 43 cases per
1,000 in 2011 was reduced to 6 cases per 1,000 in 2012.
The initiative of the Secretary-General to create a fund
to combat cholera in Haiti and his appointment of Dr.
Paul Farmer are most welcome in that regard.
More generally, measures taken in various domains
are beginning to bear fruit. With respect to education,
the Government has enrolled more than 1 million
children through its universal education programme,
with the assistance of funds-transfer programmes, and
is guaranteeing that mothers receive cash stipends in
order to motivate them to keep their children in school
and out of the work place.
Economically speaking, measures undertaken
have led to stabilization of the macroeconomic
situation, attracting foreign investors and combating
unemployment. They have resulted in thousands of jobs
and increasingly promising economic prospects.
In that context, Caracol Industrial Park in the
north of the country — one of the largest of the
Caribbean — was inaugurated and could create 20,000
direct jobs and up to 60,000 indirect jobs. Moreover, it
should be noted that the Government has considerably
increased public spending to rebuild roads, airports,
public buildings and housing projects,, thereby creating
immediate employment.
In the area of the rule of law, mindful that the
independence of the judiciary is a sine qua non for
establishing a culture of the rule of law, the MartellyLamothe Government has set up the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and filled vacancies in the Supreme
Court, which is the country’s highest level court.
Additional measures were undertaken to train judicial
staff, increase the number of prisons, combat prolonged
pretrial detention and increase the number of peace
tribunals. All of those initiatives aim to guarantee
respect for and the protection of human rights.
In the area of State reform, the Government is
reforming public administration through its State reform
framework, which was launched last October to cover
the five years from 2012 to 2017. The programme was
established following an observed lack of effectiveness
in the public administration’s service to the public. It
must therefore be modernized to improve its public
service capacity.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

With respect to corruption, the Government has
strengthened existing bodies by providing them with
the necessary funding. Therefore, due to the efforts of
the Anti-Corruption Unit, more than 200 State officials
implicated in an embezzlement affair involving funds
for universal education were arrested and prosecuted.
On the political front, my delegation notes the
concerns expressed with regard to delays in following
the electoral calendar for convening interim legislative
elections and municipal and local elections. We reaffirm
the firmly expressed will of the Government to work to
achieve those milestones as quickly as possibly based
on the utmost honesty and transparency and strict
adherence to democratic norms.
In that vein, the Government hails the recent
appointment of three parliamentary representatives to
the permanent electoral council, which will organize
the elections in order to fill the one third of vacancies
in the Senate and establish the local authorities. Those
are important elements of democratic governance that
the President and the Prime Minister are seeking to
advance.
On the security front, the situation has generally
improved greatly, thanks to the efforts of the Haitian
National Police, supported by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
According to some studies, Haiti had 8 homicides
per 100,000 inhabitants in 2012, which represents
a much lower rate as compared to other countries of
the region, which had 25 per 100,000 inhabitants. The
security situation is therefore satisfactory.
The striking success of the twenty-first summit of
the heads of State and Government of the Caribbean
Community, which took place in February in Portau-Prince, was highly important to the Haitian
Government.
All of those facts represent that wide differences
exist between perception and reality. The Government
will therefore continue its efforts to maximize security
throughout the country.
The Haitian National Police development plan
for 2012-2016 stipulates a progressive increase from
10,000 to 15,000 members in 2016, and will further
professionalize the institution and bolster its operational
capacities. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
MINUSTAH’s work and supports its draft 2013-2016
consolidation plan. We also take the opportunity

13-26505

to thank all of the countries contributing troops to
MINUSTAH.
On the social front, the Haitian Government, with
the help of many international organizations, including
the World Bank and UNICEF, has launched many social
programmes aimed at creating a social safety net in the
country. Those programmes have helped to alleviate
the situation of many families facing extreme poverty.
Despite those tangible steps forward, many
challenges remain. There are many humanitarian and
structural issues involving development in Haiti. Allow
me to highlight two of them.
The first concerns the funding of reconstruction
and development programmes and projects as
defined by the Government. That remains the core
issue in tackling emergency situations, such as the
displaced persons camps, food and security, as well
as more general matters of reconstruction. Resource
mobilization is therefore crucial. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to thank the main donor
countries and to reiterate our call to them to continue
to demonstrate their generosity and understanding to
Haiti, in order to contribute over the long term to the
country’s reconstruction.
The second challenge is the matter of the country’s
vulnerability in terms of natural disasters. Without
improved consideration of that problem, reconstruction
tasks cannot be appropriately addressed.
Finally, the Haitian Government’s core objective is
to sustainably and irreversibly set the country on the
path of development, as a precondition to the lasting
improvement of its people’s living conditions. The
Government possesses the necessary political will and
is mindful that Haitian stakeholders must be the real
motors of those ambitious objectives. However, we
also understand that given the limited resources of our
country, we require the genuine and effective support
of our international partners to attain our goals. The
Government therefore renews its commitment to work
hand in hand with its partners and with the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate. I also thank Mr. Nigel
Fisher for his briefing and for his excellent work as
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Interim Head of the United Nations Stabilization

21

S/PV.6936

Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I appreciate the
contribution just made by the Ambassador of Haiti,
Mr. Gaspar, and I welcome the participation of
Mr. Fernando Carrera Castro, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, in our debate.

Let us not forget, however, that economic growth
with job creation and social inclusion is an absolutely
essential dimension of stability in Haiti. It is the first
priority that must continue to guide the international
approach to the situation in the country.

Brazil values the concept of a consolidation plan
that foresees the conditions for a sustainable transition
of the current United Nations presence in Haiti, in line
with the security situation on the ground. We agree that
the tasks performed today by MINUSTAH should be
progressively transferred to the Haitian authorities, as
the development of national capacities allows. We also
support the concept that troop levels should be adjusted
as MINUSTAH prepares to gradually disengage.

International engagement remains key to the
development, in an integrated manner, of critical
capacities in those core areas. Brazil renews its longterm commitment to Haiti in that regard.

Nevertheless, financial considerations must not be
the driving force behind the reduction of the United
Nations presence in Haiti. Although we understand
the current financial constraints, the situation on the
ground and the assessment of the Haitian Government’s
ability to assume responsibilities should be the decisive
factors in determining the level and nature of the future
United Nations presence in Haiti. If we allow financial
needs to dictate the pace of transition, we will deviate
from the responsible and controlled exit strategy to
which the Security Council is committed.
MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan must be owned
by Haitians as a platform for the development of critical
capacities. It must entail a true partnership around key
common objectives. Moreover, it must ensure that
when the time comes for transferring responsibilities,
international partners, agencies, funds, programmes
and, more important, the Haitian Government, will
come together in a coherent strategy and that the
support and resources needed will be provided.
That is especially important with regard to the
Haitian National Police (HNP). We welcome the
Haitian commitment to the strengthening of the HNP
and to adjusting its recruitment process to the objective
of having 15,000 police officers by 2016.
Likewise, the appropriate organization by Haiti
of the upcoming elections is a fundamental step in
the country’s efforts to fully exert its institutional
and political responsibilities. In that connection, too,
sustained international support is needed. Strengthening
the rule of law, democracy and human rights are also
central areas to consolidating stability.

22

Our sister nation of Haiti has made important
strides in its quest for recovery from one of the worst
natural catastrophes of our time. Yet, Haiti’s resilience
was again put to a test. The impact of the last hurricane
season and rising living costs compound a very difficult
scenario, which still requires the sustained attention of
the international community. It is widely accepted that,
in spite of the progress achieved, a lot remains to be
done.
In that connection, it is troubling that, due to
financial constraints, important international partners
are pulling out their assistance to the country, even in
the face of worrying humanitarian needs. That trend
is not in line with MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan
laid out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/139)
before us. In fact, it contradicts one of its fundamental
assumptions. Only through an active, permanent
effort to mobilize the necessary resources to fill the
spaces progressively left open by MINUSTAH will the
consolidation plan succeed.
As a true partnership, in full respect of Haiti’s
sovereignty, the consolidation strategy also envisages
steps that can only be decided upon by Haitians
themselves. Those steps, in turn, need an environment
of cooperation and commitment to the highest interests
of the Haitian population and to a fully functional
political system. We are confident that all Haitian
political actors will continue to pursue dialogue and
democratic consolidation.
As recognized by the Security Council and by the
Group of Friends of Haiti last January, the holding of
local and legislative elections is a fundamental step
in Haiti’s path to peace, stability and development.
Brazil expects that the Haitian leadership will heed
that call and take the necessary measures to ensure the
organization of elections in the shortest possible time
frame.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

We note recent efforts and constructive initiatives
to move the political process forward, and we encourage
further steps in that direction. We remain confident in
the Haitian ability to craft the necessary consensus to
navigate through the complexities of the process, with a
view to creating the conditions for further cooperation,
investment and institutional consolidation.
The Haitian Government and people can continue
to count on Brazil’s unwavering engagement and
solidarity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, the United States of America, France,
Guatemala, Peru and my own country, Uruguay. I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate to discuss the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/139) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcomes today’s presence
of the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Interim Head of MINUSTAH, Mr. Nigel
Fisher. We thank him for his comprehensive briefing
and for taking responsibility for the Mission in this
crucial period. The Group would also like to express
its gratitude and recognition to Ambassador Mariano
Fernández Amunátegui for his dedicated work as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH.
The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, the establishment of a political culture
conducive to consensus-building and the improvement
of socioeconomic conditions are key elements to
achieve greater and sustainable stability and prosperity
in Haiti. In that regard, the Group of Friends of Haiti
strongly encourages all political actors in Haiti to
deepen their dialogue and cooperation towards their
country’s democratic consolidation. The Group
reiterates the importance of the timely realization,
with MINUSTAH’s assistance, of free, transparent and
fair partial legislative, municipal and local elections.
They constitute an essential and urgent step towards
lasting stability, recovery and development in Haiti.
The effective establishment of the country’s Electoral
Council will constitute a major milestone in that process.
In that regard, the Group of Friends looks forward to

13-26505

positive developments related to the appointment, as
soon as possible, of members of a transitional college
of the permanent Electoral Council.
The Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes the critical
role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti and commends MINUSTAH for continuing to
assist the Government of Haiti to ensure a secure and
stable environment.
The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable since the
previous report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/678),
although it was marked by an increase in civil unrest
and serious crimes. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
implement the drawdown established in resolution 2070
(2012) without undermining the security and stability
of Haiti.
The Group welcomes the submission of a concise
version of the MINUSTAH consolidation plan 20132016, which has been discussed with the Government
of Haiti and which includes a description of the scope of
the conditions-based consolidation plan, the risks and
challenges, a core set of mandated tasks that the Mission
should focus on with the respective benchmarks, and
the continuation of the work of consolidation of its
substantive, security and support pillars, all with
the objective of allowing the Haitian authorities to
gradually assume their fundamental responsibilities for
their country’s future.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of the
commitment by the Government of Haiti to strengthen
the rule of law and to make further progress in security
sector reform. In that regard, the Group would like to
emphasize the critical role the Haitian National Police
plays in Haiti’s security and stability and to stress the
importance of completing the ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the police force in
order to enable it to assume full responsibility for the
country’s security.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations towards sexual exploitation and abuse. In that
regard we expect all United Nations personnel to adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges
all actors involved to take responsibility for ensuring
that such cases are prevented, allegations investigated
and those to blame held accountable.

23

S/PV.6936

The Group welcomes the significant progress made
in 2012 in the resettlement of persons displaced by the
2010 earthquake. However, we are also concerned about
the deterioration of living conditions in the remaining
camps and about the situation of women and children in
particular, an example of the humanitarian challenges
that Haiti continues to face.
The Group of Friends is aware of the continuing
efforts being made by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups,
but also notes with concern the need to improve the
response of the criminal justice sector to rape complaints
and serious crimes against children. We therefore call
urgently for increased efforts to prevent and respond to
violence against women and children.
These and other challenges, such as the ongoing
efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic, remind us of
the importance of maintaining cooperation between the
international community and the Government of Haiti
in order to meet the needs of the Haitian people. In that
regard, the Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
efforts of the donor community and asks its members to
fulfil the pledges they have made without delay.
The Group of Friends of Haiti understands
that security, development and stability are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We therefore
underscore the importance of addressing the issue of
unemployment and the delivery of basic social services
in a meaningful way. At the same time, the Group points
out that there can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening democratic
institutions and a credible democratic process. In that
context, the Group emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law by strengthening Haitian
institutions, and further reaffirms MINUSTAH’s
responsibility for supporting the Haitian State in
the areas of good governance, the expansion of State
authority and the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with its mandate.
Finally, the Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation. We support and salute the women and
men of MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless
efforts to promote recovery and stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

24

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the organization of this debate,
and we welcome the presence today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala. We also thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing, and would
like to particularly acknowledge Ambassador Mariano
Fernández Amunátegui for his recent stint at the helm
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).
Chile associates itself with the statement just
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
In 2012 we witnessed significant milestones in the
ongoing process in Haiti: Parliament’s ratification of
the new Government, the appointment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, and the publication of the
amendments to the Haitian Constitution all deserve the
recognition of the international community. Similarly,
initiatives such as the implementation of Haiti’s strategic
development plan, the new cooperation mechanism and
the strategic development plan of the Haitian National
Police for 2012-2016 are also pertinent examples of this
ongoing process.
Such progress notwithstanding, there are areas
in which improvements must be made, and urgently,
in strengthening institutions, consolidating the rule
of law and improving the people’s socioeconomic
situation — all elements that are essential to ensuring
the security, stability, governability and economic
and social progress of the Haitian people. There is no
question that a political dialogue between the various
State authorities is essential; it is the only way to
achieve a lasting consensus that will enable an inclusive
society to be built in Haiti that fully respects human
rights and can address ongoing challenges. While
reiterating Chile’s commitment to working with Haiti
multilaterally and bilaterally, we call on the Haitian
authorities to take steps immediately to encourage
this political dialogue and the quest for consensus. In
that regard, and with the support of MINUSTAH, the
holding of free, fair and credible national, municipal
and local elections is an essential part of this process
and requires the speedy creation and functioning of a
permanent electoral council.
My delegation recognizes MINUSTAH’s central
role in maintaining a stable and secure environment
in Haiti and the progress the Haitian National Police

13-26505

S/PV.6936

has made in that area. Despite the increase in civil
disturbances and crime, the stabilization of the security
situation has enabled it to work on the reconfiguration
and agreement established in the last renewal of its
mandate. In that context, my delegation welcomes
MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan 2013-2016, and
commends its establishment of concrete goals and
targets in the areas of political development, increasing
electoral capacity, the rule of law and human rights,
and governance, agreed on with the Haitian authorities.
Similarly, we commend the plan’s initiation of a strategic
review process. These goals will enable the Mission to
use its resources and evaluate its achievements more
efficiently so as to enable a gradual and sustained
transfer of responsibilities to the Haitian authorities.
In that regard, we stress that any budget reductions
for the Mission should be justified by the situation
as observed on the ground, and also take into
consideration the connection between security tasks
and development, for which rapid-impact projects,
programmes for reducing community violence and
other initiatives supporting local populations are key
factors. In that context, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s initiative for the elimination of
cholera in Haiti and the work that MINUSTAH has
done in this area, and calls on donors to fulfil their
financial pledges.
Regarding priorities for the police, we hope
especially that the Haitian National Police can gradually
assume greater responsibility in the area of public
security, in line with its development plan for 20122016. To that end, it is fundamental that the annual
process of police recruiting and training be carried
out, which requires not only efforts by the Haitian
authorities, but also by the international community.
The Chilean Government will continue to participate
in police training through its bilateral cooperation
programmes.
In looking at Haiti from the perspective of its
development since the devastating earthquake in 2010
until now, the progress reflected in a decrease of 75 per
cent in the internally displaced people in the camps of
refugees demonstrate the outstanding work done by
the Haitian authorities in that area, with the support of
the United Nations. That is a clear demonstration that
coordinated will on the part of the various actors can
lead to positive results.

13-26505

For my delegation, it is essential to reiterate the
importance of interaction among Haitian authorities
in maintaining political stability and achieving
development. Without such positive interaction, it
will be impossible to appropriately meet the pending
challenges in strengthening the rule of law and
consolidating democratic institutions, especially in
the areas of administration of justice, human rights,
penitentiary administration, gender-based violence and
the protection of minors. It is also fundamental to lay
the foundation for development by attracting investment
and generating employment, which will make it possible
to grapple with the difficult socioeconomic situation
and the decrease in food security in Haiti.
As we reaffirm the commitment and solidarity
of the Government of Chile with the people and
authorities of Haiti, we also believe it necessary to
continue cooperating to promote the development of
institutional capacity in Haiti under the principle of
national ownership. The future of Haiti demands it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation is once again participating
in this semi-annual debate on the question of Haiti as
proof and in recognition of Spain’s commitment with
this country in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, which is therefore so close to us. Haiti is a
friend nation and we are friends of Haiti. For that
reason, while I associate myself with the statement to
be delivered shortly by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, I would like to make some additional
considerations in my national capacity.
Spain has decisively supported the reconstruction
of Haiti since the terrible earthquake that devastated the
country in January 2010. However, Haiti’s institutional
weakness has impeded to date the achievement of
desirable levels of implementation. That is why the aid
disbursed has not yet reached its full potential. Our
Secretary of State for International Cooperation and
for Iberoamerica conveyed this message to both His
Excellency President Martelly and to His Excellency
Prime Minister Lamothe on the occasion of his visit to
Haiti in February.
The Government of President Martelly has been
working with determination to reduce the endemic
problems of the Haitian political system. However, he
has not yet entirely managed to get Haitian institutions

25

S/PV.6936

working more efficiently. Local elections and the
election of a third of the Senate are still pending as
a result of the inability of Haitian political actors to
establish a permanent electoral council, as provided for
in the 1987 Constitution and which to date has not been
able to be formally established. Partial improvements
have been made in recent days, as mentioned by the
representative of Haiti, and we very much welcome
them. However, the process is still unfinished at the
present time.
Spain wishes to make a clear and convincing
appeal to all Haitian political actors to assume their
responsibilities and to work in order to achieve a smooth
and predictable operation of the institutions. As the
Security Council has already stated, the outstanding
elections should be held in the course of this year.
Strong political institutions will make it possible to
move forward in the reconstruction process in a much
more efficient way than what has been the case thus
far. It will also make it possible to shape the image of
Haiti abroad of a country that is moving forward in
its transformation into a secure, stable and socially
equitable country.
Finally, I would like to express my delegation’s
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his semi-annual
report (S/2013/139) on the activities of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as for
the consolidation plan of the Mission for 2013-2016
included in the report.
Despite some improvements, there are still many
challenges in Haiti. In order to successfully tackle those
challenges and fulfil the expectations of its people, it
is essential that Haiti’s political leaders redouble their
efforts and renew their commitment to the country’s
reconstruction and stabilization process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries Montenegro, Serbia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as

26

well as Armenia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like, first of all, to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher
for his briefing, and the representative of Haiti for
his statement. During our last statement before the
Security Council, the European Union welcomed the
relative stabilization of the political scene since the
appointment, in May 2012, of the new Prime Minister
Mr. Laurent Lamothe (see S/PV.6842). The European
Union also expressed the hope that political reforms
would move forward thanks to the enactment, early in
2012, of several amendments to the 1987 Constitution.
We reaffirm our full support for the efforts of President
Martelly and Prime Minister Lamothe to move forward
in the economic, political and social renewal of Haiti.
In that context, we regret to note that the ongoing
tense political climate, the lack of cooperation and a
tedency towards pointless political confrontation have
to date impeded the progress of those reforms, which
the still-fragile Haitian democractic system desperately
needs. It is particularly worrisome that the different
parties concerned have not yet succeeded in agreeing
upon the establishment of an electoral council, which
has been an obstacle to setting a date for the forthcoming
elections. We can only reiterate our appeal to all
stakeholders to work responsibly and in the interest
of Haitian society as the whole. The European Union
supports the Secretary-General’s request for free, fair
and transparent elections to be held without delay, and
reiterates our readiness to financially contribute to the
convening of future elections and to the strengthening
of the capacities of the future permanent electoral
council.
Nevertheless, we know that the slow-down in the
reform process is not limited to electoral matters. We
share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2013/139) in a certain number of areas
where little progress, even backsliding, has been noted.
In that regard, I am referring to persistent shortcomings
in the justice sector, arbitrary appointments in many
key areas of State administration, incidents of forced
evictions of displaced persons still living in camps and
a continuing climate of impunity, among other things.
On the whole, those observations lead to very mixed
results regarding the improvement of governance, even
though President Martelly has rightly made the rule of
law a priority of his presidency.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

The European Union will continue, within the
framework of its political dialogue with Haiti, to
remind all interested stakeholders of the urgency of
adopting a more inclusive approach in inter-institutional
relations and to work for national consensus on a small
but realistic number of political and socioeconomic
reforms on which to move forward in cooperation with
international partners.
With respect to certain aspects of the report of the
Secretary-General, in particular on activities related
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the European Union reiterates its
support and appreciation for the contribution to security
and stability that the Mission continues to provide
in Haiti. We welcome the consolidation plan for the
Mission and the focus of its future activities around the
four priority areas proposed by the Secretary-General.
Hand in hand with other donors, and in the
framework of its programmes for cooperation with
Haiti, the European Union will make its contribution
to fulfilling the responsibilities that will no longer be
part of MINUSTAH’s mandate, as well as to assisting
in the progressive handover of MINUSTAH’s mandated
competencies to the Haitian authorities. In that vein, the
support of the European Union for a broad range of State
administration reforms, announced by the Government
in November 2012, should facilitate that handover by
improving the capacities of Haitian institutions.
The European Union will continue to consider
other possible contributions in security sector
reform, including in transborder cooperation with
the Dominican Republic in order to back the Haitian
Government’s activities.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for convening
today’s debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Nigel
Fisher, Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, for his presence here today and for
his assessment of the situation on the ground.
It was with great interest that Mexico heard the
detailed assessment of political, socioeconomic and
security situation in Haiti. We believe it necessary for
the international community and the United Nations
to redouble their efforts to lay the foundation for
sustainable development in the country. The report

13-26505

of the Secretary-General (S/2013/139) describes a
complex panorama and proposes a consolidation
plan to concentrate the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in specific
areas to promote political stability.
We agree with the identification of the four priority
areas of the plan: development of police capacity,
building of electoral capacity, the rule of law and human
rights, and governance. However, we are concerned
that actions that have been successful in the past have
been left out, such as the quick impact projects that put
into place strategies to promote economic recovery and
the long- and medium-term projects that have made it
possible to meet persistent needs in humanitarian aid,
health care, food security and basic infrastructure.
We agree that while the Mission can be supported
by other actors working on the ground, including those
in the private sector, MINUSTAH should not disengage
itself from specific key areas such as education, food
and agriculture, which can be a source of long-term
instability. It is necessary to have an ongoing firm
commitment from the international community. In
that regard, Mexico calls on the Security Council,
United Nations agencies and international agencies
and partners to continue cooperating with the Haitian
people and authorities to meet the economic and social
challenges that remain prevalent in Haiti.
Mexico applauds the appointment of the members
of the transitional college of the permanent electoral
council, and hopes that their prompt entry into that
body will be a departure point for holding local and
municipal elections. It is necessary for Haiti to embrace
a culture geared to building consensus to address the
priority issues of development of the island. Also
worthy of attention is the development of the capacity
of the Haitian National Police so that it may extend its
reach to the whole territory, enabling it to effectively
address crime rates.
Mexico would like to highlight the decision to
renew, with the Haitian Government’s approval, the
mandate of the Independent Expert on the situation of
human rights in Haiti, which occurred just a few days
ago. The Human Rights Council has assessed the human
rights situation in the country and taken stock of the
Government’s commitment to improving the quality of
life of its citizens. No doubt that work will complement
MINUSTAH’s work in favouring governance in the
country.

27

S/PV.6936

Mexico reiterates its full support for MINUSTAH
and recognizes the value of the men and women who
are deployed in the Mission to improve the situation
in Haiti. The Government of Mexico will continue to
support institution-building in the country, as well as
long- and medium-term projects. We call for a possible
reconfiguration of the Mission’s mandate, taking into
account considerations put forth today by troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as by members of
the international community who are committed to the
long-term stability and development of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
and the delegation of the Russian Federation for having
organized today’s debate on Haiti.
We are having this debate at a time when, more than
three years after the devastating earthquake that struck
Haiti, the country is facing important choices for its
future. In 2012, we were once again reminded that Haiti
remains vulnerable to natural disasters when Hurricane
Sandy and Tropical Storm Isaac hit the country. Canada
responded by providing emergency humanitarian
assistance to those most in need in Haiti. The past
year also brought some progress in reconstruction and
development.
However, the ongoing stalemate in the organization
of the long-overdue senatorial and municipal elections
raises serious questions about the capacity of Haiti’s
democratic institutions. By encouraging a legitimate
and credible electoral council to organize those
elections, Haitian leaders have the opportunity to
reaffirm their commitment and demonstrate their
respect for democratic principles. If elections are not
held in 2013, it will become increasingly difficult for
the international community to accept excuses and
delays. The long-awaited elections must be held in
2013, and as soon as possible.
Canada’s partnership with Haiti has been in place
for decades, and we are one of that country’s most
generous backers. Canada has provided the country
with more than $1 billion in support since 2006. Canada
has contributed to Haitian development priorities in
a wide variety of areas — such as economic growth,
food security and maternal and child health — through
Canada’s Muskoka initiative. Canada has also provided
substantial humanitarian assistance following natural

28

disasters to alleviate suffering of the Haitian people
and meet their immediate needs.
Since February 2012, for example, we have been
pleased to assist over 5,500 Haitian families displaced
by the 2010 earthquake in relocating from the Champs
de Mars camp, with the help of case workers, and in
moving into safe accommodations. Likewise, our
development assistance is helping women and children
who cannot afford health-care services to gain access
to health facilities and thus enjoy a better quality of
life. Those are the kinds of results we want to continue
seeing in Haiti.
Members of the Canadian Government have
recently made several high-level visits to Haiti.
In November 2012, our Minister of International
Cooperation, Mr. Julian Fantino, and in February this
year, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. John Baird,
and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Diane
Ablonczy, visited Haiti to see the country’s development
first-hand. They met with President Martelly and Prime
Minister Lamothe to discuss both the successes achieved
and the existing challenges in the areas of the rule of
law, security, governance and sustainable development,
as well as the need to strengthen accountability and
transparency.
During their visit, the ministers reiterated Canada’s
determination to support the Haitian Government in
its resolve to better coordinate the efforts made by
non-governmental organizations, donors and those
partners that are present in the country. Canada is
currently reviewing its long-term commitment in
Haiti, as is the case with governmental programmes
as a whole, so as to achieve sustainable results for the
Haitian people, especially those most in need.
(spoke in English)
Canada continues to support the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In the
coming months, Canada will be closely involved in
the discussions regarding MINUSTAH’s conditionsbased consolidation plan, which entails a narrowing
of MINUSTAH’s activities to a core set of mandated
tasks in the areas of security and stability, democratic
governance and State legitimacy, and the rule of law,
with respect for human rights.
This year again, we would like to commend
MINUSTAH on its efforts to improve the security
situation in Haiti and on its work to ensure that Haiti’s

13-26505

S/PV.6936

security institutions are well equipped, so that they can
play a greater role in standing up for the freedom and
security of Haitians themselves. In that regard, efforts
must, in our judgement, continue seriously to focus
on the capacity of the Haitian National Police as the
primary security force in Haiti. We are pleased that
the current Government has adopted its new police
development plan for the 2012-2016 period. We urge the
Haitian authorities to make all necessary efforts for its
implementation, and we stand with them.
(spoke in French)
The Government of Haiti has repeatedly asserted
that Haiti is open for business. Canada welcomes this
spirit and underlines that realizing that intent and
achieving concrete outcomes will require a series of
actions. To make that openness for business clear to
the international community, steadfast political will is
needed to establish a true rule of law in Haiti. Actions
leading to further gains in economic development
will also help provide the bedrock for future growth.
A stronger rule of law will promote not only investor
confidence but also the ability of small and mediumsized Haitian entrepreneurs to succeed.
Haiti’s leaders must devote themselves to delivering
the reforms that they have promised. Haitians expect
a Government where the public interest is respected,
the rule of law prevails, human rights are protected,
the economy grows stronger and development is
sustainable. The Haitian people and their partners in
Canada expect no less.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for presiding over this debate.
Let me also thank Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui,
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), for his significant contribution to the
Mission. I would like also to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher for
taking on the important responsibility for MINUSTAH.
I would also like to pay tribute to the men and women
of MINUSTAH for the commitment and fortitude they
have demonstrated under difficult circumstances.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
MINUSTAH (S/2013/139), issued on 8 March. As
the report mentions, Haiti continues to face many
challenges. Haiti still needs to improve its basic

13-26505

infrastructure, such as roads, electricity and the
provision of potable water, as well as social services,
including access to education and medicine.
High levels of unemployment and crime also
persist. The establishment of a temporary electoral
council is also needed to carry out the next election in
a peaceful and democratic manner. Many challenges
remain for Haiti on its path to recovery, reconstruction
and development. In addition, Hurricane Sandy hit the
nation in late October. The international community
responded promptly, and Japan provided an emergency
grant of $1.2 million. However, more support is still
needed.
The international community, however, also
acknowledges and welcomes the progress that has
been made in the recovery process in Haiti. Since
the earthquake in 2010, more than 10 million cubic
metres of debris have been removed, and the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has been reduced by
more than 75 per cent. Now that three years have passed
since the deadly earthquake, the Mission remains
highly necessary and significant, but the needs of the
Haitian people have shifted. Haiti has made remarkable
progress since Japan pledged $100 million towards
emergency relief and reconstruction in 2010. Japan has
actually already disbursed an amount exceeding that
original pledge.
In recognition of that shift on the ground, Japan
decided in July 2012 that it would wind down the
operations of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force’s
engineering unit in Haiti; the unit had withdrawn from
Haiti by the end of December 2012. The number of
personnel who have served in the Japanese contingent
since its beginning totals approximately 2,200.
The contingent has made contributions to the
recovery of Haiti through various efforts, including
the removal of rubble, the dismantling of damaged
buildings, the repair of facilities in IDP camps,
road repair, the construction of orphanages, and the
distribution of water in response to the outbreak of
cholera. The contingent also contributed to human
resources development in Haiti through the sharing
of expertise on civil engineering equipment. That
equipment also was finally donated to the Haitian
Government.
The Japan Ground Self-Defense Force’s engineering
unit was able to gain a great deal of experience in
MINUSTAH. In that context, we would like to share

29

S/PV.6936

that experience here, in New York, at a seminar today.
Starting at 2:30 p.m., the Permanent Mission of Japan,
together with the Permanent Mission of Brazil, will host
a seminar at the Japan Society focusing on the evolving
roles of military engineering units in peacekeeping
missions. Engineering units can play a critical
enabling role in multidimensional missions as early
peacebuilders. Our seminar will aim at illuminating,
and gaining an in-depth picture of, the evolving roles
of engineering units, as well as identifying future
opportunities and challenges.
Even after the withdrawal of its engineering
unit, Japan intends to continue to support Haiti. The
Government of Japan will continue to provide support
to Haiti for its restoration and the establishment of basic
social services, mainly in the fields of health, hygiene
and education. Japan recently decided to provide
$5.7 million in food aid and $1.6 million in capacitybuilding assistance to the Haitian Government.
As the Council is aware, two years have passed
since the Great East Japan Earthquake struck Japan, in
March 2011. We are most grateful that the people of
Haiti expressed their sense of solidarity with the people
of Japan. I am confident that both Haiti and Japan, in
close collaboration with the international community,
will be able to overcome difficulties as we work towards
a brighter future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to commend the initiative of the
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
open debate on the situation in Haiti. We also welcome
the presence of the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, and
thank him for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Haiti (S/2013/139).
Peru wishes to continue to cooperate in order to
achieve security, stability, sustainable development and
institution-building in Haiti. My country has therefore
actively participated in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004, with a
military contingent consisting of 366 soldiers and
military officers in the general staff of the Mission.
Similarly, Peru is a member of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group for Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council, the Group of Friends of
Haiti of the Organization of American States and the

30

Latin American Political Coordination Mechanism for
Haiti.
Peru is convinced that there can be no sustainable
social and economic development without strong
institutions that promote and sustain that development.
We also reaffirm the validity of the principle of national
ownership, whereby the Haitian Government itself must
lead the process to consolidate its national institutions,
strengthen the rule of law, consolidate democracy
and build capacity. In that regard, we believe that the
work of MINUSTAH remains essential to providing
the Haitian authorities with the security and support
necessary to facilitate that process, in accordance with
national strategies and priorities set out by them.
In that context, my delegation wishes to draw the
attention of the Security Council to two aspects of the
report of the Secretary-General that Peru considers
to be of paramount importance. The first is the need
for continued support to the Haitian authorities in
establishing and strengthening strong public institutions
that allow the problems currently facing the country
to be addressed effectively. The second is the plan to
reconfigure and strengthen MINUSTAH on the basis
of the existing conditions in Haiti and the needs of the
Haitian people.
As has already been noted by speakers who
preceded me, in particular the representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti — whose
statement Peru endorses — we agree that the work of
MINUSTAH in ensuring the stability and security of
Haiti has been essential to the achievement of significant
progress in strengthening the democratic institions and
the rule of law in Haiti. However, we are also aware that
the stability achieved is an opportunity that should be
used to achieve a political agreement that would ensure
the governability of the country in the long term. In
that regard, recognizing the democratic aspirations of
the Haitian people, my delegation calls on all political
forces in Haiti to reach the agreements necessary
to lay the foundations of the basic institutions for
strengthening democracy in Haiti. We therefore hope
for the early establishment of the permanent electoral
council, the body responsible for ensuring that the
elections are conducted transparently, democratically
and credibly, while highlighting the significant support
that MINUSTAH has been providing in the area of
electoral assistance.

13-26505

S/PV.6936

The progress registered by MINUSTAH in
stabilizing Haiti in recent years allows us to look
optimistically to the future. We therefore believe that
the time has come to launch a process of gradual and
orderly transition to a second phase of cooperation of
the United Nations system for Haiti. In that respect, we
welcome the development by the Secretary-General of a
reconfiguration and consolidation plan for MINUSTAH
to strengten the achievements made and to lay the
foundation for long-term development programmes.
In that regard, Peru believes it important that the
core objectives identified in the concise version of the
MINUSTAH consolidation plan annexed to the report of
the Secretary-General contain precise parameters and
indicators that will measure progress achieved by the
Haitian Government in areas crucial to strengthening
the institutions and democracy of the country.
I also wish to acknowledge the progress in
the institutionalization, professionalization and
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, which has
been playing a leading role in protecting and ensuring
the safety of its citizens, as demonstrated by the recent
transfer of security functions to the Police in four regions
of Haiti. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of
the five-year development plan for the Haitian National
Police for 2012-2016, which will in the near future
endow the Haitian Police with the personnel necessary
to maintain public order and security throughout the
country and a strong institutional structure aimed at
strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.
It is clear that the cooperation of the United Nations
system with Haiti is not limited to the invaluable support
of MINUSTAH. Peru therefore believes that even
broader and better coordination is necessary between
MINUSTAH and the various agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system on the ground.
Finally, my delegation is of the view that the
significant achievements to date should not lull us into
the false belief that the task of the United Nations in
Haiti is complete, or close to being so. We therefore
call on States Members of the Organization and the
entire international community to continue their
support to Haiti, highlighting the three areas that have
a direct impact on the ongoing process of recovery and
reconstruction of that country, namely, governability,
security and development.

13-26505

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to Mr. Fisher to respond to comments and
questions.
Mr. Fisher: I will be brief. I would like to thank
members and the other speakers for their comments and
questions and for their support, especially with regard
to the consolidated plan.
I will first take a few highlights on elections. As
many representatives stated and I myself said, they have
become a symbol or a touchstone for moving forward
on a number of fronts on Haiti. We need the electoral
council. We look forward to its early formation. But
that, of course, is the first step in the development of a
plan for the elections, which many said should be free,
fair and credible and held this year. I will certainly take
that message back to my counterparts.
Many speakers raised the current political fragility
in Haiti and many looked at the importance of moving
ahead across the board on redoubling efforts to promote
constructive dialogue in a spirit of compromise. Many
representatives talked about inclusive political dialogue,
which is the way forward to enabling Haiti’s leaders
to focus increasingly on other necessary institutional
reforms, especially in the area of the rule of law, and to
facing the significant challenges of expanding not only
the numbers of police but also their professionalism and
presence across the country.
I think that the emphasis that many speakers placed
on development and humanitarian considerations is
also a very good reminder that whatever happens at the
political and institutional levels, security and rule-oflaw issues are there to create the necessary conditions
not only for investment but also for ordinary Haitians
to see changes in their lives, improved security, respect
for their human rights and the ability to earn a living.
I therefore thank many speakers for emphasizing
the continuing humanitarian challenges facing Haiti, as
well as the difficulty in particular of exclusion based on
gender and issues of gender-based violence.
Beyond the political fragility, on the issue of the
police, there is no doubt that we are seeing increasing
professionalism. Indeed, recruitment was slow last
year: it fell below the 2011 levels. But I would like to
affirm that, with the new training that we will begin
in April, we foresee that 150 cadets will be ready for
training. We are thus seeing the recruitment process
begin to pick up.

31

S/PV.6936

We still face challenges in ensuring the rapid
vetting of police cadets and the medical review
process, but that is moving forward. We are looking to
our own internal structure to ensure that we have the
right mix of professionals able to focus on training and
accompaniment of the police, and that includes not only
initial training, but follow-up training as they move
out of Port-au-Prince. Most police officers — some
70 to 75 per cent — are present in Port-au-Prince. We
do need to see an increased distribution and presence
around the country.
Many representatives have also commented on the
mandate and the consolidation plan, and one reminded
us all that the mandate should drive the budget. I just
want to inform the Council that MINUSTAH will be
undertaking a consultative review on the ground to test
out the assumptions and projections of the consolidation
plan. This will happen, of course, with the Government,

32

with which we have agreed to set up an ongoing working
group, as well as with Member States and others who
are contributing to MINUSTAH and have a role and
interest in our future. Several representatives said
that this is an ambitious plan, but as I said it has been
agreed with the Government, and it will be reviewed
on a regular basis with the Government and of course
brought back to the Council. I look forward to reporting
back to the Security Council on the progress achieved
in the future on the consolidation plan, which is really,
essentially, our road map for accompanying Haiti on
its journey to full national ownership and full national
management of its own affairs.
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

13-26505
