S/PV.7144

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7144th meeting

Wednesday, 19 March 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-26920 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426920*

Ukraine

S/PV.7144

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Ukraine with all my interlocutors. As the Council has
seen from his public statements, the Secretary-General
has repeatedly counselled against hasty actions that
could increase tensions and lead to miscalculations and
unintended consequences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to welcome the Deputy Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give him the
floor.
Mr. Eliasson: My statement today will briefly
focus on the continuing efforts of the United Nations
with regard to the crisis in Ukraine and the latest
developments on Ukraine since the briefing to the
Council by Under-Secretary-General Feltman on
13 March (see S/PV.7134).
The Secretary-General is today on his way to
Moscow and Kyiv as part of his ongoing and intensified
good offices efforts. He will pursue discussions in
both capitals on political and diplomatic solutions to
the crisis. Ahead of his trip, this morning he spoke to
Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.
Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7134), the Secretary-General has
continued to engage with key actors with the aim of
de-escalating the situation. He has unfailingly urged
dialogue and promoted adherence to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter in relation to
Ukraine, such as respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity and ensuring the fulfilment of the human
rights of all, with particular attention to minorities.
During my recent mission to Ukraine, I stressed the
importance of an inclusive Government and the need to
preserve a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multilingual

2/20

19/03/2014

My mission to Ukraine was followed by that of
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Šimonović. At the request of the Secretary-General,
given the volatility of the situation on the ground,
Mr. Šimonović extended his visit to Ukraine until
yesterday, 18 March.
In the meantime, a United Nations human rights
monitoring mission is being deployed in Ukraine in
order to provide an objective assessment as to what
is happening on the ground. Mr. Šimonović will take
the floor after me to brief the Council on his visit to
Ukraine and provide further information on the work
of the monitoring mission. I can add that the United
Nations has closely coordinated our efforts with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), in view of OSCE plans to also deploy monitors
to Ukraine.
I wish to recall that, during my mission to Ukraine,
I briefed the Council on 4 March from Kyiv. I reported
encountering a country grappling with a series of fastmoving and serious political, security and economic
challenges.
Since that mission, the crisis appears only to have
deepened. Instead of de-escalation, tensions in Crimea
and in eastern Ukraine continue to rise. The Crimean
authorities decided to hold a referendum on Crimea’s
status on 16 March, after which they announced
that close to 97 per cent of those who voted did so
in favour of Crimea’s secession from Ukraine. The
Secretary-General expressed his deep disappointment
and concern over the hasty decision to proceed with a
referendum with regard to an issue of such far-reaching
consequences for Ukraine, the region and beyond.
Subsequently, Crimea declared its independence, which
in turn was recognized by the Russian Federation.
On 17 March, the European Union and the United
States proceeded to apply targeted sanctions against
Russian and Crimean officials. On 18 March, President
Putin signed a treaty, which the Parliament of the
Russian Federation is expected to begin ratifying, in
order to make Crimea part of the Russian Federation.
At the same time, the Government in Kyiv has
committed to never accepting Crimea’s independence

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7144

or annexation, stating that Crimea is an integral part
of Ukraine.

specific measures that will pave the way towards a
diplomatic solution;

Yesterday, Ukraine’s Prime Minister expressed
concern that the conflict in the Crimean peninsula
was “shifting from a political to a military stage”.
That followed reports that a Ukrainian officer haad
been killed in front of a Ukrainian military base on the
outskirts of Simferopol.

“Although it has so far proved elusive, the path
towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis is still
open.”

Following that incident, the Ukrainian Deputy
Prime Minister and Defence Minister made plans to
travel to Crimea today. In turn, the Crimean leadership
has allegedly stated that Ukraine’s officials would be
turned back. That underscores the dire need for the
immediate opening of direct dialogue between Moscow
and Kyiv.
Today, reports are emerging that two Ukrainian
naval bases in Crimea have been taken over by
pro-Russian forces or unidentified groups. While
initial reports suggest that the seizure of bases has so
far occurred without bloodshed, such developments
obviously carry grave risks. The Secretary-General
has constantly underlined the importance of avoiding
further provocative actions and of refraining from
incitement.
Those latest events have heightened tensions and
added new layers of complexity to an already precarious
situation. We are now faced with risks of a dangerous
further escalation that could have ramifications for
international peace and security and have serious
significance for the Council and for the United Nations.
In a broader perspective, we should recall that the
Russian Federation and Ukraine remain neighbours,
with close and often complex historic, cultural,
economic and political ties. It is our view that it is
in the interests of us all that those two nations have
positive ties with each other and with the broader
region. However, the first step in that direction has to
be based on an immediate de-escalation and restraint in
the present crisis.
I would like to conclude by quoting some of the
Secretary-General’s key messages recently:
“It is clear that we are at a crossroads. If positions
continue to harden and rhetoric continues to sharpen,
there is great risk of a dangerous downward spiral;
“The focus must be to engage in direct dialogue
between Moscow and Kyiv, aimed at agreeing on

It is in that spirit and in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations that he now embarks on his mission to
Moscow and Kyiv.
I wish only to add that our primary diplomatic
tool is constructive dialogue on the basis of Chapter
VI of the Charter on the pacific settlement of disputes.
The United Nations will continue to play its role of
promoting dialogue for a peaceful and joint resolution
of the crisis, which now has become more serious than
ever.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Eliasson
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on my mission
to Ukraine. I joined the Deputy Secretary-General in
Kyiv on 9 March at the urgent request of the SecretaryGeneral and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. My mandate was to make an initial assessment
of the human rights situation, to highlight the critical
importance of respect for human rights in working
towards the de-escalation of tensions, and to make
recommendations on the way forward.
I met with individuals from across the cultural,
ethnic, linguistic and political spectrums in Kyiv,
Kharkiv and Lviv, including legislative and executive
officials, the Ombudsperson, civil society organizations
representing various communities, including victims of
human rights violations, as well as members of regional
organizations and the diplomatic community. My team
also collected numerous written materials.
I was not able to go to Crimea, as the authorities
there initially would not receive the mission or ensure its
security. Eventually, on Sunday, I received an invitation
to visit Simferopol. I hope that a visit to Crimea,
possibly by the head of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission, Mr. Armen Harutyunyan,
will soon take place. I also welcome the request made
on 19 March by the Independent Expert on the minority
issues to visit Ukraine. I hope that the mission will take
place as soon as possible and contribute to decreasing
tensions.

14-269203/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

Chronic human rights violations were among the
major reasons for the upheaval in Ukraine in recent
months. For many years, there have been concerns
about the weak rule of law, the lack of accountability
and resulting impunity. The right to a fair trial, equal
access to justice, cases of torture, ill-treatment and poor
detention conditions are all matters of long-standing
concern. The lack of independence of the judiciary
must be remedied and the reform of the security sector
and of the Prosecutor’s Office are also urgent tasks.
Corruption is a cross-cutting problem that affects the
rule of law, as well as equal access to public services,
and also needs to be addressed swiftly.
All reforms and new policy measures must
be adopted without any spirit of revenge and in a
consultative, transparent and inclusive manner. It is
crucial to ensure that one does not respond to human
rights violations with other human rights violations. In
the context of ongoing legislative measures concerning
lustration, those must fully respect human rights and
the rule of law, including the right to individual review
and to appeal.
Let me now move to protest-related violations. In
the context of the recent protests in Kyiv and elsewhere,
I am deeply concerned about alleged gross human
rights violations, including the excessive use of force
and extrajudicial killings, torture, disappearances and
arbitrary arrests and detentions. The actions of snipers
on the Maidan are of particularly grave concern and
need to be fully investigated. More than 100 people,
mostly protesters, but also some members of the
security forces, have also lost their lives and many more
were injured. I visited protest-related victims in the
hospital. I also spoke to physicians who helped victims
in makeshift hospitals, including the current Minister
of Health, Mr. Oleh Musiy, and Ms. Olga Bogomolets.
All of them confirmed that sniper killings of protesters
were undertaken in the style of an execution, in which
heads and chests were targeted. The perpetrators of
those and other human rights violations against all
victims must be promptly brought to justice, whatever
their background, status or affiliation, following
independent, impartial and thorough investigations.
Let me turn now to the ongoing violations and the
way to address them. I have urged all the authorities I
encountered to ensure inclusivity in governance and,
while ensuring freedom of expression, to curb hate
speech. Ukraine is a multi-ethnic, multilingual and
multicultural country. Nationalistic rhetoric and policies

4/20

19/03/2014

will be counterproductive and will further deepen the
internal dividing lines within society. All views should
be expressed freely in a democracy, as long as their
expression does not incite hatred and violence against
others. Any attempt to escalate the violence and hatred
should be prevented, or stopped when it has occurred,
before it escalates into further violence. It is incumbent
upon all authorities to ensure equal protection for all,
especially for minority groups.
The hasty repeal of the law on languages by
Parliament was a mistake. The decision of Parliament
was fortunately not approved by the acting President,
so that the old law will continue to be in force while
a new text is prepared. That process should be done
in full consultation with all concerned and be fully
participatory, transparent and inclusive.
During my visit, I met with a wide range of
representatives of civil society, including with
representatives of ethnic Russians. There seem to be
some cases where members of the Russian minority
have been harassed or even attacked, such as in the
case of the attack against a member of Parliament. All
allegations of human rights violations, in particular
against minorities, have to be thoroughly investigated.
However, it seems that those violations are neither
widespread nor systematic.
I have serious concerns about the situation in Crimea,
which remains tense with respect to the protection
of human rights. I have met with victims of arbitrary
arrest and detention, torture and ill-treatment and other
human rights violations. I spoke to representatives of
displaced Tatar persons in Lviv, Chairman of the Mejlis
of the Crimean Tatar People, Mr. Refat Chubarov, and
Mr. Nadir Bekirov, President of the Foundation for
Research and Support of Indigenous Peoples of Crimea.
I am deeply concerned about the human rights of those
who oppose the recent political events in Crimea. It has
been reported that a local Crimean Tatar activist who
disappeared after participating in a protest on 3 March
was found dead on 16 March in a forest near the town of
Belogorsk. According to reports from credible sources,
his body bore marks that suggest he had been subjected
to mistreatment.
In addition to cases of violence between various
political Ukrainian and Russian groups, with the alleged
participation of groups from outside of the region,
resulting in recent deaths and injuries, the spreading
of rumours, including through the media, particularly
in eastern Ukraine, is adding to a sense of insecurity
14-26920

Ukraine

19/03/2014

among the population. I understand that this is partly
due to rumours and perceptions about whether the
new authorities in Kyiv would ensure decentralization
policies, an inclusive Government and protect and
support the use of the Russian language.
There is an urgent need for independent monitors to
objectively assess and report on human rights violations,
as well as on the implications of recent events and to
monitor the current human rights situation throughout
the country. An independent, objective establishment
of the facts and circumstances surrounding alleged
human rights violations can help investigation, can
prevent further occurrences and can counter the spread
of false information.
We have received a request from the acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to dispatch
human rights monitors, and we have immediately
begun their deployment. The team will be composed
of 9 international and approximately 25 national staff.
The head of the human rights monitoring mission
arrived last week, and others are gradually joining him.
By Friday, monitors will be in place in Kharkiv and in
Donetsk.
In the roll-out of that mission, we will work
very closely with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has plans for a
larger monitoring mission. Both the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and I have maintained close contacts with
the OSCE leadership in that regard, and that will be
replicated on the ground.
The United Nations stands ready to help ensure
human rights are respected and protected in Ukraine
with the support of international and regional
organizations, including the OSCE, the Council of
Europe and others. In addition to monitoring the
human rights situation, the United Nations can assist by
providing technical assistance for legislative and other
reforms necessary to ensure that the recommendations
received by Ukraine from United Nations human rights
mechanisms are fully implemented so that they can
effectively contribute to both peace and development
efforts.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank the Council for
convening this meeting and for inviting me.

S/PV.7144

I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
to all Council members who addressed my Mission
today with words of condolences to the family of the
Ukrainian soldier who was killed yesterday after being
shot in his neck when a group of gunmen stormed the
Ukrainian military base in the north-east of Crimea, in
Simferopol. Yesterday our Foreign Minister protested
against all hostile and provocative actions of the
Russian Federdation’s armed forces, which caused the
death of the Ukrainian soldier.
Today we observed tremendous changes in the
situation in Crimea, but unfortunately those changes
are not for good. As we have envisaged in other previous
statements, the illegitimate referendum on the issue of
the annexation of the territory of Crimea to the Russian
Federation was conducted in an expedited manner on
16 March. Following immediately after the referendum,
on 18 March, the President of the Russian Federation
defiantly signed the agreement on its accession to the
Russian Federation, which is supposed to be ratified by
the Parliament of the Russian Federation on 21 March.
We consider all those acts to be illegitimate and we
call upon the entire civilized world not to recognize the
illegitimately declared independence of Crimea and its
violent dismembering from the territory of the country.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
for their important briefings on the situation of human
rights in Ukraine. For our part, I would like to say
only that the real violation of human rights is taking
place on the territory of the Crimean peninsula, which
is currently under the total control of the illegitimate
authorities of Crimea.
First of all, there are serious reservations about the
expressed free will of the population of that region of
Ukraine, because since 26 February, the armed forces
of the Russian Federation have, de facto, occupied
Crimea. Let me provide the Council with some of
the facts of the human rights violations that occurred
during the illegal referendum.
Some ballots were distributed to voters who were not
registered at the voting site, including nationals of other
countries. Russian citizens with a residency permit in
Simferopol were able to get a ballot for the referendum
and in fact to vote. But those who did not go to polling
stations were visited by mobile voting teams, escorted
by police, thus forcing people to vote. Journalists were
banned, despite having valid credentials.

14-269205/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

19/03/2014

Additional voters lists included large numbers
of citizens who were not qualified to vote. Contrary
to existing elections provisions, ballots were issued
immediately after submitting a registration application
to a supplementary list, without a vote by the
Commission members having taken place.

Accordingly, I assert that, on the basis of customary
norms and international law, the international
community is obliged not to recognize Crimea as a
subject of international law, or any situation, treaty
or agreement that may arise or be achieved by that
territory.

Even the results of the illegal referendum are very
doubtful because of the decision made by the Crimean
Tartars — who include about 300,000 people — to
boycott. Ethnic Ukrainians, who make up about half
a million people, and national minority populations
in Crimea did not take part in the referendum. The
referendum ballots indicated two questions as options,
neither of which provided for maintaining the present
status as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea;
rather, they only referred to accession to the Russian
Federation.

My country expresses its strong and imperative
protest against the recognition of the Russian
Federation of the self-proclaimed republic, as a matter
of international law. Those actions by the Russian side
do not meet the international obligations of the Russian
Federation in relation to its multilateral and bilateral
agreements guaranteeing the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, the integrity and inviolability of borders and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.

The personalities of foreign observers who were
invited to Crimea to monitor the referendum raised
serious doubts regarding impartiality.
Once again, I would like to emphasize the illegality
of the referendum. Even without regard for the laws or
sovereign territorial jurisdiction of Ukraine, of which
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea is a subject, selfproclaimed authorities in Crimea held a referendum
on 16 March that violated not only Ukraine’s
current legislation but also the fundamental rules of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Statute of the Council of Europe and other
documents, including of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the 1991 AlmaAta Declaration regarding the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
An abundance of evidence, including photographs
and videotaped materials, eyewitness accounts of
events, including those of foreign nationals, prove
that the conditions of the so-called referendum failed
to meet the democratic standards of referendums
developed under the framework of the OSCE and the
Council of Europe. The declaration of independence
by the Crimean Republic is a direct consequence of
the application of the use of force and threats against
Ukraine by the Russian Federation. Given the Russian
nuclear power status, the situation is particularly
dangerous in terms of Ukraine’s independence and
territorial integrity and for international peace and
security in general.

6/20

The independence of that formation was declared
by an illegitimate authority based on the results of the
anti-constitutional referendum held under outrageous
violations of the democratic standards. Russia’s
recognition of the self-proclaimed republic of Crimea
has one single goal: to create pseudo-legitimate reasons
for the annexation of the territory of Ukraine and its
incorporation into the Russian Federation.
We are seriously concerned about the security of
the ethnic Ukrainians, Ukrainian Tartars, Karaims
and other ethnic groups living in Crimea that have not
supported the so-called referendum. Their lives are
seriously threatened.
In conclusion, I would like to echo my Council
colleagues. Ukraine and the entire civilized world
will never recognize the illegitimately declared
independence of Crimea and its accession to the
Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Šimonović for their statements, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Ukraine for his.
This past Saturday, the international community sent a
unanimous message to Russia on behalf of the Council,
to whit, that the referendum it had instigated in Crimea
was illegal and null and void under international law.
Russia’s veto changed nothing — quite the contrary.
The illegal act of separating Crimea, which had been
in preparation since a long time, appeared all the more
blatant.

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

Yesterday Crimea was annexed by Russia,
despite the picture painted that has fooled no one.
The annexation was accompanied by flags, drums
and trumpets forming a gathering wave of aggressive
nationalism, the future consequences of which, once it
is awoken, are unknown; nationalism that never leads
to anything good, a nationalism that is used to mask or
to justify attempts to suppress civil rights.
Moreover, little effort has been made to hide the
use of force. The referendum was hastily organized,
Russian soldiers were everywhere. Nothing was
left to chance. The media was controlled at the level
of describing events, international observers were
recruited from among the far-right European parties
and if fascists are part of the story, they are certainly not
where they are claimed to be. Finally, the final results
appeared so excessive that they lost all meaning. How
could more than 86 per cent of the people have voted,
when some communities — particularly the Crimean
Tartars and Ukrainians that represent nearly 14 per cent
of the population — had called for a boycott.
The United Nations was created to ensure that
one would no longer witness such spectacles which
dishonour the organizers and in effect reflect upon
the entire international community. The rule of law
must guide relations among States. The acquisition of
territory resulting from the use of force or even from
simple threats is simply unacceptable. That principle
that Russia subscribed to in the early days is our code.
I would call it the DNA of the Organization. As I stated
on Saturday (see S/PV.7138), by voting against the draft
resolution, it is the Charter of the United Nations that
Russia has in effect vetoed.
We have just heard from Mr. Šimonović that nothing
in Ukraine justified references to extremely serious
attacks on human rights or minorities placed in critical
situations. If any serious human rights violations have
occurred, it was during the time of Yanukovych.
At least we are reassured regarding the situation
throughout the country. The authorities in Kyiv are
endeavoring to extend their hand to all of the various
components of Ukrainian society. Nothing will justify
in the long-term the current discussion about an
irresponsible Government whose actions could lead to
fear among its populations.
In terms of the protection of Russian and Russian
language populations in Ukraine invoked by Moscow
to justify its intervention in Ukraine — it is again clear

S/PV.7144

that it does not correspond to the reality of the situation,
nor is it a legal justification of the military occupation
of a territory of a sovereign State and it becomes even
less relevant when used as a pretext to extend its own
borders.
We continue to recall that minorities in Ukraine,
including religious and language minorities, must be
protected. That falls first and foremost to the transition
authorities — and that is what they are doing. The
situation in Kyiv, L’viv, Donets’k or Kharkiv should not
concern the Council. It is in Sevastopol and Simferopol
that the law is being flouted, militiamen terrorize those
who will not give in to force, and Ukrainian soldiers are
being killed simply because they refuse to surrender.
Faced with a Russia that does not heed the concerns
of the international community as a whole and has not
even responded to the sensible propositions we have
made to peacefully resolve the crisis, we are forced to
respond. All that remains is to make Russia understand
that we will never accept the fait accompli that it has
just imposed on the ground. But we must also look to
the future, with a double call on Russia.
The first is to tell it to stop there. Agents provocateurs
are already at work in eastern Ukraine; let them not
play the same game as in Crimea; let Russia cease its
thinly veiled manoeuvres. It has already succeeded
in creating lasting alienation between Ukraine and
European countries; to go further wold be most grave.
The second call regards the need for Moscow to open a
channel of direct negotiations with Kyiv. Russia should
make no mistake — Ukraine cannot be replaced with
something else, as it seems to hope; no one will decide
Ukraine’s future except Ukraine itself.
We are already counting the first casualties of this
grim misadventure. Yesterday, the Ukrainian Prime
Minister announced that the conflict with Russia was
now moving from a political phase to a military one.
We continue to call on Russia to see reason, listen to
the voice of the international community, and not drag
the international community into a spiral that will
sooner or later spin out of control, or at least escape the
restraint of the Ukrainians.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation thanks Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović for their updates on the recent
developments in Ukraine. From the outset, we with to
reiterate the Deputy Secretary-General’s observation
that the door for dialogue to resolve the crisis in Ukraine

14-269207/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

is still open, not closed. We hope that all of the parties
involved and concerned will take advantage of that.
This is the eighth time in three weeks that the
Security Council has met on the situation in Ukraine.
This underscores the seriousness with which the
Council views the matter and its commitment to
addressing issues related to international peace and
security. Nigeria has consistently highlighted and
stressed the need for dialogue, especially between the
parties directly concerned, and for mediation by the
rest of the international community to ensure that the
situation in Ukraine is resolved peacefully.
We reaffirm our earlier warning that the world has
too many challenges to international peace and security
to contemplate adding another layer to existing ones.
All peaceful means, including mediation, arbitration
and dialogue, must be explored and used to the hilt
by the parties concerned. Further escalation of the
situation with hurtful rhetoric would only leave to
grave consequences, including military confrontation,
which the world can ill afford, especially when nuclearweapon States are involved. The world would therefore
not want to see any further deterioration in the situation
as this could have grave implications, not just for
Ukraine, but for the entire region and beyond. The
Deputy Secretary-General’s report was clear on that
point.

19/03/2014

turned to Russia with a request to welcome Crimea
into the Russian Federation. Russia as a sovereign State
agreed to the Crimean people’s request. A treaty to that
end has been signed between the Russian Federation
and the Crimean Republic on the accession into the
Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol and the creation within the Russian
Federation of two new territorial units.
The results of the referendum were quite clear. More
than 82 per cent of voters participated in the voting,
more than 96 per cent of whom chose in favour of
reunification with Russia. This figure is the expression
of the free will of the people of Crimea.
I shall now briefly depart from my text. I was
stunned by how the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine tried to discredit the referendum by using the
arguments of Western propaganda — that those who
did not want to vote were visited at home with the
police in tow. A few of my Western colleagues may
not know this, but my Ukrainian colleagues know very
well that this is an old, tried and tested tradition in our
elections. If someone cannot vote because they are
too ill to come to the polling booth, members of the
electoral commission will visit that person at home to
afford him or her an opportunity to vote.

With regard to the human rights situation in
Ukraine, we welcome the deployment by Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović of a United Nations
monitoring team throughout the country to establish the
truth or otherwise or alleged human rights violations.
Nigeria once again urges all parties to embrace dialogue
and negotiation, and to seek a peaceful resolution
to the crisis. We call on all concerned to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in line with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

But I am going to stick to the topic. I will not dwell
on the history of the issue in detail. The President of
the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, spelt it out
yesterday in a televised appearance with which I trust
all present here are familiar. I shall focus on just a few
aspects. Today, out of the 2.2 million inhabitants of the
Crimean peninsula, close to 1.5 million are Russian;
350,000 are Ukrainians, most of whom consider Russian
to be their mother tongue; and between 290,000 and
300,0000 are Crimean Tatars, a significant proportion
of whom, as shown by the referendum, also favour
Russia, regardless of what others elsewhere might have
suggested in the run-up to the referendum.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Yesterday, a truly historic event took
place — the reunification of Russia and Crimea, which
our peoples have awaited for six decades. In strict
compliance with international law and democratic
procedure, without outside interference and through a
free referendum, the people of Crimea have fulfilled
what is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and a great number of fundamental international legal
documents — their right to self-determination. They

A historic injustice has been righted. It resulted
from the arbitrary actions of the leader of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics at the time, Nikita
Khrushchev, who, with the stroke of a pen in 1954,
in violation of constitutional norms, transferred the
Russian region of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which was
then part of the same State. He did so without informing
the population of Crimea and without their consent.
No one has showed any regard for the views of the

8/20

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

Crimeans during the break-up of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. Over the years, many citizens and
community activists in Crimea have repeatedly raised
this issue, stating that Crimea is intrinsically Russian
land and that Sevastopol is a Russian city. It is only now
that the will and freely expressed choice of the Crimean
has been fulfiled.
Of course, we have taken note of the reaction of a
number of our Western partners who simply cannot rid
themselves of the imperial colonial habits of attempting
to impose their writ on other peoples and countries.
Now they are nervous as their reckless geopolitical
gamble in Ukraine has led to such unexpected results.
The people of Crimea have spoken and made their
choice, as have the people of Russia, and those choices
must be accepted and respected by all.
Let me now turn to the alarming situation in
Ukraine and the international assistance provided
to it to overcome its pronounced internal crisis. The
pseudo-friends of Ukraine need to understand once and
for all that the cause of the crisis there lies not with
Russia but in the irresponsible actions of individual
Ukrainian political forces and their foreign mentors.
The attempt to drive Ukraine, like other targeted
States of the eastern partnership, to make an artificial
choice between the European Union and Russia, largely
provoked the deep-seated internal political crisis that
led to the unconstitutional changes in Kyiv.
However, Western capitals, it would seem, continue
to feel no shame about backing people who are not
ready to listen or heed the views of the entire Ukrainian
people and who are fully dominated by the ultra-radical,
nationalist organizations Right Sector and the Freedom
Party, which according to the European Parliament, is
anti-Russian, anti-Semitic and xenophobic. And yet, it
is with them that the European Union is planning to
sign the political section of an association agreement in
the near future.
In that respect, we are puzzled by Mr. Šimonović’s
glib, one-sided assessment of the human rights situation
in Ukraine. We are especially puzzled by the fact that
Mr. Šimonović referred to the Maidan snipers. Not a
word was said about the evidence that provocateurs
fired both on the representatives of law and order and
on the opposition forces to pave the way for the use of
force to seize power.
One simply cannot claim that there has been
no politically motivated killing or mass torture; no

S/PV.7144

kidnapping of individuals, no attacks on journalists and
human rights defenders; no political detentions. One
cannot claim that nationalist radicals, like the Taliban in
Afghanistan, are not destroying and profaning historical
sites, that there are no chilling racist incidents with
anti-Russian and anti-Semitic undercurrents, backed
or at least passed over in silence by those who have
seized power in Kyiv. The Kyiv extremists have offered
rewards for killing journalists, the self-proclaimed
authorities have shut down foreign television stations,
foreign correspondents have been denied all access,
and they are even trying to scramble the retransmission
of satellite signals.
Two scandalous incidents occurred only yesterday.
Two dozen members of Parliament and activists of the
Freedom Party pushed their way into the Cabinet, and
in front of cameras beat up and took away the General
Director of the Ukrainian First National television
station, who knows where. Who is in authority in Kyiv?
Neo-Nazi slogans are heard, Nazi enforcers and their
Bandera-loving storm-troopers are glorified, and calls
are sent out for violence against Russian-speaking
Ukrainians and Russians in general, with all the signs
of ethnic cleansing, and for the armed overthrow of the
legal authorities. These must all be clear and obvious
to anyone claiming to be objective. Instead, supposedly
profound concerns are raised about the human rights
situation in Crimea. As a result of the combined efforts
of the people and the self-defence forces, law and
order has been maintained, and Crimean authorities
have guaranteed the rights of all minorities, without
exception.
In that respect, we would especially like to draw
attention to the fact that, pursuant to the treaty between
the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea
regarding succession to the Federation, there will be
three equal State languages in the Republic: Ukrainian,
Russian and Crimean Tartar. Crimeans, with the
support of the entire Russian people, are doing all in
their power to preserve peace and tranquility in Crimea.
No provocation will keep them from doing so, not even
such incidents as that which occurred a few days ago
in Simferopol, where, in Maidan style, sniper fire from
an unfinished building across from the Ukrainian
military base killed an unarmed self-defence soldier
and a Ukrainian national soldier. The attack by Russian
forces on a Ukrainian military facility, to which the
Permanent Representative referred today, simply did
not take place. It was clearly a planned provocation

14-269209/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

that was immediately seized on by Mr. Yatsenyuk and
Mr. Turchynov to call on the Ukrainian military forces
in Ukraine to use their weapons — against whom?
Against their fellow countrymen?
Russia stands ready to work in close cooperation
with all international partners that are genuinely
interested in normalizing the situation in Ukraine on
the basis of a broad internal Ukrainian dialogue with
the participation of all responsible political forces and
all regions. Establishing a multilateral mechanism for
the settlement of the Ukrainian crisis could be promoted
with out partners through our proposal to create an
assistance group for Ukraine. We await responses to
our constructive initiative.
We will continue to discuss proposals aimed
at fulfilling the agreement of 21 February with the
objective of restoring order, launching comprehensive
constitutional reform in Ukraine, and putting an end
to the provocations of the ultra-nationalist and radical
forces against the Russian-speaking population and our
fellow countrymen in south-eastern and other parts
of Ukraine. To that end, observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council
of Europe are invited as long as they implement an
impartial mandate and mutually agreed modalities for
such a deployment in various regions of Ukraine.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their briefings.
The representative of the Russian Federation began
his statement extolling the so-called referendum as
embodying democratic procedures and having been
conducted without outside interference. Russia is
known for its literary greatness, and what the Council
just heard from the Russian Ambassador showed more
imagination than Tolstoy or Chekhov. Russia has
decided, it seems, to rewrite its borders, but it cannot
rewrite the facts.
The United States rejects Russia’s military intervention
and land grab in Crimea. Those actions again violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, Russia’s
own binding agreements, international law, the expressed
will of most members of the Council and the letter and
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Two days ago,
President Obama and other world leaders put in place
sanctions in response to Russia’s blatant disregard for global
opinion and the legal rights of Ukraine. We are prepared

10/20

19/03/2014

to take additional steps if Russian aggression or Russian
provocations continue.
In this Chamber, when the crisis began, the Russian
Federation described its intervention into Crimea as a human
rights protection mission. It claimed that the recent change
of Government in Ukraine constituted such a danger to
ethnic Russians in Crimea that military action was justified.
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović’s briefing
once again illustrates that the crisis was never about
protecting the rights of ethnic Russians and was always
about one country’s ambition to redraw its own borders.
Indeed, if there was ever a time to be concerned
about human rights in Crimea, it is now. Credible
reports indicate that cases of harassment have been
directed by Russian allies against ethnic Ukrainians and
Tatars. The Tatar community, which constitutes 12 per
cent of the population, is rightly fearful of again falling
victim to deportation or discrimination. The Crimean
First Deputy Prime Minister has recently announced
that Crimean Tatars will be evicted from some of their
land, which he claimed is needed for “infrastructure
projects”. The body of Reshat Ahmetov, a Crimean
Tatar, was discovered Sunday. He had last been seen
at a protest in Simferopol on 3 March. Ahmetov’s body
reportedly showed signs of torture.
Russian troops are reportedly storming apartment
buildings housing Ukrainian troops, border guards,
veterans and their families, threatening them and
demanding their immediate departure. In addition,
we are seriously concerned about activists, civil
society leaders, media restrictions and journalists in
Crimea. Accordingly, the United States supports the
rapid deployment of international observers in all
parts of Ukraine. We believe it is instructive that the
Government of Ukraine has repeatedly welcomed their
deployment, and the Russian Federation has not.
Again today in Vienna, Russia was the lone country
to block an Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe monitoring mission. There, Russia was
dramatically outnumbered. It was the lone dissenting
voice out of 57 countries; 56, it seemed, had a different
view. Russian officials say that they understand the
urgency, but they vote with their feet, relying on their
military forces and refusing to allow the deployment
of those who could help defuse the crisis and prevent
further violence. After hearing my Russian colleague’s
assault minutes ago on the Assistant SecretaryGeneral’s briefing, I see the logic of Russian obstruction.

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

Objective information is inconvenient to the Russian
tale. We call on all parties to support these observer
missions, including their access to Crimea.
We want to thank members of the Council for taking
a strong stance on Russia’s intervention in Ukraine and
for making it clear that Russia stands alone in its failed,
illogical and mendacious attempt to justify actions that
cannot be justified. Five days ago, when the Council
accurately described the Crimean separatist referendum
as invalid, only a single hand rose in opposition. When
the Council declared that the referendum could not form
the basis for any alteration of the status of Crimea, only
a single hand rose in opposition. Now the referendum
has taken place, but the national and international legal
status of Crimea has not changed. A thief can steal
property, but that does not confer the right of ownership
on the thief.
In conclusion, let me just emphasize again that
what Russia has done is wrong as a matter of law, wrong
as a matter of history, wrong as a matter of policy,
and dangerous. What happened in Crimea cannot be
recognized as valid. We must stand together denying
recognition and imposing consequences for that illegal
act. In doing so, we must also be very clear that what
happened in Crimea cannot be repeated in other parts
of Ukraine.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Assistant
Secretary-General
Šimonović
and
Permanent
Representative of Ukraine Sergeyev for their statements.
The Security Council is meeting at a sensitive
moment. The 16 March referendum was held in
Crimea and has been judged as unconstitutional and
has been seen as undermining the territorial integrity
of Ukraine, a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations. The circumstances around the vote has led to
worry in the international community, which questions
its legitimacy. The holding of the referendum has no
doubt contributed to the worsening of the situation.
Chile would reiterate the need to restore the rule of
law and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, in keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The death of a Ukrainian soldier in an assault in one
of the military barracks in Crimea and the increased
tensions in the eastern part of the country reveal an
escalation of the crisis that has to be stopped. In that
context, we value the briefings of Deputy Secretary-

S/PV.7144

General Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights Šimonović.
In truth, we are observing a growing deterioration
of the situation. Chile believes that it is necessary to
broaden the space for a solution through diplomacy.
That is why we endorse the efforts of the Organization
and, most especially, the efforts being undertaken by
the Secretary-General.
Chile regrets that Mr. Šimonović and observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe were not allowed to enter Crimea. We call for
the actions of the United Nations not to be impeded,
with a view to ensuring timely and truthful information
in order to be able to assess the human rights situation
on the ground. The situation of ethnic minorities in
Crimea is of concern for us, especially that of the Tatar
minorities, who have started moving to other areas of
Ukraine. The existence of internally displaced persons
is the clearest sign of a worsening of the crisis. That
fact strengthens the call of the international community
to seek a negotiated solution.
It is indispensable that the Council contribute to
and generate maximum restraint and moderation among
both parties. Accordingly, it makes a new appeal for
all sides to avoid unilateral actions that might escalate
the crisis still further. Now is the time for constructive
participation in an inclusive process that would
guarantee the rule of law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and respect for human rights.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): We thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their briefings and
for the devotion they have shown in their activities
taken with respect to Ukraine.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the recent developments in that country. The Republic
of Korea will not recognize the referendum in Crimea
nor the annexation of Crimea by Russia. We call on
Russia and the Crimean authorities to refrain from
further hasty actions. We urge them to immediately
enter into meaningful discussions with the Ukrainian
Government and the international community, with a
view to finding a peaceful political solution.
Implications of any boundary alterations on the
existing international order must be fully taken into
account. We hope that space exists for a negotiated way
forward. In that context, we greatly value the ongoing

14-2692011/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

mediation efforts by the international community,
particularly those of the Secretary-General. We look
forward to the continued constructive role of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon in that regard.
Once again, we reiterate our firm support for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Ukraine. All the relevant international and bilateral
agreements, especially the Charter of the United Nations
and the Budapest Memorandum of 1994, must be fully
observed. It is also vital that the rights of all persons
in Ukraine, especially of minorities, be protected. The
future of Ukraine should be considered and decided
upon based only upon the will and aspirations of all
Ukrainians themselves, without any intervention or
influence by outside forces.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I wish to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Šimonović for their respective briefings.
I also thank the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
for his participation in today’s meeting of the Security
Council.
Argentina is following with great concern the
unfolding of the situation in Ukraine. The delegation
of Argentina once again reiterates the fundamental
importance of adhering to the principles that we have
all subscribed to as Members of the United Nations.
For Argentina, it is essential to respect the primacy
of the principle of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of all States. Therefore, in
speaking in support of the draft resolution that was
put to a vote on 15 March, I said that my country had
sustained that principle throughout its history, even
before the existence of the United Nations, and it will
continue steadfastly to do so.
Argentina does not comment on the internal
developments in Ukraine that have led to the current
institutional crisis in the country because we understand
that all countries should refrain from intervening
militarily, economically or politically in the internal
affairs of other States and should adjust its actions
so that they are in strict compliance to international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. In that
context, we urge that human rights and international
humanitarian law be scrupulously observed and that
the rights of all minorities — be they ethnic, linguistic,
cultural or religious — be upheld.

12/20

19/03/2014

We are concerned about the past violence and
the current violence — and the possibility that it
might worsen. We regret that, despite repeated calls,
the rhetoric of confrontation has not been abandoned
in Ukraine. It is incumbent upon all of us to refrain
from encouraging dissent or escalating confrontations
that could become a threat to international peace and
security. Indeed, it is the most influential actors who
should be calling for constructive diplomacy.
Finally, we support the mediation efforts that are
being undertaken by various United Nations officials,
as well as the good offices of the Secretary-General.
We understand that this situation cannot be resolved
by unilateral acts. We therefore stress that actions that
complicate the situation and that lead us further away
from a political and peaceful solution to the crisis must
be avoided.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting on the situation
in Ukraine. It shows the seriousness of the situation
and the commitment of the Security Council in the
quest for a diplomatic solution to the crisis. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for their respective
briefings on the political, security and human rights
situation in Ukraine.
Rwanda is still concerned about the prevailing
rhetoric in Ukraine and the region and the continued
demonstrations and violence in the cities of eastern
Ukraine. Something needs to be done, and that begins
with a commitment from all parties, with a sense of
urgency, to resume dialogue, in order to avoid further
escalation of the situation.
We continue to commend the role of the United
Nations in that regard. We look forward to the visit of
the Secretary-General to the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, scheduled for tomorrow, 20 March, and we
hope that his visit will help all the parties involved and
regional organizations to find a political and diplomatic
solution that will benefit Ukrainians and all the peoples
of the region. We welcome the deployment of a United
Nations human rights monitoring team in Ukraine, and
we count on all stakeholders to extend full cooperation
to the team. We indeed believe that only an independent
body will be able to objectively establish the facts on
alleged human rights violations.
Rwanda has been calling for constructive efforts to
de-escalate the situation, and we continue to advocate for

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

a political and diplomatic solution to the conflict, with
the engagement of the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and the Russian Federation at the international
level, and for inclusive talks at the national level among
all Ukrainian parties that ensure equal participation
by all communities in the country while protecting
minorities. In the meantime, we call on all Ukrainian
parties to respect the rule of law and exercise maximum
restraint. We urge the regional and international actors
to avoid any diplomatic, economic, political or even
military move that would further escalate the situation.
In conclusion, let me stress that the Security
Council, which is the world’s only body in charge of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must work towards restoring its own unity, in order to
be able to defend the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a United Nations State Member
while addressing the interests of all the countries of the
region.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for his statement. I also
thank Ukraine Ambassador Sergeyev.
As we know, five days ago, the Council sought
to adopt a draft resolution on Ukraine reaffirming
fundamental principles of international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations. The draft resolution
was opposed by only one State: Russia. The message
of Council members to Russia, reflecting the views
of the broader international community, nevertheless,
remains clear. It must comply with international law,
take active steps to de-escalate the crisis and engage in
dialogue towards a peaceful resolution of it.
But the fact is that Russia has steadfastly ignored
that message. It has moved to annex Crimea on the
basis of a referendum that was manifestly unlawful and
illegitimate, not least because it was carried out while
Russian forces exercised effective control over Crimea.
President Putin’s signature of a decree recognizing
Crimean independence and of a purported treaty with
Crimean leaders and the presidential approval of a
draft bill on the annexation of Crimea do not validate
the referendum, nor do they provide any legitimate
basis for Russia’s acquisition of part of the territory of
Ukraine. Indeed, Russia’s actions are a clear violation
of the fundamental principles of international law,
which were contained in the draft resolution it vetoed

S/PV.7144

on Saturday: respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and the illegality of the acquisition of
territory by the threat or use of force. Those remain
the international community’s touchstone, and the
international community will not recognize Russia’s
annexation of Crimea.
Russia has further strengthened its military control
of Crimea in recent days, dramatically escalating
tensions. Incidents involving the use of armed force,
the occupation of military bases and the killing of
a Ukrainian soldier and the wounding of another
significantly increase the stakes and make a descent
into conflict more likely.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has sought
an immediate meeting of Ministers of Defence of the
parties to the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, which
provided security guarantees to Ukraine, in order to
prevent further escalation of the crisis, and we urge
Russia to respond positively to that request. He has sent
Ukraine’s First Deputy Prime Minister and the Acting
Defence Minister to Crimea to de-escalate the crisis. It
is crucial that that direct dialogue take place.
The Secretary-General’s travel to Moscow and
Kyiv over the next few days is clearly welcome, and
we urge all parties to engage in constructive dialogue
with him.
In pursuing its current course of action, Russia
has chosen a path towards isolation. In doing so, it
undermines its own standing, credibility and relations
with other States and increasingly poses a threat to
security and stability in the region. Inevitably, there
are consequences for its unlawful action. In addition
to measures put in place by others, the Australian
Government announced, on 19 March, that it would
impose targeted measures against individuals who
have been instrumental in the Russian threat to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We
have not taken those steps lightly and have done so
with regret, only after repeatedly urging Russia to
de-escalate and engage in diplomatic dialogue to
resolve the crisis.
An important first step for Russia will be to
recognize the need for and support the deployment
of monitors on the ground. We encourage Russia to
engage constructively in support of an Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitoring
mission to Ukraine. Such a mission should be deployed
as a matter of priority.

14-2692013/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

Given the allegations raised by Russia about
serious infringement of the human rights of Russian
speakers in Crimea and elsewhere in Ukraine, it is
obviously important that those allegations continue
to be independently assessed, especially as the OSCE
High Commissioner for National Minorities found no
evidence of violations or threats to Russian speakers
in Crimea during her recent visit. As Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović has just reported to us,
the violations he has learned of are neither widespread
nor systematic. On the other hand, Crimea’s Tatar
community clearly feel threatened. Mr. Šimonović has
noted there are credible reports that a Tatar activist has
been tortured and murdered. There are also reports that
Ukrainian civil society activists have been abducted.
Those violations must cease. Ongoing human rights
monitoring is essential, and we welcome the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights team that is already being done and
their continued deployment, but such monitoring must
also take place in Crimea.
In conclusion, we are obviously at a critical point
for Ukraine and the region and for the integrity of the
rules-based international order itself. All Member
States have a direct interest in the preservation of that
order.
As the Deputy Secretary-General has underlined
again today, the crisis must be resolved peacefully
through diplomatic means and direct dialogue. Such a
resolution must respect Ukraine’s unity and territorial
integrity. It is up to Russia to commit to finding such
a solution. It is not too late for it to turn from the
deliberate path of provocation and isolation that it has
taken.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for their
respective briefings. China has been closely following
developments in the situation in Ukraine.
The Security Council has repeatedly taken up the
question of Ukraine. China has explicitly stated its
principled position on the issues concerned. Respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is China’s consistent position. China has
taken an fair and impartial approach in addressing
the question of Ukraine. We will continue to promote
peaceful dialogue and to play a more constructive role
in seeking a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine.

14/20

19/03/2014

China has put forward the following proposals in order
to address the Ukrainian crisis.
An international coordinating mechanism comprising
all parties concerned should be established as soon as
possible in order to explore political ways to address
the situation in Ukraine. In the meantime, all parties
should refrain from taking any action that may further
exacerbate tensions. International financial institutions
should start to explore various possibilities to help
Ukraine maintain its economic and financial stability.
In our view, a political solution to the Crimean issue
should be found within the framework of law and order.
All parties concerned should exercise restraint and
refrain from any action that could cause the situation
to further deteriorate. The international community
should make constructive efforts to defuse tension.
China supports today’s trip by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon to the countries concerned to
conduct mediation. China hopes that the international
community will continue to make constructive efforts
to defuse tension.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s intent to travel to
Moscow and Kyiv this week. We hope that his visit
will help to persuade President Putin to step back, to
de-escalate the siutation, to fulfil Russia’s obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations, to allow the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and United Nations monitors full access to
Crimea, and to engage in dialogue with Ukraine.
We also thank Mr. Šimonović for his briefing. It
is inexcusable that he was denied access to Crimea,
but we applaud his efforts to gather information
from the peninsula via other means. His report on
the extent of human rights violations in Crimea is of
serious concern. Cases of arbitrary arrest, detention,
torture, ill-treatment, disappearances and population
displacements directly contradict Russia’s claims to the
contrary.
We share Mr. Šimonović’s concerns about the
gross human rights violations that took place under the
previous Ukrainian Government. In that context, we
welcome the new Ukrainian Government’s request for
United Nations monitors to investigate those concerns
and its commitment to reflect Ukraine’s rich linguistic,
ethnic and cultural diversity. We urge the rapid

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

deployment of the United Nations monitors across the
country.
Last Saturday, 14 Council members underlined
their commitment to Ukraine’s unity and territorial
integrity (see S/PV.7138). Russia was urged to distance
itself from the referendum set to take place the next
day in Crimea. Our aim was to avoid further escalation
and to ask Russia to heed the views of the international
community.
Russia has rejected that message. It rejected it on
Saturday by vetoing a draft resolution that carried
the overwhelming support of the Council. Yesterday,
following the referendum, it underlined its disregard
for our appeals for calm and for de-escalation by
announcing new laws to incorporate Crimea into the
Russian Federation. The Permanent Representative of
Russia spoke about that process being in compliance
with international law, without outside interference and
through a democratic process. It is hard to know which
of those three assertions is the biggest lie.
Sunday’s referendum was a mockery of democratic
practice. It was illegal under the Ukrainian Constitution,
arranged at 10 days’ notice, met none of the OSCE
standards for democratic elections, was held under
Russian military occupation and gave the people of
Crimea no option to vote for the status quo. Neither the
referendum nor the succession of increasingly desperate,
contradictory and inconsistent legal arguments put
forward by Russia can conceal the stark reality of
that country’s actions. Russia has annexed part of the
sovereign territory of an independent State Member of
the United Nations through the use of military force.
Russia claims not to be bound by any of its previous
obligations and commitments in respect of Ukraine,
including the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, on the
grounds that it does not regard the new Government
in Ukraine as legitimate. However, treaties and
international agreements are between States, not
Governments. A change in Government in Kyiv does
not absolve Russia from its international obligations
and commitments. We are witnessing the illegal
behaviour of a large country bullying its neighbours,
disregarding international norms and unilaterally
adjusting internationally recognized borders to its own
advantage.
Yesterday, in his speech to the Federation Council,
President Putin said: “In the hearts and conscience of
the people, Crimea has always been, and remains, an

S/PV.7144

inalienable part of Russia”. He went on to add that,
because Crimea was a strategic territory, it needed to be
under the strong and stable sovereignty of Russia. Now,
at last, after weeks of denial, Russia’s real motives for
its military adventurism have been admitted. There are
plenty of lessons from history about where that kind of
extraordinary logic leads. One only has to think back
to the 1930s to recognize the dangers of a complacent
international response when such behaviour occurs.
The United Nations system and the framework of
international norms that it embodies were the response
of our forefathers to a global conflict that resulted from
lawless aggression. The United Nations was designed to
provide security to us all by preventing the subjugation
of any State. We all therefore have an interest in
upholding the international framework and norms that
the United Nations represents. Russian actions throw
into doubt the credibility of that international order.
That is why they should be clearly condemned and
why Russia must now face further consequences for its
actions.
Russia cannot be granted the impunity to disregard
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Even at this late stage, Russia has the option to change
course, to heed the message of the international
community and to engage in dialogue with Ukraine.
Last week, in the Council, we all heard the Ukrainian
Prime Minister offer to open up such a dialogue with
Russia (see S/PV.7134). Yet, so far, even that basic step
has been rejected.
The situation in Ukraine and the region is serious.
Yesterday, another threshold was passed when a
Ukrainian serviceman was killed during the storming
of a Ukrainian military compound in Crimea by
forces aligned with Russia. There are credible reports
of Russian-inspired provocations across eastern
and southern Ukraine. We praise the continuing
and remarkable restraint of the Ukrainian military.
However, such actions only underline how close we are
to a further dramatic escalation.
The issue extends far beyond Ukraine’s imperilled
borders. The issue before us is about respect for
bilateral and international treaties. It is about upholding
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Those are the frameworks on which we all rely
and that Russia is challenging. We have a collective
responsibility to defend everything that we have worked
so hard to build over the past 70 years.

14-2692015/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I, too, would like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their briefings and
our colleague from Ukraine for his statement.
Last Sunday, a hastily crafted illegal referendum
took place in Ukraine’s Crimea — a referendum held
in a region cut off from its mainland and the rest of
the world by another country’s armed forces and
under a heavy barrage of aggressive anti-Ukrainian
propaganda.
Representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of
Europe and key United Nations national and regional
organizations with outstanding experience in human
rights monitoring and the organization and observation
of elections were all prevented from entering Crimea.
The plebiscite was organized in a record short period
of time, probably a first in the practice of referendums,
without nationwide preparations or consultations. Not
a single credible international observer was present to
verify and ascertain that this hurried referendum was
free and fair. Those facts alone are sufficient to raise
alarms about the quality of the referendum and its
fraudulence.
At the same time, notably while representatives
of major international organizations, monitors and
observers were prevented from entering Crimea, more
than 100 so-called “independent referendum observers”,
as our French colleague has stated, who were wellestablished hard-line nationalists, Nazi sympathizers,
deniers of the Holocaust, anti-semites, deniers of the
massacre of Srebrenica and Islamophobes — hardly a
company to keep for those who claim to protect Europe,
Ukraine and Crimea from fascism — were able to
observe and to ascertain that allegedly the referendum
was fine and fair.
The indigenous Tatar population, for whom Crimea
is the only place on Earth they can call home and whose
massive deportation by Stalin in cattle cars is still
very much alive in their collective memory, called to
boycott the election as contrary to their desire to be an
integral part of Ukraine. How about their right to selfdetermination?
The so-called referendum is nothing but an
undisguised land grab and a blatant violation by Russia
of the Charter of the United Nations, international
law, as well as bilateral and multilateral agreements
and commitments. A country which should have

16/20

19/03/2014

been a guarantor of Ukraine’s sovereignty, as per
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, breached its
legal responsibility towards Ukraine to protect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity in exchange for its
renunciation of nuclear weapons. How does that bode
for the non-proliferation regime?
Sunday’s referendum is nothing else but a fraudulent
sham whose sole purpose was to rubber-stamp the illegal
annexation of a part of Ukraine. As such, it cannot be
recognized by the international community. Lithuania
once again calls on all States to reject that act, not to
recognize the illegal joining of a part of the territory
of sovereign Ukraine to the Russian Federation and to
reaffirm their support for the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
How deeply ironic is the fact that, carried out under
the false pretext of protecting human and minority
rights, the aggression against Crimea is carried out
by pro-Russian militants with Moscow’s support,
causing serious and repeated human rights violations
against the Crimean population through incitement
against Ukrainians, extreme censorship, shutting down
media outlets and press hubs, cases of arbitrary arrest,
detention and enforced disappearances, routine attacks
against journalists, vandalism, beatings and other illtreatment?
Furthermore, the outcome of the referendum and
the rushed admittance of Crimea into the Russian fold
will further infringe upon the rights of large numbers of
Crimea’s inhabitants, who will be forced to make heartrending choices regarding their loyalty to the Ukrainian
State and their citizenship, with serious consequences
for their families, their property rights and their future.
One country appropriating at will a part of a
neighbouring country is a profoundly disturbing signal
to everyone that, once again, territories are up for
grabs and that the international norms guaranteeing the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the inviolability of
States can be rewritten by force. Who will be next?
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
would like to express its concerns following the events
of the crisis in Ukraine, especially in Crimea, given
the fact that efforts undertaken to achieve a peaceful
solution have unfortunately not yet been successful.
We would like to reiterate the need to protect the
sovereignty of Ukraine, its territorial integrity and its
political independence.

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

All territories and regions of Ukraine, including
Crimea, fall under Ukrainian sovereignty. That
fact is recognized by the international community
and established by international law and, of course,
the Charter of the United Nations, which is further
complemented by relevant international treaties, such
as the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.
We wish to reaffirm the fact that the instrument
that governs all regions and parts of Ukraine’s territory
is the Constitution, which guarantees its territorial
integrity and unity throughout all regions and parts of
the country. That is why it is simply unacceptable to
split off a part of its territory and have another country
annex it. The international community should spare no
effort to tackle the crisis and to encourage the parties
to reach a solution that would protect their legitimate
interests and rights, which would result, of course, in a
return of Crimea to Ukrainian control.
There is also a need to establish the necessary
guarantees to protect the interests of the various sides.
If ever an agreement were to be concluded to put an end
to the crisis, it should include guarantees of minorities’
rights in Ukraine. We urge the United Nations to use
its good offices to reconcile the positions of the two
parties and to come up with a mechanism that would
enable us to initiate dialogue and make progress.
Clearly, the time has come to set up an international
contact group to achieve that objective, to work with all
parties on the ground and to cooperate with the various
monitoring and observation groups, which could be
deployed to verify the situation throughout all regions
in Ukraine, including Crimea. The various parties
to the crisis should refrain from actions that would
lead to escalation. They should give pride of place to
reconciliation, common sense and logic, and work with
international organizations within the framework of the
existing forums. Such an effort would spare the world
from the negative consequences of the crisis and its
impact on international peace and security.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Šimonović for their
briefings. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine for his statement.
Chad is alarmed by what is taking place in
Ukraine, including in Crimea. We note with a great
deal of concern that, despite the repeated calls by the

S/PV.7144

international community, in particular the Security
Council, the undermining of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine continues.
We reaffirm once again that we are committed to
the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine, and we
urge all parties to comply with the basic principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Article 2.
We ask all the relevant parties to give pride of place to
a peaceful settlement. We support the good offices of
the Secretary-General aimed at forging direct dialogue
between the two parties to achieve a political solution.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for their briefings. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations, Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev, for his statement.
It cannot be emphasized enough — the referendum
held on 16 March in the Crimea violated the Constitution
of Ukraine, which provides that the territory of Ukraine
is indivisible and inviolable. In addition, the election
was held in conditions that forfeited all legitimacy.
Crimea was occupied and cut off from the rest of
Ukraine, journalists and members of civil society
were intimidated, and media freedom was severely
hampered. Representatives of the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) who had been invited by the Ukrainian
Government were denied access to the Crimea.
The international community in no way recognizes
the result of this illegal and unconstitutional
referendum. Similarly, the international community
does not recognize any measure to integrate the
Ukrainian Autonomous Republic of Crimea within the
Russian Federation via the referendum. We welcome
the very broad convergence of views on this issue in
the Security Council.
Russia’s actions on Ukrainian territory over the
past three weeks flagrantly violate international law,
particularly the Charter of the United Nations and the
Helsinki Final Act. They contradict the commitments
made by Russia regarding Ukraine in the framework
of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership signed in
1997 between Russia and Ukraine.

14-2692017/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the rising
tensions in Crimea caused by the illegal presence of
armed Russian forces outside their authorized area. It is
urgently necessary to defuse the crisis through military
de-escalation, starting with the immediate withdrawal
of Russian forces to their pre-crisis permanent areas of
deployment. We welcome the calm and restraint shown
by the Ukrainian authorities to date in the face of the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of their country. However, we consider the death of a
Ukrainian officer killed yesterday by bullets during
the attack on a military base in Simferopol of greatest
concern. Today, there are reports of attacks on Ukrainian
armed forces bases, including the headquarters of the
Ukrainian navy in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
In the present context, every incident could become the
spark that ignites the fire.
To address the crisis, we believe that the United
Nations has a role to play in close cooperation with the
OSCE, the Council of Europe and other organizations.
We regret that it was not possible for the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights to visit Crimea.
Nevertheless, Mr. Šimonović’s briefing, based on the
evidence he collected, tends to confirm the observation
made two weeks ago by the OSCE High Commissioner
on National Minorities. The main reason given by the
Russia to legitimize its actions — threats to the rights of
Russian speakers and communities in Crimea — have
turned out to be unfounded. It was not the actions of
the Government in Kyiv or the Ukrainian authorities
but Russia’s military escalation that fostered a climate
of impunity and an increase in human rights violations
in Crimea. The situation threatens seriously to disrupt
the balance between the various communities that have
coexisted peacefully until now in Crimea.
We welcome the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to quickly
deploy observers, under the “Rights up front” action
plan of the Secretary-General, to monitor the human
rights situation of throughout Ukrainian territory. The
observers can establish the facts and report objectively
in order to halt the spread of unfounded allegations
geared to exacerbate tensions. We hope that the team
of observers will soon be fully operational and that it
will also go to Crimea and eastern Ukraine. In the same
vein, we hope that the presence of the international
community throughout Ukraine will be reinforced as
soon as possible by the establishment of a special OSCE
observer mission. Its implementation should be delayed
no further.
18/20

19/03/2014

In general, we encourage the United Nations to
pursue its good offices in the crisis between Ukraine
and Russia. In that respect, we applaud the visit planned
by the Secretary-General to Moscow and Kyiv in the
next few days. Even if they have not yet borne fruit,
diplomatic efforts must continue intensively to achieve
a solution that respects the political independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): During the course of our discussions, a number
of my colleagues have given themselves poetic license.
I am especially forced to return to the statement made
by the representative of the United States. Ms. Powers
started with a reference to Tolstoy and Chekhov and
finished by lowering herself to the level of the tabloid
press. It is simply unacceptable to listen to such insults
addressed to our country. If the delegation of the
United States of America expects our cooperation in
the Security Council on other issues, Ms. Powers must
understand that quite clearly.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked to make a further statement. I
give him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you personally, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I would like to thank all the members of the
Council for inviting me to take part in it. I am grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and the Assistant
Secretary-General for their briefings. I would like to
extend my gratitude to all who, in their statements,
expressed support for the territorial integrity of my
country and raised strong objections concerning the
illegitimacy of the referendum in Crimea. I will now
say a few words in Russian, as is becoming customary.
(spoke in Russian)
I should like to comment on a few elements of the
statement of my colleague from the Russian Federation.
It is very complicated and to a large extent unpleasant
to make comments regarding some of the statements
made by my Russian colleague. It is very difficult to
comment on what is blatantly false, because it puts one
in a position of having justify oneself.

14-26920

19/03/2014

Ukraine

Regarding the freedom of expression and access
to information in Ukraine, does Mr. Churkin know the
difference between freedom of expression and access to
information in Ukraine and in Russia? All the webcasts
of the Security Council are broadcast in Ukraine on
all channels, without editing. Not everything that was
heard here today will sound pleasant to the ears of
Ukrainians. There were a great many recommendations
made here today that contain elements critical of
Ukraine, but we are ready to listen to all of that.
The only things that are heard in the Russian media
are Russian statements. Yesterday, I met with a women’s
non-governmental organization that participated in
the Women’s Forum at the United Nations. One of
the women was from Odessa, another from Donetsk
and the third was from Chernihiv. All were Russian
speakers. They turned to me and asked: “How can
the whole world, watching on television, be told such
lies as are heard in many of the statements made by
representatives of the Russian Federation?” How could
I answer them?
The means justify the ends? That is probably the
only answer.
I have two comments that it simply behoves me
to make. My Russian colleague characterized as
blasphemy the decision of the Ukrainian authorities
yesterday to allow our military in Crimea to use
weapons in self-defence, following the death of their
fellow soldier. Today, we have heard that it is blasphemy
because they are raising their weapons against their
fellow countrymen. This is odd. The feeling one is left
with is that it is Ukraine that has launched an attack by
bringing its forces in, as opposed to the truth, which
is that Russia three weeks ago deployed its forces
throughout the sovereign territory of Ukraine — and
this at the beginning of the Orthodox Easter, at the time
when believers were to gather. I believe that there is an
excess of cynicism and untruth here.
(spoke in English)
Ukraine keeps saying that we are ready for dialogue.
We started with a request to our Russian colleagues
to hold consultations under the bilateral agreement.
We invited all guarantors under the Budapest
Memorandum to convene a meeting as provided for by
that document. The Russian Federation refused. We are
ready for further dialogue, and we acknowledge the
recent proposal made by the Russian Federation. But
what is disappointing is that these are not proposals;

S/PV.7144

they are ultimatums and demands as to how Ukraine
should build its future. We do not like these ultimatums
because they are open interference in our domestic
affairs. We would like to have dialogue.
We applaud the efforts of the Secretary-General
over recent weeks and we expect that his meetings in
Moscow in Kyiv will lead to some positive developments.
I thank my colleagues in the Chamber for their support.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to take the floor to
make an additional statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not want to exchange polemics with my
Ukrainian colleagues and I do not think there is going
to be a lengthy discussion, but there are two comments
that I wish to make.
What is cynicism? Cynicism is attempting to
provoke a conflict by shooting both at one’s own side
and the other side. Today, a number of my colleagues
referred to an alleged attack on a Ukrainian base. I can
tell the Council again that there has been no attack on any
base. There were not even any Russian soldiers present.
Those who were present were unarmed members of the
self-defence forces, wearing only bullet-proof jackets,
and a sniper posted on a nearby building shot, killed
and injured one person on each side. Immediately, the
leaders in Kyiv come out with a statement saying that
there is now a need to fire on Russian soldiers. Now
that is real cynicism.
Cynicism is what we saw in the Maidan, where
there was an attempt to provoke the violent overthrow
of the authorities by shooting at all sides and kill as
many protestors as possible, as Mr. Šimonović said
today. A professional fired on the crowds, and everyone
saw where the shots came from. One well-equipped and
well-trained sniper came from the headquarters of the
so-called Maidan commandant. That is cynicism.
Finally, let me turn to the so-called ultimatum.
I do not know why our Ukrainian colleagues refer
to this as an ultimatum. Our Western partners have
started to consider how to extricate themselves from
the crisis in Ukraine and to come up with their own
recipes to do so. We in response provided them with
our vision of how we could extricate ourselves from the
crisis in Ukraine to ensure that all regions feel at rest
and secure. The very core of our proposal is entirely
in keeping with the agreement of 21 February. There

14-2692019/20

S/PV.7144

Ukraine

needs to be a constitutional process whereby all regions
would feel that their rights were being defended within
the framework of the Ukrainian State. That is not an
ultimatum to Kyiv, but something we have discussed
with our partners. In my statement today, I said that we
stand ready to continue such dialogue.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of France has asked to take the floor to make an
additional statement.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I believe that
we cannot talk nonsense here and that we cannot let the
representative of the Russian Federation lecture us to the
effect that Russia has made proposals intended to settle
the conflict. In reality, Russia’s proposals are simple.
What is mine is mine — that is to say, Crimea — and
we can negotiate on what is yours — that is to say,
Ukrainian sovereignty. That is the Russian proposal.
The Russian keep repeating that they are ready to talk
about whatever is left of Ukraine, but Crimea is over.
We say no; let us be clear. On such bases, we cannot
have a dialogue founded on international legal order.
We did not reject the Russian proposal. Quite simply,
we rejected any proposal that boils down to forcing us
to accept the annexation of Crimea. It is simple. We

20/20

19/03/2014

are ready to negotiate on the basis of international law.
International law means the territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to take the floor to
make an additional statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have a feeling that there is something in our
proposal that our French colleague does not like. That
is the impression I am left with. But we did not submit
it as a draft resolution of the Security Council. It was
discussed by Secretary of State Kerry and Minister
Lavrov in great detail. They tabled their documents;
we tabled ours. What is unusual about any of this? I
do not see anything unusual in all of this, and if there
is something that he does not like, let us sit down and
discuss the specific points that you do not like. That is
standard diplomatic process.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

14-26920
