S/PV.8861

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8861

st meeting
Wednesday, 15 September 2021, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Chumakov
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-25346 (E)
*2125346*

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

challenges they have in finding income for their families
to survive. Almost none of them has an income.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Ms. Amany Qaddour, Regional Director of Syria Relief
and Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I returned last week from a visit
to Syria, Lebanon and Turkey — my first mission to
the region in my new capacity. The visit offered an
opportunity for candid and constructive discussions,
including in Damascus with Foreign Minister
Fayssal Mekdad and Deputy Foreign Minister Bashar
Al-Ja’afari, and in Ankara with presidential spokesman
Ibrahim Kalin and the Deputy Foreign Minister.
My primary conclusion from my visit is that
humanitarian needs in Syria are greater than they have
ever been, as many people told me, although we may
read about that less in the front pages of newspapers.
The most recent assessments tell us that that is the case.
As authorities in Damascus reminded me, an estimated
13.4 million people across Syria require humanitarian
assistance. That is a 21 per cent increase compared to
the year before and the highest since 2017. As I am sure
Ms. Qaddour will say, the lived reality in Syria is even
more dire than figures can describe.
During my time in Syria, my visit to Aleppo gave
me a first-hand glimpse. I spoke with women, men and
children about the profound effects of more than 10
years of conflict. Children asked for help to learn and
receive health care and for fuel to survive the upcoming
winter. Women who head households spoke about the
2/21

15/09/2021

Thanks to a Syrian non-governmental organization,
supported by the Syria Humanitarian Fund, a nearby
clinic in the areas I visited, provides life-saving care,
including for children with cancer. I met a young boy
suffering exactly from that terrible affliction. The clinic
provides care with limited electricity, running water
and medication. Patients and their families must travel
from the outskirts of Aleppo city, where I was visiting,
to receive treatment, assuming they are even available.
Mothers, fathers, sisters and brothers are in
anguish —indeed, they spoke to me about this — over
their separation from family members, many of them
located across front lines nearby. Families live with
daily heartbreak because of the lack of documentation,
safe passage and security guarantees, which prevents
family reunification.
I also learned in those discussions about the
protracted water crisis affecting many parts of Syria.
It was brought up by Syrian and Turkish authorities in
Damascus, Aleppo, Ankara and Antakya alike. People
simply do not have clean water. The lack of access to
safe water has a disproportionate impact on the general
health and reproductive health of women and girls.
The human right to water entitles everyone to
sufficient safe, acceptable, accessible and affordable
water. Mechanisms established over the years to manage
transboundary water issues are no longer tenable and
that impasse must be removed. Council members can
see the consequence of it. The lack of water leads to
the lack of electricity, which leads to the absence of
schooling and difficulties at clinics. Members can see
the cascade of consequences of the problem, which is
also affected by climate change. As I mentioned to all
those I met, we need to work together to find an agreed
solution to that particular problem.
Donors remain generous in their support for the
humanitarian response plan for Syria, which is, at
$4.2 billion a year, the largest and most expensive plan
worldwide. I have no doubt about the basis of needs,
but I also observe the quantity desired. Of course,
humanitarian needs tragically outstrip available
resources. Only 27 per cent of the response is funded.
Just over a quarter of the people in need in Syria
have a chance of having their needs met through that
humanitarian operation. Even if that total were to
increase in the coming months because of the response
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

and generosity of donors — and I hope it will — funding
is not keeping pace with the growing needs of Syrians.
That is a fundamental and objective reality.
Communities I met are determined, as are
those elsewhere, to restart their lives. However, they
desperately need early recovery support to do so.
Children want to learn, and families want to prosper.
Young adults want to work. They want support, as
people everywhere else in the world, to find their own
dignified path to a better future. Greater investment in
resilience activities is an important way — and one of
the few ways — to do just that. Put another way, a failure
to invest in resilience activities will inevitably lead to
greater humanitarian needs and increased tensions.
As I saw, early recovery and livelihood programmes
are already an essential part of the humanitarian
response in Syria and have been the subject of debates
in the Council recently. The United Nations and its
partners, and perhaps particularly its partners, help
students have drinking water in their schools, displaced
families afford more sustainable accommodation
and farmers replant their fields and focus on their
livelihoods. However, much more needs to be done to
put people in Syria on the path to recovery. That is the
central part of my conclusions of the visit.
The United Nations and its partners need to design
new programmes. Authorities need to facilitate even
more activities and we need donors to invest further
in early recovery. I might add that early recovery is
approximately 10 per cent of the overall humanitarian
response plan and that needs to be increased if essential
access to basic services is to be met. Such activities
should be based on assessed and objective needs and
should be in addition to ongoing and urgently needed
relief efforts. It is not a matter of one or the other, but
both. Many people I have spoken to — including Syrian
families, of course, but also people in the humanitarian
community who have been there over the past 10
years — have told me that their needs have never been
greater or more urgent. Self-reliance is the best way to
help the Syrian people to regain a sense of the future
in Syria, despite the many other issues that must cloud
that vision.
I returned from Syria with positive news. While
I was in Aleppo, the World Food Programme (WFP)
completed the first cross-line operation, as I am sure
the Council is aware, into north-western Syria since
2017 — four years ago. The operation transported food

S/PV. 8861

rations for some 50,000 people in need to a warehouse in
Idlib, in north-western Syria. I was in Aleppo by chance
that day, and I met an Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs staff member who described to
me the tension on both sides of the front line as those
initial trucks crossed from Government-controlled
areas, across a no man’s land, into north-western Syria.
That mission required considerable effort, trust and
negotiation. Tragically, it also cost a Syrian soldier his
life. He was killed by a landmine at the final checkpoint
in the operation.
I am sure that the Council joins me in commending
all parties for taking that important step. The crossline operation, which has been much discussed in the
Council, shows the resolve of the United Nations and
our partners to assist people in need through all possible
modalities, sparing no effort. However, much more is
needed. The WFP supplies need to be distributed and
are sufficient to cover only a fraction of the enormous
food needs in north-west Syria.
Moreover, the challenges faced highlight both the
difficulty in deploying cross-line operations and the
clear reality that cross-border operations conducted
from Turkey remain the most efficient and predictable
way to reach millions of people in need. Nonetheless,
the United Nations aims to build on the WFP operation
and its experience. An interagency cross-line operation
is being planned with a view to delivering more varied
assistance to people in need in north-west Syria. I will
be happy to update the Council on those processes
next month.
My visit to Damascus, as the Council is well
aware, also coincided with continued tensions in
southern Syria, particularly around the neighbourhood
of Dara’a Al-Balad. I discussed those issues with the
Syrian authorities and others, as well as the need for
the protection of civilians, humanitarian access and the
well-being of the over 36,000 people displaced due to
the recent hostilities. News about the recent agreement
is welcome. The ceasefire is an important development,
and we will need to see how it develops, hopefully
in the right way. It is important that the terms of the
agreement are honoured and that the restoration of
humanitarian access, as we have heard about, is also
welcomed and sustained.
Food distribution resumed across the governorate
this week and emergency assistance entered Dara’a
Al-Balad. Most displaced persons have reportedly

21-253463/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

returned to the area. I do not want to state that without
any sense of the tragedy that affected the population in
that governorate and in Dara’a Al-Balad in the many
weeks of the crisis that overtook their lives. Further
assessments are planned in the coming days to assess
outstanding humanitarian needs. We will, of course,
use those assessments to guide our future relief efforts.
My conclusion is very simple in humanitarian
terms. Syria is caught in a downward spiral. The
country will continue to be a place of tragedy, so long
as the conflict continues. Need and suffering will
continue to grow in the near-term. I came away with
a renewed commitment and conviction to identify,
develop and invest in sustainable and effect ways to
help. I acknowledge the complexity and sensitivity of
that task. That is what we, the Council and the countries
represented here owe to the people of Syria because,
at the moment, we are not meeting the needs of the
Syrian people, who continue to suffer. The futures of
the children I met in that classroom in Aleppo continue
to be uncertain. It is our job to bring them some form
of consolation.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Qaddour.
Ms. Qaddour: I thank you, Madam President,
for allowing me to brief the Security Council once
again after my previous briefing over a year ago (see
S/2020/758). I also wish to thank Mr. Griffiths for his
powerful briefing and congratulate him on his new role
as Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
I am here on behalf of an incredible team of over
2,000 aid workers on the ground in Syria from Syria
Relief and Development, many of whom have been
providing vital life-saving services for the past 10 years.
Through my messages today, I am hoping to serve as a
conduit on behalf of those aid workers and the many
other outstanding non-governmental organizations in
Syria that have continued to work in a context that is
akin to hell.
That is why I want to open by complementing what
Mr. Griffith emphasized in his briefing, namely, that
the protection needs of the population are inextricably
linked to every other concern we see in north-western
Syria. Specifically, in the most recent period, we have
seen an escalation of hostilities that has impacted
civilians and aid workers themselves, including the
4/21

15/09/2021

recent attacks on Jabal Al-Zawiya, where populations
were displaced to areas further north such as Salqin,
Atme and Sarmada, among others. With the shrinking
amount of space for people to find safety from the most
rudimentary, physical standpoint, we are seeing other
protection needs continue to rise. With so many residing
in crowded camps and other temporary settlements, as
I am sure Mr. Griffiths saw, the security risks have
become exponential.
Specifically in terms of some of the most
vulnerable groups, we are seeing increased violence
in such overcrowded, contentious settings, especially
for women in terms of intimate partner violence. We
have also seen an increase in rape cases and other forms
of sexual violence against children and adolescents in
particular. Beyond addressing those incidents from a
health standpoint, such as the clinical management of
rape and individual psychological support, we have
found that other key service areas, such as mechanisms
to hold perpetrators accountable and safe housing
measures, have not been fully integrated within
the immediate needs of the population, given the
volatile context.
Similarly, the exploitation of children, including
child recruitment and child labour, is on the rise.
Recently, we have seen an increase in children as
young as 10 years old forced into heavy manual labour
in construction and even mining. Those precarious
working conditions pose risks for adults, let alone
children who have been stripped of their ability to
maintain a semblance of a normal and safe childhood
and be afforded the right to healthy development. We
have seen an increase in suicides, including among
young people and even children, whose entire lives
have been permeated by conflict. The atmosphere is
palpable with hopelessness and despair.
Many children are unable to go to school, in part
due to continuous displacements but also to economic
desperation in the country as a whole. Many families
must make very difficult decisions to survive, often
with regard to their children, who must work in order
to support their household. Another critical barrier to
accessing school and the cause of delays to starting the
school year is the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The
crippled education system simply does not have the
capacity to maintain or even facilitate remote learning
in the way that one would see in other more stable and
developed settings.
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

That brings me to a more general reflection of
where the COVID-19 pandemic and response stands in
Syria — where less than 1.5 per cent of the population
is vaccinated relative to the United States, where more
than 50 per cent of the population is vaccinated. In
north-west Syria, cases are dramatically increasing.
Intensive care unit beds in hospitals are full. There
is a massive shortage of vaccines and a delay in the
roll-out, with in some areas, such as in Ras Al-Ayn
and Tel Abyad, having no vaccines delivered to date.
Other areas are on lockdown, such as Harem, Salqin
and Kafr Takhareem. And in the past, I have noted
how lockdowns in a context where the economy has
crumbled and people rely on a daily wage is essentially
a death sentence, particularly as we see the inability to
obtain food has led to numerous cases of malnutrition
and instances starvation, specifically among infants
and pregnant women. Throughout the pandemic, certain
parts of the population have become more isolated,
such as the elderly, who have been hard to reach and at
the same time unable to access vital services that they
need outside of their homes. That has also been the case
with persons who live with disabilities, and although
there has been some progress made with more tailored
and specialized services for those individuals, we still
have a very long way to go to ensure that their needs
are fully met.
Although COVID-19 seems to be the most salient
concern for many countries, there are many other
pressing health concerns occurring in parallel in Syria
that still remain a priority, specifically in terms of
chronic illnesses and infectious diseases. And as we
approach the winter, we anticipate that the need to
address those will become more necessary, since so
many people will have inadequate shelter and warmth.
A major concern is the gaps that have emerged
for women, specifically in terms of access to maternal
health services, which are so closely linked with
children’s services. That gap in service provision has
been one of the most concerning recently. There are
multiple facilities in those regions that are the only
ones servicing those populations. A big reason for
that is diminished funding. Certainly, there has been
generosity from donors, but it must be said that in some
cases there has been a 40 to 50 per cent decrease in
funding for health services in Syria. That includes
countless facilities managed by different health actors,
including Al-Firdous Hospital in Daret Ezza, Al-Salam
Hospital in Harem and Al-Rahma Hospital in Darkoush.

S/PV. 8861

Funding is one key element of the operational
environment, but we also know the access piece has
been at the top of all discussions leading up to the vote
this past July. I know that, leading up to the mandate
renewal, the Security Council heard a series of
briefings and perspectives on the vital need for access.
I will therefore not go into as much detail on that
particular decision since it is in our close periphery.
But I will say that difficult decisions have been made
regarding how to reach different populations because of
restricted access. The unfortunate thing is that, when
you look at certain areas on the ground, there is often
an over-saturation of services in areas with more fluid
access — and, conversely, a visible neglect of other
hard-to-reach areas. The bottom line is that access
capability is not what should decide which communities
are able to receive assistance.
With operational considerations, I want to take this
opportunity to expand on the risks aid agencies and aid
workers face on the front line.
Even with tremendous collaboration and a spirit
of partnership with agencies further upstream,
organizations that are on the ground will always be
zero degrees of separation from the violence, fear and
insecurity that comes with an imperative to provide
services. Those actors will always be on unequal
footing with agencies that are not on the ground, simply
because the risks will never be shared in the same way.
I know that might sound negative, but I say that rather
to emphasize the reality and the need to explore those
risks together, as Mr. Griffiths emphasized, and to
share them with agencies at the forefront. The irony is
that, although those organizations have absorbed the
most risks as time has passed in Syria, often times those
risks are passed down to them. Many organizations
have therefore endured greater scrutiny over time and
been forced to deal with more and more bureaucratic
impediments. The notions of duty of care and the
protection of aid workers and civilian populations
still has a long way to go before being applied in a
meaningful way that aligns with, and is proportional
to, the risks faced by those agencies on a daily basis.
Before I conclude, I want to take a moment to
acknowledge and commemorate those who lost their lives
this past year during their service, including Mariam
Fathallah, Ammar Sheikh Ahmad, Anwar Al-Daher,
Samira Al-Souqi, Subhi Al-Assi and countless others
from agencies such as Hand in Hand, Big Heart, the

21-253465/21

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8861

Syrian American Medical Society, Shafak and Violet,
among other incredible actors working on the ground.
Lastly, I want to leave Council members with words
not from myself, but from Ghaith, a Syrian nurse who
administers vaccines to children in Syria, as his words
perfectly capture the plight of aid workers and the dark
reality on the ground:
“Between one bomb and the next, it would feel like
our life was flashing before our eyes, not just for me
but for the children who hadn’t yet seen anything in
this world.”
Although Ghaith’s words are haunting, I think that
compelling testimonies like his should propel us with
the power and resolve to continue to protect those
in peril.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Qaddour

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I make this statement
on behalf of the co-penholders on the Syrian
humanitarian file, that is, Ireland and Norway.
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for his
briefing today. I also want to thank Amany Qaddour,
Regional Director at Syria Relief and Development, for
her powerful account of the breadth of the humanitarian
needs in Syria and the continued suffering of the Syrian
people 10 years into this conflict. We salute her courage
and commitment to advocating for those in need.
We welcome Mr. Griffiths’ account of his visit to
Syria and the region. We appreciate his engagement
with all stakeholders in addressing the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people, as well as the challenges
faced by neighbouring countries that have generously
hosted Syrians fleeing the conflict.
Coinciding with Mr. Griffiths’ trip to Syria, we in
particular welcome the two World Food Programme
convoys that went from Aleppo across the conflict line
into the Idlib governorate at the end of August. That
was the first cross-line humanitarian operation into
north-west Syria since 2017. Together with the relative
increase in cross-line deliveries to the north-east, those
long-awaited pilot convoys across the conflict line to the
north-west represent much-needed progress in crossline access for life-saving humanitarian aid in Syria.
6/21

15/09/2021

We encourage the United Nations to continue to pursue
cross-line deliveries and urge all actors to facilitate
rapid, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian aid.
As co-penholders, we remain guided by the
underlying principle that humanitarian aid must reach
all people in need, and we welcome all modalities — both
cross-line and cross-border — to reach the millions of
people in need throughout Syria.
The fragile situation in Dara’a and the humanitarian
suffering of its people remain of serious concern. The
internal displacement of more than 36,000 civilians,
the shortage of food, the limited access to medical
services and the disruption of electricity and water
supplies underline the need to protect the civilian
population, including by ensuring humanitarian access
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
Women and children are among those who are in an
especially vulnerable situation.
The mortar hits on the Al-Shifa Hospital and the
National Hospital of Dara’a on 30 of August — and also
the reported damage to a medical point and two civilian
deaths during the bombardment of Jabal Al-Zawiya in
the north-west on 7 September — are grim reminders
of the security risks facing medical staff in Syria. At
least 25 health workers have died this year alone owing
to attacks. We call on all parties to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
protect those who risk their lives while saving others.
Health workers must be protected, not attacked.
The damage to a school in Dara’a Al-Balad, also on
30 August, is yet another example of how the conflict
has impeded access to education for the next generation
of young Syrian boys and girls. The crisis has left
over 7,000 schools damaged or destroyed and roughly
2 million children out of school.
With the school year starting now in September,
we reiterate the Security Council’s condemnation of
attacks against schools in contravention of international
humanitarian law, and we are urging all parties to the
armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children’s access to education.
Attacks on health-care facilities, the destruction
of schools, increased displacement and civilian deaths,
compounded by the widespread food insecurity and
economic decline, have led to increased humanitarian
needs in Syria. These challenges are magnified by
the ongoing threat of the coronavirus disease, and we
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

note with alarm the recent rapid increase in cases,
particularly in north-west Syria.
The water crisis in Syria in particular demonstrates
the complexity of the humanitarian response. The
closure of water stations has not only disrupted water
supply, but reduced the supply of electricity, with a
consequent negative impact on the operation of hospitals
and schools. On this note, we welcome the recent news
that the Allouk water plant is again operating, which
must continue.
All of the foregoing underlines the need for a
broader humanitarian response, including in the areas of
water, sanitation, health, education and shelter, as well
as early-recovery projects geared towards providing
for the immediate needs of Syrians. As penholders, we
remain guided by the humanitarian needs of the people
in Syria, and we fully support the United Nations
and all humanitarian actors in their efforts to deliver
life-saving aid to those in need.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the civil
society representative, Ms. Amany Qaddour, for
their briefings. We value the work of humanitarian
organizations and civil society actors in Syria that are
rendering humanitarian assistance to the Syrians. I also
welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran
to today’s meeting.
At the outset, I reiterate the position of Tunisia that
there is no sustainable alternative to the solution in
Syria but through a political settlement under resolution
2254 (2015), which should be accelerated so as to end
the humanitarian suffering of the Syrians and put
Syria back on track towards security and development.
In the meantime, it will be necessary to expand the
scope of humanitarian assistance throughout Syria in
order to meet the increasing needs of the people and
to reduce the manifestations of vulnerability and the
aggravated risks they face as a result of more than a
decade of violence and conflict, the deterioration of the
economic, humanitarian and climate situation, and the
ramifications of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Tunisia expresses its satisfaction with the recent
positive signs of a return to calm in Dara’a as the Syrian
parties — the Government and local actors — have
agreed to take steps towards a settlement that would
end escalation of tensions, restore stability and preserve
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country.

S/PV. 8861

In this respect, we value the priority given to dialogue
and negotiation in conjunction with mediation and
reconciliation efforts between Syrians.
We note the decrease in violence in the northwest and the north of Syria in recent days, leading to
the restoration of stability across the country and to a
sustainable and comprehensive ceasefire. We also note
with satisfaction the restoration of humanitarian access
in Dara’a, in conjunction with the return of displaced
persons to their homes in the region. We look forward
to the United Nations and its partners supporting the
efforts of the Syrian Government aimed at helping
Syrians return to their normal lives by addressing the
humanitarian situation and achieving recovery after the
recent challenging period.
We commend the fruitful efforts of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Griffiths, during his recent
visit to Syria, Lebanon and Turkey, as well as his
meaningful engagement with the Syrian Government
and other stakeholders, with a view to pushing forward
humanitarian relief efforts, saving lives and promoting
the livelihoods of Syrians.
We have taken note of the deployment of the first
cross-line food convoy by the World Food Programme
to north-western Syria, in line with the provisions of
resolution 2585 (2021). We reiterate the need for all
parties on the ground to engage positively, commit to
the delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance
according to the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law, and work to improve
the ways that humanitarian assistance is delivered,
using them effectively and transparently.
We also look forward to promoting the recovery
and resilience efforts through the integration of
humanitarian and development programmes and
projects in Syria, pursuant to the provisions of resolution
2585 (2021), and enabling the United Nations to provide
the resources needed for a comprehensive and effective
response. We also commend the regional cooperation
aimed at achieving economic stability in the region and
facilitating the fulfilment of vital humanitarian needs
and services.
We are following with concern the refugee,
displacement and terrorism trends in Syria and the
region. Accordingly, we stress the importance of making
concerted and coordinated regional and international
efforts to address these phenomena, while respecting
international law and international human rights law,

21-253467/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

so that Syria does not remain a target for terrorists and
the Syrian people are able to restore security and meet
their aspiration for a better future and dignified life.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Qaddour for their briefings.
More than 10 years after the Syrian tragedy began,
the violence continues, as evidenced by the recent
increase in hostilities in the north-west and in Dara’a.
Civilians continue to pay a heavy price. The priority
now is an immediate cessation of hostilities under
United Nations supervision, as well as a humanitarian
pause, in accordance with resolutions 2532 (2020) and
2254 (2015) and the Secretary-General’s appeal.
International humanitarian law must be strictly
respected, as should the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Since last March, 19
humanitarian workers have been killed in the northwest of the country. These attacks will not go
unpunished. France will continue to give its full support
to mechanisms to fight impunity.
Humanitarian access must be fully guaranteed.
The priority must remain emergency aid. All parties,
in particular the Syrian regime, must respect their
obligations. Humanitarian needs continue to grow in the
context of food insecurity and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. In this respect, it is essential to
accelerate vaccination campaigns against COVID-19.
France welcomes the first crossline convoy
delivery to the north-west, which is a concrete
translation of the terms of resolution 2585 (2021). It is
important, however, that cross-line aid not be limited to
food aid and that it be delivered in full compliance with
humanitarian principles.
But let us be clear — the cross-border mechanism
will be necessary as long as humanitarian aid does not
reach all the populations in need throughout Syria,
based on objective needs assessments. The renewal
of this mechanism for 12 months was a relief. But we
all know that it is insufficient to meet the needs. We
encourage United Nations agencies to intensify crossborder convoys to pre-position humanitarian aid before
the winter.
Only a political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015) will bring an end to the tragedy and
bring lasting stability to the country. Supported by its
allies, the regime pursues a logic of obstruction to the
political process, in defiance of the aspirations of the
8/21

15/09/2021

Syrian people and the commitments made before the
Security Council.
Without a credible political solution, the position of
France and its partners on normalization, reconstruction
and sanctions will remain unchanged. Exploiting
the sanctions issue to cover up the overwhelming
responsibility of the regime is fooling no one. Without
a political solution, there will be no safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for sharing with us the outcome of his visit
to Syria and the region. We welcome the fact that the
visit took place in a timely manner, in tandem with
the beginning of his new mandate. Engaging with
actors involved in the humanitarian response in Syria
is crucial to building trust and facilitating access to
humanitarian assistance. I also commend Ms. Amany
Qaddour on her valuable briefing and the services that
she is providing for the population. I also welcome
the presence of the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Turkey at this meeting.
I will focus on two points: access to humanitarian
assistance and the hostilities that are mainly affecting
the civilian population.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, Mexico
welcomes all efforts to improve access for the more
than 13.4 million people in need of it. Accordingly,
we welcome the fact that the first conflict cross-line
operation in the north-west finally took place, which
is undeniably an encouraging step. We acknowledge
the efforts of the World Food Programme and all the
actors involved that enabled the crossing of 14 trucks
with food products from areas under the control of the
Syrian Government to Sarmada, and we trust that this
mechanism will continue to be strengthened.
However, it is worth noting that the number of trucks
that came through that route contrasts significantly
with the 1,000 trucks that on average cross through Bab
Al-Hawa every month. Both crossings are necessary
and complement one another. For example, in order to
address the rise in cases of coronavirus disease, the
number of vaccines reaching the population must be
increased. The 350,000 delivered doses are welcome
but clearly insufficient.
Secondly, my delegation is concerned about the
hostilities that have taken place in recent months in
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

north-western and south-western Syria. Although
Russia facilitated a ceasefire agreement in Dara, the
situation remains extremely precarious. The fact that
more than 36,000 people have been displaced in the
area by the violence in recent months is of concern.
Moreover, in Idlib, we have once again recorded
the deaths of innocent civilians, for example, those of
Joud, a 21-year-old recent university graduate, who had
much to contribute to her country, and a father who died
while trying to rescue his son, who was also wounded
by the explosions. Unfortunately, those are not isolated
incidents but many people’s reality. We express our
condolences to those who have suffered losses as a
result of those events.
The violence must stop now. Mexico calls for the
observance of a lasting and sustainable nationwide
ceasefire in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Without
a definitive cessation of hostilities, humanitarian
needs will continue to increase. We urgently call for
unconditional respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and stress the need for those
responsible for acts of violence to be held accountable
and the need for acts leading to the deaths of civilians
not to go unpunished.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
Ms. Amany Qaddour for their briefings.
First, we reiterate our serious concerns about the
continuing escalation of violence in north-western
Syria. Air strikes and artillery bombardment, which
violate the ceasefire agreement, have become the new
normal in southern Idlib, with approximately 10 to 20 air
strikes currently recorded every day, directly affecting
civilians and humanitarian workers, as Ms. Qaddour
briefed us earlier.
In recent weeks, eight civilians, including two
women and one child, have been killed, including in
heavy artillery shelling on residential areas of the
city of Idlib by the regime and its allies. Since March
2021, 19 humanitarian workers have been killed and 36
injured in the violence. We urge all parties to respect the
ceasefire agreement and comply with their obligations
to protect civilians and humanitarian workers.
Secondly, turning to the situation in Dara, we
welcome the recent ceasefire agreement, which we
hope will provide a lasting reprieve from violence for
civilians living there, but brutal shelling by the regime

S/PV. 8861

military, backed by Iranian-affiliated militias, together
with fierce street fighting between regime forces and
opposition fighters, has resulted in the widespread
destruction of civilian infrastructure. The estimated
20,000 people who remain in the area continue to have
limited access to food, water and medication. With
approximately 45,000 people displaced, it is more vital
that humanitarian agencies are granted unhindered
access to Dara Al-Balad.
Thirdly, we note with concern the water crisis in
north-eastern Syria. We welcome the United Nations
consolidated whole-of-Syria response plan to the crisis
and look forward to updates on efforts to address
the situation.
Fourthly, we commend the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations and its partners to scale up cross-border
humanitarian shipments into north-western Syria in
order to meet the vast needs of the 3.4 million people
there. We also welcome the recent cross-line World
Food Programme delivery to Sarmada, as part of the
effort to address those needs.
Lastly, we wish to express our condolences for all
those who have lost their lives to maintain ceasefires
and humanitarian operations, including an attack in
north-western Syria in which Turkish soldiers were
killed last weekend. We welcome Turkey’s efforts to
uphold the ceasefire agreement and protect civilians
from a further regime offensive.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his update. We welcome his latest insights
provided by his recent visit to the region. I also thank
Ms. Amany Qaddour, Regional Director of Syria Relief
and Development, for her briefing on the issue.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria has not seen much
improvement in recent months. More than 13 million
people across Syria are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance, which has been further aggravated and
compounded by the water crisis. One million people
have been affected by the disruption of the Allouk
water station. The drought conditions and reduced
water flows in the Euphrates River have further added
to problem. Active coronavirus disease cases are
increasing every day, particularly in north-western
Syria, while vaccination levels have remained very low.

21-253469/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

In that context, the visit by Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and his assessment of the current
situation have again reminded us what needs to be done
urgently. We welcome his visit and his engagement with
the Government and the leadership of Syria.
We have consistently emphasized that the answer
to the humanitarian crisis lies in a political solution.
Without forward movement on the political front, the
humanitarian crisis will persist and the people of Syria,
particularly women, youth, children and the elderly,
will continue to suffer.
The presence of foreign forces, as well as external
support to armed groups, is only making the situation
worse. There are reports from the ground that United
Nations-proscribed terrorist groups, such as Hay’at
Tahrir Al-Sham and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, are attacking civilians in rural Idlib and
Hama and in the north-east of Syria. That has further
exacerbated the humanitarian situation.
We have been calling for enhanced and effective
humanitarian assistance for all Syrians throughout
the country, without discrimination, politicization or
preconditions. The international community needs
to engage purposefully to address the situation and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. We also
need to look into the worsening situation in camps for
internally displaced persons, such as Al-Hol, where
nearly 10,000 third-country nationals, including women
and children, are suffering in worsening conditions.
Access for humanitarian aid and assistance is
pivotal, and concrete steps need to be taken to address
the hurdles that obstruct the functioning of both crossborder and cross-line operations.
With regard to cross-line aid delivery, we welcome
the first such convoy to Aleppo from Damascus, which
coincided with the Under-Secretary-General’s visit. We
once again stress the need for an effective monitoring
mechanism, which involves Syrian Government
authorities, to enable the smooth and efficient delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Serious efforts are needed
to expand cross-line assistance, including to areas
currently not accessible.
Reconstruction efforts and funding concerns
related to the United Nations humanitarian response
plan for Syria also need to be examined as a priority by
the international community.
10/21

15/09/2021

In conclusion, India has contributed to humanitarian
efforts by extending development assistance and human
resource development support to Syria through grants
and lines of credits for development projects, the supply
of medicine and food, artificial limb-fitment camps and
capacity-building training programmes. India remains
steadfast in its commitment to supporting the people of
Syria through development and humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Ms. Qaddour for their briefings.
China welcomes the recent visit to Syria by UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, which brought us firsthand information on the humanitarian situation on the
ground. We hope that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs will maintain communication
and coordination with the Syrian Government on the
issue of humanitarian relief work.
According to United Nations assessments,
humanitarian needs in Syria have reached the highest
level since the outbreak of the crisis, with more than
13 million people in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. The international community should make
joint efforts to increase humanitarian assistance to
Syria and strive for substantive improvement in its
humanitarian situation as soon as possible. We would
like to make the following three points.
First, it is important to rigorously conduct earlyrecovery projects that are closely tailored to the needs
of the Syrian people, while providing emergency
humanitarian assistance. The international community
should implement resolution 2585 (2021) by promoting
early-recovery projects in areas such as water resources,
health care, education and shelter, while helping Syria
fight the pandemic, so as to promote its economic and
social development. Recently, the Syrian Government
has taken measures to promote vaccination, develop
agriculture, help small and medium-sized enterprises
strengthen market management and carry out energy
cooperation, with considerable results that merit
acknowledgement. It must be stressed that unilateral
sanctions imposed by some countries aggravate the
humanitarian crisis in Syria, hinder its economic
and social development and run counter to the
efforts of the international community. They must be
lifted immediately.
Secondly, we should strengthen the monitoring of
the cross-border mechanism and promote the transition
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

from cross-border to cross-line rescue. The Security
Council has an obligation to step up the monitoring of
the cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism in
order to ensure that it is neutral and transparent and
that it remain true to its humanitarian nature. It must be
made clear that the cross-border mechanism is a special
arrangement, made under specific circumstances, while
the cross-line mechanism should be the main channel
for humanitarian assistance to Syria.
China supports the World Health Organization in
its ongoing efforts to conduct humanitarian operations
in the north of Syria through the cross-line mechanism.
The World Food Programme’s first cross-line delivery
of humanitarian supplies from Aleppo to Idlib marks a
major breakthrough in humanitarian relief operations in
Syria. It is hoped that relevant parties can work together
to scale up the cross-line mechanism and better meet
the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people.
Thirdly, we need to support the Syrian Government
in stabilizing the security situation across the
country and in creating the necessary conditions
for humanitarian operations and political processes.
China welcomes the ceasefire agreement reached by
the relevant parties in Dara’a and supports the Syrian
Government in stabilizing the local situation with
regard to civilian resettlement and providing relief.
Several Council members are concerned about
terrorist activities in Syria and their spillover
risks. Addressing the counter-terrorism issue is the
prerequisite for restoring peace and order in Syria.
Terrorist forces in Idlib pose a major threat to Syria’s
national security. With regard to Idlib, the international
community should categorically condemn terrorism,
support the Syrian Government’s counter-terrorism
efforts and maintain the positive momentum for peace
and reconstruction in Syria.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I too
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his usual
insightful updates. I also thank Ms. Amany Qaddour
for her vivid and heart-wrenching account of the plight
of Syrians, in particular Syria’s children and Syrian
relief workers.
We remain profoundly concerned about the security
situation in Syria. Sporadic and indiscriminate violence
across the country continues to threaten civilians and
civilian objects. Hostilities have further exacerbated
displacement and obstructed vital humanitarian

S/PV. 8861

access. It is past time for a nationwide ceasefire to be
implemented and fully respected by all.
Civilian protection remains the highest priority.
Military objectives and counter-terrorism operations,
although necessary, should never take precedence
over civilian protection, and impunity for violations
of international law should not be tolerated. Syrians
should no longer continue to pay the highest price for
a conflict that they did not create and over which they
have no control.
The economic crisis plaguing the country and its
people is undoubtedly made worse by the effects of
the global pandemic. Millions remain food insecure,
and basic commodities are inaccessible, even as we
approach the winter months. Unquestionably, Syrians
must continue to be supported through humanitarian
aid, and the cross-border mechanism is of critical
importance. However, the mechanism is not enough
on its own. Other indispensable modalities, such as
cross-line deliveries, are necessary to complement
the mechanism and ensure sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access.
We are therefore pleased to note that the first crossline operation to the north-west took place at the end
of August. We urge all parties to continue working
together to expand that modality and to ensure that
existing access arrangements are preserved and scaled
up to reach every Syrian in need. That is especially
important to assist in the effective and efficient
distribution of coronavirus disease vaccines.
Beyond humanitarian aid, further practical steps
must be taken to assist Syria and Syrians in need. That
requires the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures
that have been imposed on the country. Those measures
have had an indirect adverse impact on the civilian
population and are incompatible with international law.
It further requires assistance for Syria’s
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts. The conflict
has devastated Syria’s infrastructure, leaving millions
vulnerable without access to shelter and essential
services. Reconstruction is a costly undertaking that
requires support from the international community.
We ought to be reminded that it is also a necessary
condition for the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of origin. Therefore,
we encourage Syria’s partners to assist in their
reconstruction and to help the country achieve its longterm development goals.

21-2534611/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

The water crisis demands immediate attention.
The worst drought in decades, precipitated by the
existential threat of climate change and in combination
with other troubling factors, has put millions of lives
and livelihoods in peril. A sustainable solution must
be urgently pursued. On that point, we reiterate and
recall that water and water systems should never be
weaponized. As Mr. Griffiths reminded us earlier,
access to clean water is a human right.
Syria is a grim humanitarian emergency
with multidimensional challenges. Geopolitical
dynamics have compounded the complexities of the
conflict, including through the continued presence
of unauthorized foreign forces on Syria’s sovereign
territory. The Syrian people should be our primary
concern and constructive international diplomacy ought
to be encouraged and prioritized to ensure support for
them.
The well-being of the Syrian people is paramount,
and they deserve peace and stability. The conflict and
the attendant humanitarian crisis will only continue
in the absence of a political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We therefore
have a duty to engage constructively towards a political
solution with the Syrian people at the forefront.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Qaddour for their presentations.
I also welcome the participation of the representatives
of Syria, Turkey and Iran in this meeting.
The various briefings to the Council on the
humanitarian situation in Syria show that it is far from
improving. In addition to food insecurity, rising prices
for basic necessities and the weakening of the health
system, which has been exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, there is a water shortage
affecting people and crops due to the falling water level
and low flow of the Euphrates River.
On the security front, although the Russian-Turkish
agreement on the demilitarized zone in the north-west
still stands, the persistence of violence and sporadic
clashes, which continue to affect the civilian population
trapped in the area, is deplorable. We welcome the
agreement reached between the armed opposition and
Government forces in Dara’a. We hope that will result
in an improvement in the provision of basic services for
the city’s population.
12/21

15/09/2021

The security situation in Al-Hol camp must
be addressed by the international community. The
unbearable living conditions and violence in the camp,
which is populated mainly by women, children and
the elderly, must be addressed. The rate of COVID-19
infections in the camps remains alarming, as social
distancing is virtually impossible in such overcrowded
settings. We encourage the World Health Organization
and the Syrian Government to collaborate further on
this issue.
We welcome the news that the first aid delivery
operation across the border in north-western Syria began
on 30 and 31 August. It marks a crucial step forward and
we would like to see more such cooperation between all
humanitarian actors on both sides. We reiterate our call
on the warring parties to continue to cooperation with
the United Nations and its partners in order to improve
and strengthen the delivery of humanitarian aid across
the lines of conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for the easing
or suspension of the unilateral economic sanctions that
are weighing heavily on Syria’s ability to cope with
the pandemic and the current economic crisis. Those
sanctions are an aggravating factor as regards the
humanitarian situation — not only for Syria, but also
for its neighbours and the international organizations
working on the ground.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his briefing and thank Ms. Qaddour
for her moving statement.
Estonia remains worried about the ongoing tensions
and violence in several parts of Syria, which continue
to impact civilians and contribute to the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. Estonia strongly condemns
the continued shelling of urban areas in Idlib, where
several civilians have been killed in a series of attacks
conducted by the forces of the Syrian regime and its
allies. Civilians must be protected at all times and
attacks on civilian objects must stop.
We are also concerned about the situation in
Dara’a. Despite the agreement reached between the
Syrian regime and the local forces, tensions remain
high. There is an urgent need to improve the dire
humanitarian situation, where access is restricted, food
and basic services are limited and over 36,000 people,
mostly women and children, have been displaced.
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

In addition to the dire humanitarian situation
caused by ongoing violence and corruption, we are
also worried about the increase of coronavirus disease
infections, especially in north-western Syria, as well as
the water crisis in north-east Syria, which is causing a
rise in outbreaks of water-borne diseases. We call upon
all parties to ensure safe, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all Syrian people in need.
Estonia notes the first cross-line delivery to northwestern Syria as a step in a right direction. However,
given the challenges and instability of cross-line aid, it
is clear that it does not replace cross-border deliveries,
which remain essential.
In the context of the ongoing conflict, more attention
should also be addressed to the impact on women and
vulnerable groups, such as children and persons with
disabilities, who remain exposed to increased protection
risks. Women are also particularly impacted when they
or their family members are detained. We demand the
release of all arbitrarily detained persons and political
prisoners. We also call for accountability for the many
war crimes and crimes against humanity so as to put an
end to impunity.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
for his informative briefing and Ms. Amany Qaddour
for sharing her insights. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in
today’s meeting.
Month after month, we grow accustomed to
hearing about the continuing dire predicament of over
13 million people in Syria as a result of the ongoing
security, economic, food, water and health crises. As
Mr. Griffiths just said, we all own our individual and
collective responsibility to the Syrian people to help
alleviate their suffering.
The protection of civilians continues to attract
special attention. Regardless of the current relatively
calm situation in the north-west, there still were
security incidents that claimed lives and destroyed
infrastructure. Considerable efforts are required to
maintain the most recent ceasefire deal in Dara’a city so
as to avoid human suffering and address humanitarian
need due to recent violence, including the return of
over 36,000 displaced persons. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint and to ensure respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8861

Apart from the severe economic meltdown and
the food crisis, the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the growing water crisis
are exacerbating the hardship and vulnerability
suffered by the population. The current situation
above all necessitates safe, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access to provide assistance for all
people in need. We once again stress the importance
of the unanimous adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) in
order to continue cross-border humanitarian assistance
delivery in the north-west.
It is very encouraging to see that cross-line
deliveries also finally reached that region, on 30 and
31 August, after months of negotiations. We encourage
further coordination among relevant parties in order
to enhance the frequency and quantity of that delivery
method. Humanitarian aid should also be prioritized
in the north-west through all appropriate channels in
order to prepare for possible deterioration during the
winter months ahead. We are also genuinely delighted
with the progress on cross-line delivery to the northeast, where there is a need to tackle the shortage of
medical items, the current water crisis and the potential
loss of harvests right before winter.
Given the recent complicated developments
with regard to COVID-19 in Syria, we are of the
view that particular focus should also be placed on
the distribution of vaccines all over the country. My
delegation supports the Secretary-General’s appeal for
the waiving of sanctions that hinder the humanitarian
response to the pandemic.
My delegation calls for continued support for Syria
during this challenging time. We take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the work of humanitarian organizations
and personnel on the ground, as well as the generous
contributions of international donors.
We also welcome the first visit to Syria and the
region by the Emergency Relief Coordinator in his
new capacity. We fully support his focus on enhancing
humanitarian access, protecting civilians and building
resilience to help people in Syria.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
the utmost importance of unity in order to meet the
common goal of assisting people in need. The spirit of
cooperation in recent months has actually borne fruit. It
needs to be maintained and built upon. In the long run,
it is unquestionable that the only viable way to end the
current humanitarian crisis is through the achievement

21-2534613/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

of a comprehensive political solution, led and owned by
the Syrians, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in
full accordance with international law.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and Ms. Amany Qaddour for
their briefings on the humanitarian situation in Syria. I
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey at this meeting.
Kenya
commends
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his recent visit to the region, where he held
useful engagements with the Government of Syria and
other stakeholders in efforts to expand humanitarian
access, enhance the protection of civilians and ensure
that Syrians have an opportunity to rebuild their lives
through early recovery and livelihood activities. We
encourage the Under-Secretary-General to continue
with those engagements towards the timely, efficient
and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance for
every Syrian in need.
As we have said before, Kenya stands with the
Syrian people and supports the Security Council’s
deliberations and actions that are underpinned primarily
by the people’s needs and the practicalities of ensuring
that those needs are in fact met.
We remain gravely concerned by the deteriorating
security across parts of the north-west, north-east and
the south of Syria, where unrelenting shelling and air
strikes have resulted in deaths, injuries, displacement
and the destruction of civilian property, with the most
affected being women, children and the elderly, as well
as humanitarian workers.
Also worrisome is the persistent insecurity in
Al-Hol camp, where 59,000 people, most of whom
are women and children, reside in a constant state of
fear owing to rampant attacks. Kenya calls on source
countries to repatriate their citizens in order to ease
tensions within the camp so that a semblance of
normalcy can return.
We reiterate the imperative on the protection
of civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian
infrastructure. It is critical that all parties honour the
nationwide ceasefire and that all those responsible for
violations be fully investigated and held accountable.
Turning to the economic situation, it is alarming
that the prices of basic food baskets have doubled
and continue to be out of reach for many. Indeed, as
we speak, about 60 per cent of the population is food
14/21

15/09/2021

insecure. The situation is compounded by the water
crisis fuelled by reduced water levels and reduced access
to the Euphrates River and the Allouk water station,
leading to harvest losses and a lack of electricity for
schools, hospitals and other objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population.
It is against that backdrop that Kenya is persuaded
that all modalities for access to humanitarian assistance
are crucial. We particularly commend continued
deliveries and anticipated increases of the most essential
supplies, including the distribution of coronavirus
disease vaccines, through the cross-border mechanism.
Kenya also welcomes the first cross-line food
mission to north-west Syria, conducted at the end of
August. We commend the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and encourage the consideration of an
intersectoral delivery so that medical supplies are also
included in future deliveries. Those modalities should
continue to complement each other with a view to
ensuring continued principled humanitarian aid to the
millions in need.
Kenya notes that unilateral coercive measures have
contributed significantly to the economic situation
and the ability of the Government to provide for the
vulnerable members of society. We call for the lifting
of such measures, especially when humanitarian
operations are affected.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
multilateral system, and in particular the Security
Council, should continue to speak with one voice, as
it did two months ago with the adoption of resolution
2585 (2021), to facilitate consensus and collaborative
approaches to peace and reconciliation through a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his report
on his recent visit to the region, and I thank Amany
Qaddour for her urgent reminder of the dire situation
on the ground.
It is hard to imagine after more than 10 years
of conflict, but with each passing month somehow
the situation in Syria gets worse, as we have heard
today. Basic services are not being delivered, and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is running rampant.
Resources for diagnosing COVID-19 in Syria remain
extremely limited, with international organizations
warning that testing materials could be severely
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

depleted in the near term. This widespread suffering
is not sustainable, and, as the Syrian people head into
another winter, we know humanitarian protection needs
will spike. We must do everything in our power to
support the United Nations and the non-governmental
organizations in their efforts to deliver life-saving
humanitarian assistance to the millions of Syrians
in need.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of
that situation: our concerns in Dara’a, the north-west,
Rukban and the Al-Hol camp; progress and updates
from cross-border aid operations; and our commitment
to all modalities to bring aid to Syrians in need.
First, we continue to closely watch the situation in
Dara’a. We condemn the Al-Assad regime’s ruthless
assault that has killed civilians, displaced thousands
and led to shortages of food and medicine for many
more. The regime is reportedly using threats of
forced displacement as a pressure tactic in ceasefire
negotiations. This is unacceptable. An effective
ceasefire requires commitment from all sides, and we
urge all parties to respect the ceasefire in Dara’a. We
are thankful that, at the very least, aid deliveries have
resumed. The United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations must have unimpeded access to those
in need.
We are similarly concerned with the intensification
in air strikes and shelling in north-west Syria in recent
months, leading to dozens of civilian casualties. All
sides must respect the ceasefire and comply with their
obligations to protect civilians and medical facilities.
Two years have passed since the Syrian regime permitted
the last humanitarian convoy into Rukban. The regime
and its backers must enable full humanitarian access
to the camp and its residents. Any plans to resettle the
nearly 10,000 inhabitants must be safe, voluntary and
dignified. We are also concerned with the ongoing
tragedy at Al-Hol camp, and we call on all parties to
facilitate a long-term solution.
Secondly, on 30 and 31 August, the World Food
Programme (WFP) was able to dispatch a 14-truck
crossline humanitarian convoy to Sarmada in Idlib,
transporting almost 600 metric tons of food. This will
help meet the vast needs in the north-west. The United
States is proud to have supported this work. We offer
thanks to Turkey, the United Nations, the WFP and all
other parties for facilitating this access. Sadly, a Syrian
solider was killed while removing mines to allow this

S/PV. 8861

convoy to get through. This only underscores the serious
dangers and complexities of delivering crossline aid.
Thirdly, and finally, the United States supports
all modalities that bring aid to Syrians in need — all
of them. We are committed to facilitating more crossborder and crossline assistance and early-recovery
projects that respond to the overwhelming humanitarian
needs in Syria. At the same time, we echo what we have
heard from the Under-Secretary-General: crossline
is not a replacement for cross-border access. To the
Al-Assad regime and its backers, we say that it is time
to stop politicizing crossline assistance. Aid should not
be used as a cudgel against Syrians who disagree with
Al-Assad’s brutal policies. Similarly, one single crossborder point, even when complemented by crossline
assistance, cannot possibly meet all the needs of all
Syrians. We must reauthorize the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Yarubiyah crossings to meet the dire needs of the
Syrian people.
Immediately, the humanitarian needs are immense.
We must address them with vigour, and as we do this
difficult work, we must commit ourselves to addressing
the root causes of these needs. The only solution is a
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
which represents the only sustainable path to the peace
and prosperity the Syrian people deserve.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his briefing
and for providing a detailed account of the outcomes
of his trip to Syria and its neighbouring States. We
commend the active and constructive position of
the new head of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the Syrian
track. We also note the input of Ms. Amany Qaddour
to this discussion.
We welcome the first successful humanitarian
campaign of the World Food Programme (WFP) in
Idlib, which was carried out through the crossline
mechanism. We realize that there were major difficulties
in endorsing the dispatch of this humanitarian convoy to
the warehouse in Sarmada. At the same time, we call on
all the stakeholders not to be satisfied with the modest
and one-time result. It was a modest outcome because
the WFP mission has only been partially completed; in
the absence of a distribution mechanism, the task has
not been completed. The assistance has not reached
those who need it, and it continues to be stored in a
warehouse under the supervision of unnamed but so-

21-2534615/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

called reliable partners. We would like to understand
whether or not these partners are listed among the 80
non-governmental organizations that appear in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/784).
How, then, can we be sure that the humanitarian
assistance will not be stolen or actually sold out to
those who need it?
We would also like to ask Mr. Griffiths about
the fate of the joint convoy of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Is there any chance that it
will be dispatched to Atareb and Daret Izza, as was
agreed with Damascus in April last year? What efforts
are being made by the United Nations to achieve
that end?
We would also like to reiterate our firm position
on the need to establish reliable crossline deliveries
of humanitarian aid in the north-west. Half-measures
will not solve this problem. It is an extremely important
task, and it is enshrined in the unanimously adopted
resolution 2585 (2021). Nevertheless, with regard to this
task, Western members of the Security Council, as far
as we can tell, continue show a lack of due enthusiasm
it. They are in no hurry to put pressure on the terrorist
groups operating under their auspices in Idlib.
At the same time, they are absolutely unforgiving
towards Damascus for delays in issuing authorization
to United Nations workers to operate in territory
under its control. Our Western colleagues have a
clearly equivocal attitude with regard to the legitimate
authorities and the remaining terrorists in Idlib, who
have not been held accountable despite the fact that,
according to the United Nations Population Fund, the
number of early and child marriages in the Idlib enclave
is on the rise. Indeed, when it comes to the Idlib enclave,
the rights of women and girls appear to be of far less
concern to our colleagues than the rights of women and
girls in, say, Afghanistan. Once again, we are facing
double standards.
We note with satisfaction the normalization of the
situation in the Dara’a province, in particular in the
area around Dara’a Al-Balad. That was made possible
thanks to the efforts of Damascus and the assistance of
Russian troops. Civilians are already returning to their
homes, and unimpeded humanitarian assistance is being
delivered to the governorate both by the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. I do not believe that
16/21

15/09/2021

we need to belabour the issue any further. The Syrians
have other more important issues to deal with.
In particular, we continue to hear in the Council
from representatives of Western States about the socalled targeted impact of the sanctions introduced
against certain Syrian officials and how they in no
way affect the lives of ordinary Syrians. Meanwhile,
in August, the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) published a curious report
analysing the situation in Syria during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic for the period from July
2020 to July 2021. I should like to cite the following
passages from the report:
“[t]he United States sanctions, which came into
effect in June 2020, significantly contributed to the
devaluation of the Syrian pound and the spiraling
economic crisis;
“[t]he combined effects of COVID-19 related
restrictions imposed from March to May 2020 and
in June, along with the US Caesar [act] sanctions
led the exchange rate to devalue even more;
“[i]n January 2021, the United States administration
announced the continuation of sanctions against
Syria to reduce flows of funding to the Government
..., which led to even further devaluation;
“coinciding with the implementation of the US
economic sanctions and the end of a two-month
lockdown, inadequate food consumption rates kept
increasing sharply;
“[t]rade was also further limited by US sanctions,
resulting in an increase in criminal activity and
unofficial trade in the black market instead;
“COVID-19 precautionary measures and fuel
shortages, currency depreciation and economic
sanctions, importation constraints, and high
transportation costs, all contributed to a general
rise in the prices of key agriculture inputs and
products from March 2020”.
The data published by USAID demonstrates the
true extent of the impact of anti-Syrian sanctions by
the United States on every individual Syrian. Some of
our European colleagues are following close behind in
making life difficult for ordinary Syrians and shifting
blame onto Damascus despite the glaring statistics
and international calls, including from the SecretaryGeneral.
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We are also extremely dismayed by the situation
in the Al-Hol camp for internally displaced persons, in
which the majority of residents are women and children.
Since the beginning of the year, 74 premeditated
murders have been committed there. The situation
risks spiralling out of control. Against that background,
according to reports we have received, active efforts
to radicalize residents in the camp are being made.
A similarly dangerous situation can be seen in the
Al-Tanf region. We recall that the occupying party
bears responsibility for everything that is taking place
in those areas.
We are also very concerned about the issue of water
supply in the northern part of Syria and the Euphrates
region. In those areas, 70 per cent of the population
is currently encountering difficulties in accessing
drinking water. The grain harvest is at serious risk.
The problem lies not only in the reduced levels of the
Euphrates River, but also the continuous interruptions
at the Allouk water station, which, like a large share of
infrastructure and facilities in Syria, requires serious
repairs and subsequent maintenance. We urgently
draw donors’ attention to that and call on them to
provide the necessary support to the United Nations for
implementing the relevant provisions of resolution 2585
(2021).
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General on his new approach to reporting
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. However,
much work lies ahead of us. In order to ensure that the
Council avoid difficulties this winter in renewing the
mandate of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism, we call on the United Nations and all
Council members to work on ensuring smooth crossline deliveries, as well as to do their part to normalize
the humanitarian situation in Syria and strengthen its
territorial integrity. We again emphasize that resolution
2585 (2021) does not provide for any automaticity in
that regard; everything will depend upon progress in
implementing its provisions.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths
to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Griffiths: Although I do not have any specific
comments to make, I would say only the following.
My key observation is that we are not meeting the
needs of the people of Syria. There are many reasons
for that, and many members of the Security Council
have given their own various different reasons. Amany

S/PV. 8861

Qaddour gave us a vivid example of the plight of the
people of Syria, and I tried to do so in my own way.
There are efforts to carry out cross-line operations
and resolve the issue of Dara’a Al-Balad. There are
problems involving the water supply in the Euphrates
River. There are families in Aleppo who are unable to
access schooling and health care.
We are not meeting our obligations. That is my
overriding message, and I call on all Council members
to come together on this issue — rather than find
differences — in order to see how we can better meet
our obligations. I think that the cross-line operation was
a very important action. It took a long time. It led to
the death of the soldier. There was danger for all those
involved. The aid has yet to be distributed. In response
to the question from the representative of the Russian
Federation, the World Food Programme is responsible
for its distribution.
Let us be very clear. The people of Syria are in a
situation of increasing need, with basic services fraying
before their eyes and no outcome to the conflict in
sight. Like all others, I of course support the call for
a nationwide ceasefire and political solution, but in a
more immediate way to meet the basic needs of Syrians
wherever they may be, without contest, distinction
or differentiation.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
clarifications and additional comments.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Since the previous Security Council meeting
on the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8841),
a number of meetings and visits have taken place in the
country with representatives of the United Nations and
its specialized agencies and programmes, as the Syrian
Government has continued its constructive engagement
with the United Nations and other partners to improve
the humanitarian situation and provide services and
support to Syrians in need throughout the country.
We listened today to the briefing by Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, in which
he spoke of his visit to Syria and the meetings he
held there. We hope that his visit will contribute to
correcting the course in our relationship with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

21-2534617/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

(OCHA) and strengthening cooperation with it, in
accordance with the principles of humanitarian action
set forth in General Assembly resolution 46/182
and the criteria of professionalism and objectivity,
while avoiding politicization and the diktats of some
Western Governments.
After a long period of obstruction by the Turkish
occupation forces and their proxy terrorist groups,
the convoy of the World Food Programme, which was
approved by the Syrian Government several months
ago, was able to reach Sarmada, in north-west Syria,
via a cross-line route from Aleppo, in coordination
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. That operation was
successful, as confirmed by Mr. Griffiths. Relevant
Syrian authorities took all the measures necessary to
ensure safe passage for the convoy and the security and
safety of United Nations and national staff.
The soldier Monawar Hasan Salim paid the ultimate
price and became a martyr in the line of duty. As he was
securing the passage of the convoy, he was killed by a
mine that had been planted by terrorist proxies of the
Turkish occupation forces on the trucks crossing road.
It is reprehensible and to be condemned that some
countries commend the Turkish regime at a time when
it still obstructs the deployment of an aid convoy from
within Syria to the Atarib region, in north-west Syria.
The United Nations had been granted approval by the
Syrian Government to deploy the convoy a year and
a half prior, and approval had been renewed, but to
no avail.
On the other hand, upon approval of the Syrian
Government and in close coordination with United
Nations agencies and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
an inter-agency aid convoy was deployed to Dara’a in
the south of the country. The World Food Programme
resumed its monthly programmes and started
to distribute food baskets after the convoy and
humanitarian staff had safely arrived there, and aid
reached those who needed it.

15/09/2021

(WHO) delivered three cross-line shipments,
including two airlifts and one road convoy”.
The report also confirmed the provision of aid to
millions of Syrians in all 14 governorates, including
food aid to approximately 4.8 million people. All those
achievements would not have been possible without
the cooperation, facilities and support provided by the
Syrian Government.
Although some Western countries hostile to
my country continue their efforts to cover up those
achievements and continue to promote the so-called
cross-border mechanism and the fabricated reports
presented by the Gaziantep office, my country will
remain committed to working to deliver aid from
within Syria. We will maintain our position and
continue to call for an end to the politicized crossborder mechanism, which violates our sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We will expose the hostile role
played by the Gaziantep office.
I must point out the inhumane effects of the coercive
measures imposed by some Western countries on
Syria, which have led to significant shortages of food,
medicine and medical supplies, fuel and electricity.
My delegation stresses the need to urgently address
the issue, especially with the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which poses an
additional threat to the health of Syrians. Syria’s health
sector is overburdened due to the lack of medicines,
supplies and equipment of all kinds, in particular those
needed to treat respiratory and cardiovascular diseases
and cancer. Those measures prevent us from securing
those supplies. Britain, for example, which continues to
claim to be committed to humanitarian action, obstructs
efforts to enhance the capacity of the Syrian health
sector to respond to COVID-19. It prevents specialized
laboratories from obtaining the necessary equipment to
conduct the relevant tests.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that improving
the humanitarian situation requires the following.

With regard to the north-east, I refer to the recent
relevant report (S/2021/735) of the Secretary-General,
which confirms that

First, it requires full respect for Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity — a
principle stressed by all of the Council’s resolutions
related to the situation in my country.

“Between January and July, 1,588 trucks providing
humanitarian assistance crossed lines into the northeast compared with 199 trucks during the same
period in 2020. The World Health Organization

Secondly, it requires an end to the illegal military
presence of the United States and Turkey on Syrian
territories and an end to the crimes and practices
committed by their occupying forces, which seek

18/21

21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to prolong the crisis, support terrorism and its proxy
militias and plunder our wealth and economic resources.
My delegation stresses the need to compel the Turkish
regime to stop using water as a weapon of war against
Syrians for political purposes, in order to ensure the
continuity of the functioning of the Allouk water
station and the flow of drinking water to more than
1 million citizens, as well as the flow of the Euphrates
River according to the rates agreed upon between the
two countries.
Thirdly, it requires the immediate and unconditional
lifting of the immoral, inhumane and illegal siege
imposed by the United States of America and the
European Union on the Syrian people, which represents
collective punishment and economic terrorism that
seriously harms the Syrian Government’s humanitarian
and development efforts and the ability of Syrians to
meet their basic needs.
Fourthly, it requires the fulfilment of the pledges
announced to finance the humanitarian response plan,
which is funded only at 27 per cent to date — and we
are in the last quarter of the year.
Fifthly, it requires supporting the implementation
of early-recovery projects, as called for in resolution
2585 (2021), increasing them in quantity and quality
and rejecting any attempts by hostile countries to
impose programmes and projects that are inconsistent
with Syrian national interests.
And, sixthly, it requires enabling the United
Nations to finalize the agreement with the Syrian
Government on the strategic framework that some
Western Governments continue to obstruct, and to start
implementing it to ensure support for efforts to achieve
sustainable development and not be “left behind.”
The United States and its allies must desist from that
destructive approach and stop investing in terrorism
and forming illegitimate alliances under the pretext
of combating it. They should stop spending billions of
dollars to wage futile and useless wars that destabilize
States Members of the Organization.
In conclusion, our hand is stretched out to embark
upon a new stage of cooperation. We will continue
to provide the facilities necessary for the work of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies while fully
adhering to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
look forward to genuine partnerships that support the
efforts of the Syrian State to restore peace and stability,

S/PV. 8861

provide assistance to civilians in need, enhance
development efforts and rehabilitate the infrastructure
and facilities that are necessary for the dignified,
voluntary and safe return of displaced persons to
their homes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing. I
also thank Ms. Qaddour for her insightful statement.
This month, Turkey welcomed United Nations highlevel officials who observed, first-hand, the impact of a
decade-long war in Syria. They met with Syrians who
had fled the brutal war waged against innocent civilians.
They also witnessed the dire conditions of those living
under constant threat and fear across our borders with
Syria. Both Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
High Commissioner Grandi highlighted the need to
keep Syria high on our collective agenda and strengthen
our response to the ongoing humanitarian crisis.
Turkey continues to facilitate the work of the
United Nations towards that objective while hosting the
largest population of Syrian refugees and shouldering
all humanitarian and security consequences of the
Syrian conflict.
Throughout Syria, the United Nations and its
partners strive to address record levels of needs under
difficult circumstances. Humanitarian agencies report
that the north-west is at the height of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak, where the fragile health
system operates at its maximum capacity.
At the same time, the escalation of violence by
the Al-Assad regime continues to result in increasing
numbers of civilian casualties and significant
displacement since the ceasefire in Idlib. The heinous
attack against the Turkish armed forces in Idlib on
11 September resulted in the death of two Turkish
soldiers, with three others injured. We thank our friends
and allies who have extended messages of condolences
in that regard. We will continue our efforts to preserve
the ceasefire in Idlib.
Under the current conditions, the United Nations
cross-border mechanism remains the only tool to help
the 4 million people stuck in the north-west. They
desperately need that assistance for their most basic
needs, including medical equipment and vaccines. On
several occasions in the Security Council, many of

21-2534619/21

S/PV.8861

The situation in the Middle East

us have underlined the urgency of maintaining crossborder operations in order to prevent the spillover effect
of COVID-19 in the region. The largest shipment of
vaccines to the north-west from Turkey, with 350,000
doses, took place at the beginning of the month. We
aim to increase the delivery of COVID-19 vaccines in
the coming weeks. It is clear that the absence of the
mechanism at such a critical time would be devastating.
We all applauded the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2585 (2021) in July. Millions of vulnerable
people in the north-west will continue to benefit from
cross-border aid, at least for another year. Two months
after its adoption, important progress has already been
made regarding cross-line access into the north-west,
despite all the difficulties posed by conducting such
an operation.
Between 30 August and 1 September, 14 World
Food Programme trucks containing 600 tons of food
items made the journey from Aleppo to Sarmada, Idlib.
That operation required a total-risk assessment and
negotiations with different actors. It also validated our
concerns in relation to the safety of cross-line assistance
in the region.
Allow me to recall once again that resolution 2585
(2021) covers the entire country and requests progress
on cross-line access throughout Syria. In that regard,
I will repeat our call for cross-line operations to be
conducted into the north-east, including into Ras
Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad, where needs are severe, but no
aid has been delivered until now. We expect to see equal
attention paid to the most vulnerable in the north-west
and north-east of the country, as well as in the southwest, in Dara’a, who require our immediate attention.
There will be no sustainable peace without
accountability. Year after year, Syrians have continued
to confront gross violations and abuses at the hands
of the Al-Assad regime and terrorist organizations.
Countless people have been deprived of their liberty
in Syria, with many waiting for news from their
disappeared and missing family members. The atrocities
committed by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units and its Syrian offshoot, the so-called
Syrian Democratic Forces, vary from bomb attacks on
hospitals and schools to the recruitment of children to
assassinations and kidnappings. Their war crimes and
crimes against humanity test our conscience every day.
Independent mechanisms such as the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
20/21

15/09/2021

Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism have a vital role to play in
ensuring that impunity does not take root in a postconflict Syria. The latest report (A/HRC/48/70) of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
reveals a bleak picture of the situation in Syria,
documenting torture and sexual violence in detention,
deaths in custody and enforced disappearances. We
should closely follow up on its recommendations and
accelerate efforts to ensure accountability.
The Syrian people have endured a decade of
loss and heartbreak, but they have not given up on
justice or respect for their rights. We must show our
determination to support them along that path. Despite
the false accusations and fabricated lies we just heard,
the regime will not be able to cover up its crimes and
walk away. When the time comes, the regime will be
held accountable for the systematic massacres and mass
destruction it has committed throughout Syria,
With regard to the insulting statement made by the
representative of the Syrian regime, I reiterate that I do
not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart. His
presence here is an affront to the millions of Syrians
who are victims of the regime’s countless crimes. I will
therefore not honour his delusional accusations with
a response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): For well
over 10 years, the Syrian people have greatly suffered
from one of the gravest humanitarian situations in the
world. Unfortunately, people are suffering more now
than ever before, as Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
was told by Syrians and humanitarian workers alike
during his recent visit to Syria.
The international community has a serious
political, moral and ethical responsibility to address the
dire situation. The United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator’s visit to Syria, which enabled him to collect
first-hand information and assess the actual situation
on the ground, was a welcome act. It is promising that,
according to his account, he was encouraged by his
discussions with Syrian Government officials and by
subsequent developments on the ground, including the
first humanitarian cross-line operation into north-west
Syria since 2017.
21-25346

15/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We value all the efforts undertaken to make
that happen, including preparations by the Syrian
Government and the cooperation of the humanitarian
community. More important, we salute the dedication
of the Syrian soldier who lost his life while demining to
clear the road for the humanitarian convoy. The transfer
of humanitarian aid to Dara’a with the cooperation of the
Syrian Government is also an important development.
As the United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator has been notified by the humanitarian
community, the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation continues to deteriorate. There is an urgent
need for recovery assistance and improved provision of
basic services.
That serves to underline the importance of the
full and effective implementation of resolution 2585
(2021), through which the Security Council calls upon
all Member States to respond with practical steps to
address the urgent needs of the Syrian people. Through
that resolution, the Council also stresses that such
efforts must include supporting essential services, such
as water, sanitation, health, education, shelter and early
recovery projects.
In that context, we welcome the statement by
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and his call to
dramatically increase our early recovery assistance.
However, it is disappointing that, according to him,
needs in Syria continue to grow while funding continues
to shrink. That means that financial contributions for
humanitarian activities in Syria must increase. But that
alone is not enough.
Therefore, efforts towards early-recovery projects
and reconstruction must be redoubled and expedited.

S/PV. 8861

Unilateral sanctions, which have a devasting role
in aggravating the humanitarian situation, must be
removed fully and immediately. The looting of Syrian
oil and wealth must stop. Water must not be weaponized.
And the return of refugees and displaced persons must
be facilitated.
Further efforts must also be made to ensure that
Syrians no longer need to rely on humanitarian aid. The
ultimate solution, of course, is ending the conflict, the
full withdrawal of all uninvited foreign forces, defeating
terrorists and ensuring Syria’s territorial integrity, unity
and political independence. We hope that the recent
positive developments as a result of the coordination
and cooperation of the Syrian Government and the
humanitarian community will yield further results and
replace confrontational approaches with cooperation.
The touching story told by Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths of a 4-year-old Syrian boy with
leukaemia under treatment at a clinic in rural Aleppo
that has no electricity, running water or access to
medication is only one example of the hardship faced
daily by many Syrians. We must not leave this proud
nation alone. We should not let them down.
As in the past, we will continue to assist the people
and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
overcome the challenges they face.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I shall now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

21-2534621/21
