VI,

A.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

SOLICITATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLEDGES AND
COLLECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS

2. The Controller, in consultation with the Under-SecretaryGenera:l for Political and General Assembly Affairs and the
Direetor of the Division of Human Rights and with the advice
of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, shaJI determine the
procedures for soliciting voluntary contributions to the Fund.
3. Any prospective donor desiring to make a voluntary
contribution to the Fund shall submit a written proposal to
the Secretary-General. The request for acceptance should
contain all relevant information including the amount of the
proposed contribution, the currency and the timing of payments.
4. The proposal, with the comments, inter alia, of the
Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly
Affairs and the Director of the Division of Human Rights,
shall be .forwarded to the Controller, for determination that
the proposal is acceptable under the Financial Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations, including the determination of
whether or not any proposed gift or donation might directly
or indirectly involve additional financial liability for the Organization. Before acceptance of any gift or donation involving
such liability, the Controller shall request and obtain the approval of the General Assembly.

5. The Controller shall acknowledge all pledges and shall
determine the bank account or accounts in which contributions
to the Fund should be deposited. He shaJl be responsible for
collecting contributions and following up on payments of
contributions pledged.

6. The Controller may accept contributions in such currencies as he deems usable by the Fund or readily convertible
into usable currencies.
B.

OPERATION AND CONTROL

7. The Controller shall ensure •that the operation and control of the Fund shall be in accordance with the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. He may delegate
responsibility for the operation and administration of the Fund
to the heads of departments or offices designated by the
Secretary-General to execute ,activities financed by the Fund.
Only officials so designated may authorize the execution of
specific activities to be financed by the Fund.
8. In respect of activities conducted by the United Nations,
requests for allotments of funds shall be submitted to the
Controller by the Director of the Division of Human Rights
accompanied by such supporting information as the Controller
may require. After review, allotments to provide for expenditures of the funds received shall be issued by the Director of
the Budget Division, and certifying officers for the Fund shall
be designated by the Controller in accordance with established
procedures.
9. The Controller shall be responsible for the reporting
of the financial transactions of the Fund and shall issue
quarterly statements of assets, liabilities and unencumbered
Fund balance, income and expenditure.
10. The Fund shall be audited by both the Internal Audit
Service and the Board of Auditors, in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.

C.

REPORTING

11. An annual report showing funds available, pledges and
payments received and the e~penditures made from the Fund
shall be prepared by the Controller and submitted to the
Genera,1 Assembly and, as appropriate, to the Commission on
Human Rights.

33/175.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing its commitment to foster universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and funda-

IS9

mental freedoms for all in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 96
Recalling that in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 97 everyone has the
right to life, liberty and security of person and the
right not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention
or exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Reaffirming once more its condemnation of all forms
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling its resolution 32/118 of 16 December 1977, in which it reiterated its profound indignation, as well as its resolutions 3219 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3448 (XXX) of 9 December 1975
and 31/124 of 16 December 1976 concerning the
human rights situation in Chile,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975,98 in which it
established the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, and resolutions 3
(XXXII) of 19 February 1976,99 9 (XXXIII) of
9 March 1977 100 and 12 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978 101
of the Commission, by which it extended the mandate
of the Ad Hoe Working Group,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities to implement General Assembly resolutions
31/124 and 32/118,
Having considered the study prepared by the Special
Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities on the
consequences for human rights in Chile of the various
forms of aid extended to the Chilean authorities,102
Taking note of the important role that regional human rights organizations can play in situations of
violations of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the fact that in
July 1978, for the first time, members of the Ad Hoe
Working Group were enabled to visit Chile in pursuance of their mandate, which represents a valuable
experience for the United Nations when dealing with
constant and flagrant violations of human rights,
Having considered the reports of the Ad Hoe Working Group 103 and of the Secretary-General104 under
96 Resolution 217 A (III).
97 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
98 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXIII,
sect. A.
9 9 /bid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768),
chap. XX, sect. A.
100 Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927),
chap. XXI, sect. A.
10 1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
102 E/CN.4/Sub.2/412 (vols. I to IV) and Corr.1.
103 A/33/331.
104 A/33/293.

160

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

this item, as well as the observations and documents
submitted by the Chilean authorities, 105
Noting that the Ad Hoe Working Group records its
appreciation for the co-operation extended to it by
the Chilean authorities,
Noting also that the report of the Ad Hoe Working
Group confirms the substance of its previous reports,
Acknowledging the conclusions of the Ad Hoe
Working Group that the present situation of human
rights in Chile has improved, as compared to previous
years, in that cases of torture and ill-treatment as well
as the number of arrests for political reasons have
decreased, large numbers of political prisoners are no
longer held, no cases of persons disappearing in 1978
have been confirmed and the expression in the press
of a wider range of opinion appears to be permitted,
which developments are mainly attributable to the efforts of the Chilean people and the international community,
Gravely concerned by the conclusions of the Ad Hoe
Working Group that violations nevertheless continue
to take place, often of a grave nature, of human rights
provided for in:
(a) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and manifested inter alia by ill-treatment
and torture, arrest and detention for political reasons,
denial to Chileans of the right to return and live in
their country, prohibition of political parties by infringement of freedom of expression and the lack of
effective legal remedies,
(b) The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 106 and manifested inter alia
by denial of the right to collective bargaining and the
right to strike,
Concerned furthermore by the recent dissolution of
labour organizations, arrest and persecution of labour
leaders and trade union members and infringements of
acquired labour rights,
Particularly concerned also by the lack of progress
in clarifying the fate of missing and disappeared persons in spite of appeals by the General Assembly, the
Commission on Human Rights, the Secretary-General,
private institutions and citizens of Chile,
Concluding, therefore, that the human rights situation in Chile justifies the continued concern and involvement of the international community and the
special attention of the Commission on Human Rights,
l. Expresses its continued indignation that violations of human rights, often of a grave nature, continue
to take place in Chile, as has been convincingly established by the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group
on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile;
2. Expresses also its particular concern and dismay
at the refusal of the Chilean authorities to accept responsibility or account for the large number of persons
reported to have disappeared for political reasons, or
to undertake an adequate investigation of cases drawn
to their attention;
3. Calls once more upon the Chilean authorities
to restore and safeguard, without delay, basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms and fully to respect
the provisions of the relevant international instruments
105 A/C.3/33/7.
106 Resolution 2200

A (XXI), annex.

to which Chile is a party, including the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, as well as to heed the concerns expressed by
the international community;
4. Urges the Chilean authorities in particular:
(a) To cease the state of emergency, under which
continued violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms are permitted;
(b) To restore the democratic institutions and
constitutional safeguards formerly enjoyed by the
Chilean people;
( c) To ensure an immediate end to torture and
other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment and
to prosecute and punish those responsible for such
practices;
(d) To take urgent and effective measures in response to the profound international concern at the
fate of persons reported to have disappeared for political reasons and, in particular, to investigate and
clarify the fate of these persons;
( e) To cease arbitrary arrest and detention and
to release immediately those who are imprisoned for
political reasons;
(f) To restore fully the right of habeas corpus;
(g) To restore Chilean nationality to those who
have been deprived of it for political reasons;
(h) To allow those who have been forced to leave
the country for political reasons to return home and
take appropriate measures to assist in their resettlement;
(i) To remove restrictions on political activities
and re-establish the full enjoyment of the freedom of
association;
(j) To guarantee the standards of labour protection called for by international instruments and fully
restore previously established trade union rights;
(k)
To guarantee fully freedom of expression;
(/) To safeguard the human rights of the Mapuche
Indians and other indigenous minorities, taking into
account their particular cultural characteristics;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur for his report on the consequences for human
rights in Chile of the various forms of aid extended
to the Chilean authorities; 102
6. Commends the Chairman and other members
of the Ad Hoe Working Group for their thorough and
objective report;
7. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to give close attention to the situation 111
Chile and, to this end:
(a)
To appoint, in consultation with the Chairman
of the Ad H oc Working Group from among members
of the Group as presently constituted, a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Chile who
should report to the Commission on Human Rights
and to the General Assembly, and to formulate his
mandate on the basis of resolution 8 (XXXI) of the
Commission, in which it established the mandate of
the Ad Hoe Working Group;
( b) To consider at its thirty-fifth session the most
effective ways of clarifying the whereabouts and fate

VI.

Retiolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of m1ssmg and disappeared persons in Chile, taking
into account the views on this subject expressed by
the Ad Hoe Working Group in its report;
8. Urges the Chilean authorities to co-operate with
the Special Rapporteur;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session, through the Economic and Social Council, a
progress report on action taken in compliance with
the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/176.

Importance of the experience of the
Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation
of Human Rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975, 107 in which
it established the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, and resolutions 3
(XXXII) of 19 February 1976, 108 9 (XXXIII) of
9 March 1977 109 and 12 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978 110
of the Commission, by which it extended the mandate
of the Ad Hoe Working Group,
Welcoming the fact that the Ad Hoe Working Group
was finally able to travel to Chile and carry out, on the
spot, an investigation of the human rights situation in
that country in accordance with its mandate,
Aware of the importance of this experience in the
framework of United Nations activities, when dealing
with consistent patterns of gross violations of human
rights,
1. Expresses its great appreciation to the Ad Hoe
Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in
Chile for the careful and objective manner in which
it carried out its mandate;
2. Draws the attention of the Commission on Human Rights to the importance of the experience of the
Ad Hoe Working Group in view of the Commission's
future action, when dealing with consistent patterns
of gross violations of human rights.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/177.

Draft Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/136 of 16 December 1977,
Reiterating its conviction that the adoption of the
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination
107 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXIII,
sect. A.
108 [bid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768),
chap. XX, sect. A.
109 Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927),
chap. XXI, sect. A.
110 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

161

against Women and its entry into force will contribute
to the implementation of the principal objectives of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Convinced that the adoption of the Convention and
its entry into force will contribute to the achievement
of equality between men and women,
Taking into account the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women, to be held in 1980,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Working Group of the Whole on the Drafting of
the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women 111 established by the Third Committee;
2. Recommends that a working group be established at the beginning of the thirty-fourth session of
the General Assembly and be provided with adequate
facilities to enable it to complete its task, to consider
the final provisions of the draft Convention and to
reconsider the articles which have not yet been completed with a view to the adoption of the draft Convention at the thirty-fourth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session, as a matter of high priority,
the item entitled "Draft Convention on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women".
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/178.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Considering that 1978 marks the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 11 ~
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
in the light of the principles embodied in the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 32/63 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General
to draw up and circulate among Member States a
questionnaire soliciting information concerning steps
they had taken, including legislative and administrative measures, to put into practice the principles of
the Declaration,
Rernllini further its resolution 32/64 of 8 December 1977, in which it called upon Member States to
reinforce their support of the Declaration by making
unilateral declarations against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment,
1. Takes note of the progress report of the Commission on Human Rights on the drafting of a con111 A/C.3/33/L.47 and Corr.I and 2, Add.I and Corr.I and
Add.2 and Corr.I (subsequently issued as A/34/60).
112 Resolution 217 A (III).
