A /72/PV.38

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

38th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 1 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Llorentty Solíz
(Plurinational State of Bolivia), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 42
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/94)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.2)
Mr. Biang (Gabon): Before I begin my formal
statement, allow me to express my firm and strong
condemnation of the tragic attacks that hit New York
City yesterday. I present my deepest condolences to the
Government of the United States of America and my
solidarity to the victims’ families.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of African States on the agenda item on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
Allow me also to associate my statement with that
to be delivered by the representative of Ecuador on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
This is a matter of great importance to the Group of
African States, and indeed to Africa in general. At the
twenty-eighth ordinary session of the Assembly of the

African Union, held in January 2017, the African Heads
of State and Government deliberated on this matter.
Their call was loud and clear for the lifting of the longstanding unjust economic, commercial and financial
blockade of Cuba.
It has now been 55 years since the embargo against
Cuba was unilaterally imposed by the United States
of America. Moreover, for more than two decades the
will of the international community, as expressed in
the General Assembly, has overwhelmingly urged and
appealed for the immediate end of the long-standing
economic embargo against Cuba. It is particularly
regrettable that after the improvement in the bilateral
relations between the United States and Cuba that
was achieved during the previous United States
Administration, the blockade against Cuba has recently
been strengthened. That is clearly a step backwards in
the bilateral relations between the two countries, which
should be urgently addressed.
We are particularly concerned that the embargo
continues to causes great economic hardship for
the people of Cuba, particularly the poor and most
vulnerable. Moreover, it most certainly makes the
achievement of sustainable development even more
elusive. Therefore, it undermines our collective efforts
to universally push towards implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and ensuring that
no one is left behind. The international community
needs to stand together in bringing the blockade to an
end. It is an infringement on the Cuban people’s right
to development.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35800 (E)

*1735800*

A/72/PV.38

The African Group calls for the blockade against
Cuba to be unequivocally lifted, not only because it is
right to do so, but also because of Cuba’s many positive
contributions over the past decades as a responsible
member of the international community. In fact, Cuba
has a proud history in Africa, both in its support for
Africa’s struggle for liberation and, more recently, in
its contributions to alleviating the effects of some of
the major health crises that the continent has faced
in recent years. The people of Africa will continue
to remember those contributions, and the people of
Cuba should continue to be proud of their nation’s
important contributions as a responsible member of the
international community.
Accordingly, the Group of African States reaffirms
its full support for draft resolution A/72/L.2, on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. We think that a diplomatic and
political solution can be found to the matter, and we are
of the firm belief that that it will be beneficial to both
the United States of America and Cuba, in addition to
other countries. The Group of African States further
reiterates the call on the Government of the United
States to lift the long-standing embargo against Cuba.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the immense pleasure of welcoming the
Foreign Minister of Cuba and his delegation, who are
present with us today. They are always very welcome.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of
77 and China on agenda item 42, “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the agenda item that we are discussing
(A/72/94). The Group once again deplores the fact
that the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States 55 years ago against our
brotherly Republic of Cuba remains in full application
and continues to be strengthened. The Group recalls
the positive steps taken by the previous Administration
of the United States in 2015 and 2016, which, though
still inadequate to effectively end the impact of the
embargo, were headed in the right direction. The
Group also deplores the new policy established by
the current President of the United States, which is
aimed at strengthening the embargo against Cuba. The
Group believes that such a policy is a setback in the
2/28

01/11/2017

process of achieving normalized relations between the
two countries.
The Group of 77 and China reiterates its commitment
to the purposes, principles and spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly the principles of
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in their internal affairs, as well as
the freedom of international trade and navigation. We
believe that it is the duty and responsibility of every
Member State to strictly comply with those principles.
We are also of the view that any policy or action that
disregards those principles — in this case, the unilateral
economic sanctions against Cuba — should be seriously
considered for immediate repeal.
Given that the embargo by the United States against
Cuba has continued for more than 50 years, the Group
of 77 and China expresses deep concern about the
prolonged negative effects that the economic sanctions
and travel restrictions have had on Cuba and its people.
From April 2016 to June of this year, the impact of the
United States embargo on Cuba’s foreign trade amounts
to more than $4 billion. Limited foreign investment and
difficult access to development credits translate directly
into economic hardship and humanitarian impacts for
the people of Cuba.
The country’s socioeconomic reforms have also
been hampered by the cruel embargo. The Group
of 77 and China fears that if the economic sanctions
continue, Cuba’s potential for development in both
the economic and human development spheres will be
unjustly undermined. It will be impossible for Cuba to
successfully embark on the path towards sustainable
development, as envisaged in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, for which all Member States
have pledged their support.
Over many decades, Cuba has extensively
and continuously contributed to the international
community, particularly through its remarkable
supply of medical assistance to countries in need.
Cuba’s emergency assistance to African countries that
were affected by the Ebola virus in West Africa is a
great example of its solidarity with the international
community. Therefore, the Group of 77 and China
commends Cuba’s contributions to humanitarian
assistance and would like to express the hope that with
the permanent lifting of the embargo by the United
States, Cuba will be granted the opportunity that it
has long deserved to fully cooperate with the global
17-35800

01/11/2017

community and international organizations with respect
to, inter alia, health, the environment and agriculture.
To conclude, the Group of and China would like
to reiterate its strong support for the implementation
of the recommendations of resolution 71/5. We would
like to reiterate our call for the ending of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. The urgency
and necessity of our call is further highlighted by the
ongoing global collective endeavour to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Therefore,
the Group of 77 and China would like to appeal to the
international community to further step up its efforts
in support of the lifting of the embargo, not only for
Cuba’s prospects, but also for the full achievement of
economic and social development of all members of
the entire global community as a whole. That is the
declaration of the Group of 77 and China.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to propose that the list of speakers on the
current topic be closed, in view of the large number of
delegations inscribed on the list.
It was so decided.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Before I make my formal
statement, I wish to express, on behalf of my delegation,
our condolences to the Government and the people of the
United States of America for the loss of lives sustained
as a result of the terrible terrorist attack in New York
yesterday, which we condemn in unequivocal terms.
I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba and his delegation to New York. It is a pleasure to
see him again in our midst.
I have the honour to address the General Assembly,
on behalf of the States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to express our
support for the draft resolution on ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against the Republic of Cuba
(A/72/L.2). The General Assembly has consistently
adopted this annual text by an overwhelming majority
since it was first introduced in 1992. ASEAN
member States have voted unanimously in favour of
the resolution for the past 16 years, and this marks
the third year that ASEAN has made a statement
in the Assembly calling for the unilateral embargo
against Cuba to be lifted as soon as possible. It is our
firm belief that differences between States should

A/72/PV.38

be resolved through engagement and inclusion, not
confrontation and isolation. That would be in concord
with the fundamental principles of sovereign equality,
non-interference and non-intervention, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
ASEAN welcomes the restoration of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States in 2015.
That was an important step towards the normalization
of bilateral relations and remains key to building better
regional relations in the Americas. A more important
step will be for the United States to end its economic,
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. That
would significantly improve the quality of life and
living standards of the Cuban people and contribute to
the economic and social development of Cuba.
Bringing an end to the embargo would also advance
the Assembly’s efforts towards achieving the inclusive
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
ASEAN encourages the United States and Cuba in
their efforts to chart a new way forward. We recognize
that much remains to be done. We encourage the United
States and Cuba to remain committed to an open and
constructive dialogue, underpinned by mutual respect.
ASEAN joins the other members of the Assembly in
reiterating our support for the lifting of the unilateral
embargo against Cuba as soon as possible.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to begin my statement by greeting
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and his delegation and to
welcome them to this House of ours.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
(CELAC).
CELAC once again welcomes the steps taken in
2015 and 2016 by Cuba and the United States of America
to commence the normalization of their diplomatic
relations. That marked the beginning of a new chapter
in the history of peace and coexistence among the
American nations. However, we regret that the blockade
remains a reality for the Cuban people. It is undeniable
that it is the main obstacle to the normal development
of Cuba. The report of the Secretary-General (A/72/94)
confirms the cost of this policy for the country, as it
causes considerable and unjustifiable harm to the wellbeing of the Cuban people and is contrary to the wishes
for peace of the Latin American peoples, as enshrined

17-358003/28

A/72/PV.38

in the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace.
We also deplore the new policy announced by the
current United States Administration that is intended
to strengthen the economic, commercial and financial
blockade against Cuba. It is a setback in the process
of normalization of bilateral relations between the two
countries. The economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed on Cuba is contrary to the letter,
spirit, purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
CELAC reiterates its firm rejection of the
application of laws and measures that are contrary
to international law, such as the Helms-Burton Act,
including those with extraterritorial effects, as well as
of the increasing harassment of Cuba’s international
financial transactions, in disregard of the political will
of the international community. We therefore urge the
Government of the United States of America to stop
implementing them. The United States Congress has
the authority to end the Cuban embargo completely.
Moreover, it has has been demonstrated that the
President of the United States, if he so wishes, may use
his broad executive powers to substantially amend the
application of the blockade.
CELAC reiterates its special declaration on the
need to put an end to the economic, commercial
and financial blockade of the United States against
Cuba — adopted at the fifth Summit of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, on 25 January 2017 — by
which the Government of the United States of America
was requested to fulfil the successive resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and, in response to
the repeated calls from the international community, to
put an end to the economic, commercial and financial
blockade it maintains against Cuba.
We believe that the return to the Republic of Cuba
of the land occupied by the United States naval base
in Guantanamo, which has been repeatedly requested
by the Cuban people and Government, should be an
important element in the process of the normalization
of relations between the two countries, by means of a
bilateral dialogue that adheres to international law.
The Charter of the United Nations enshrines laws,
obligations and principles that have become part of
the legal heritage, not just of international law but
of humankind. It should not be violated or abused
4/28

01/11/2017

by any Member State. Member States should adjust
their national and international actions to the rights,
obligations and principles enshrined in the Charter.
In 2015 and 2016, resolutions 70/5 and 71/5, on
this item, were both adopted with 191 votes in favour,
confirming the near universality of this cause.
For all those reasons, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States will once again
decisively support the adoption of draft resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/72/L.2). We emphasize the
inconsistency of the application of coercitive unilateral
measures that are not supported by international law or
by the letter, the spirit and the purposes and principles
of the Charter.
We reiterate our call on the United States to
accept the call of the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean, of every region of the world and of its
own people to put an end once and for all to the unjust
embargo against the Republic of Cuba.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): First,
allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to join others in
condemning the terrible terrorist act that took place in
lower Manhattan yesterday. Our condolences go out
to the families who lost loved ones, and we stand in
solidarity with the United States of America, Argentina,
Belgium and the entire international community as
together we continue to fight this scourge.
I have the honour to address the General Assembly
on behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) in the presence of the
honourable Foreign Minister of Cuba.
CARICOM aligns itself with the statements made
earlier by the representatives of Ecuador, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, and of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, on behalf of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, as well as that to be
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Four States members of CARICOM — Barbados,
Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago — established
diplomatic relations with Cuba on 8 December 1972
in an independent, sovereign act in the face of strong
opposition from their traditional ally, the United States
of America. Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago had
become independent nation States in 1962, and Barbados
and Guyana in 1966. As the other eight anglophone
17-35800

01/11/2017

A/72/PV.38

Caribbean countries acceded to independence, they all
followed the original four in establishing and building
excellent relations with Cuba: Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Belize, the Commonwealth of Dominica,
Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. Suriname and Haiti, the two
non-anglophone Caribbean nations with membership in
CARICOM, had established diplomatic relations prior
to their membership in this regional body.

a key component of his policy towards Cuba. That
was reaffirmed in his address to the United Nations
in September, during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session (see
A/72/PV.3). With its policy against Cuba, the new
Administration will reverse the progress achieved since
the former President announced, on 17 December 2014,
the re-establishment of diplomatic relations and the
beginning of a process to normalize bilateral ties.

The States members of CARICOM have maintained
close relations with Cuba throughout the years of
their independence, and that relationship has been
strengthened through a wide range of programmes of
cooperation in areas that include trade, health care,
infrastructure and human resource development. In
2015, the international community adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which sets
Goals that guide the creation of the future that we want
and which aims at leaving no one behind. Our future
regional development is in many ways reliant upon our
collective advancement and progress. The blockade
works contrarily to those aspirations to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.

In the light of that disappointing reversal, the
Caribbean Community wishes to reiterate to the
General Assembly, as we did during the general debate
in September (see A/72/PV.23), our unequivocal
commitment and unceasing call for an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba. We remain fully committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly to the principles of the sovereign equality
of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their
internal affairs and freedom of trade and navigation.

Striving for peace and the right to development
have been the deepest concerns of each member of our
Caribbean Community since gaining independence. In
that context, we view the embargo not just as a punitive
act against Cuba, but as an impediment to our shared
regional development.
The General Assembly has adopted a resolution
on this item each year since 1992, condemning the
ongoing impact of the embargo and declaring it to be
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. The Assembly’s seventy-first session
marked a milestone, when not a single Member State
voted against resolution 71/5, calling for a definite
end to the unilateral decision that has proved to be an
untenable, unnecessary and undesirable fissure in our
hemispheric family. Opposition to the policy is now
almost universal. Citizens across the United States are
joining the international community by increasingly
voicing their disapproval and calling for the lifting of
the unilateral sanctions. Today, 73 per cent of Americans
and 63 per cent of Cubans living in the United States
support the lifting of the blockade.
Yet, on 16 June the current President of the United
States announced the strengthening of the economic,
commercial and financial blockade against Cuba as

CARICOM enjoys friendly relations with both
Cuba and the United States. The two neighbours — a
mere 90 miles apart — have produced great scholars,
scientists and great global leaders. The two countries
possess proud and noble histories and are populated
by friendly, open and loving peoples. The progress
achieved in 2015 and 2016 has shown that Cuba and
the United States can live together, respecting their
differences, and that they are able to cooperate for the
benefit of the two countries and peoples.
Therefore, CARICOM remains optimistic that there
will be a diplomatic solution to the long-standing issue,
which is now a mere relic of the Cold War. To that end,
CARICOM consistently supports subregional, regional
and international efforts to promote constructive
dialogue to bring about the cessation, sooner rather
than later, of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba. It is within that context that
the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community
unstintingly support draft resolution A/72/L.2, on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo by the United States of America
against Cuba.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I have the honour to make a statement on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). But first let me express
the solidarity and compassion of the member States of

17-358005/28

A/72/PV.38

01/11/2017

OIC to the United States of America in the wake of the
terrorist attacks yesterday here in New York.

resulted in 191 votes in favour and 2 abstentions (see
A/71/PV.32).

I warmly welcome Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba, who is present here today.

In a world firmly focused on globalization and
the opening of markets to international trade, States
members of the OIC, while concerned about the
statements of the new Administration of the United
States of America that are bringing recent developments
into question, underscore that the commercial and
financial embargo imposed on Cuba remains one of the
main obstacles to the economic and social development
of that country.

A year ago, almost to the day, the United States
Administration, through the voice of its Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, chose, for the
first time since 1992, to abstain in the voting during
the consideration of the resolution entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba” (see A/71/PV.32). That decision of the
Permanent Representative gave rise to hope in the
international community in general and in the member
States of OIC in particular, hope based on the positive
evolution of relations between the United States
and Cuba initiated by the American President at the
time. It was illustrated, inter alia, by the reopening
of the respective embassies of the two countries, in
Washington, D.C., and in Havana, the restoration of
commercial flights between the two States and the
visit of the former American President to Cuba in
March 2016.
Despite the positive development initiated by
the American presidency with a view to gradually
normalizing relations between the United States and
Cuba, the American economic embargo — which
constitutes the central pillar of sanctions against
Cuba — remains. That situation is a source of serious
concern, not just for Cuba, but also for a large part of
the international community, including the member
States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
The concern of the OIC is justified in view of the
decision taken last June by the new United States
Administration to cancel, with immediate effect, the
agreement between Washington and Havana under the
previous American Administration.
Through this statement, the OIC member States
reaffirm their opposition to the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
against Cuba more than 50 years ago, which, it would
seem, did not have the desired effect. On the contrary, it
created international solidarity around Cuba, which has
been demonstrated in recent years by massive votes to
lift the embargo by almost every State Member of our
Organization. The latest vote in the Assembly, in 2016,
6/28

When, at the initiative of the United Nations,
the international community has embarked on a new
development programme with a view to 2030, the OIC
member States consider that the time has come to lift
the embargo against Cuba so as to enable that country
and its people to benefit fully from the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals in order to
ensure that no one is left behind. In that perspective,
the OIC member States very firmly support draft
resolution A/72/L.2, entitled “Necessity of lifting the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba”, and call on States
Members of the United Nations to vote overwhelmingly
in favour of it, as they did last year.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
First, we would like to pay our respects and offer
a very warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba. We would also like to express our
gratitude for the report by the Secretary-General on
this very important issue (A/72/94).
Over the past 26 years, the General Assembly has
every year expressed its resounding support for and
solidarity with the people and the Government of Cuba
through its decisive support for the resolution calling
for the lifting of the embargo imposed by the United
States of America against that sovereign country. Last
year, 191 States Members of the Organization voted in
favour of the resolution (resolution 71/5).
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries takes
this opportunity to reiterate its full opposition to
the enactment and imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, given their extraterritorial implications and
17-35800

01/11/2017

illegal nature. Likewise, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries has on several occasions repeated its call
on the Government of the United States of America
to put an end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed against Cuba more than
55 years ago, which is unilateral and illegal. The
embargo — apart from violating international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
and principles that govern peaceful relations among
States — is also a violation of Cuba’s right to fully
interact with the international community.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
historically taken a position of principle in rejecting
unilateral coercive measures, particularly those used
as instruments of political or economic and financial
pressure against States, particularly against developing
countries. Those positions were reaffirmed recently,
when on 20 September, at the meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Movement held under the
theme “Promulgation and implementation of unilateral
coercive measures, in violation of international law and
the human rights of the peoples subjected to them”,
adopted the Political Declaration of New York.
The embargo against Cuba is a perfect example
of the adverse effects of unilateral coercive measures
affecting the welfare of peoples, impeding the full
enjoyment of their human rights. The direct and
indirect harm inflicted by this undeserved embargo
against Cuba is vast. It affects all crucial sectors of the
Cuban economy, including public health, nutrition and
agriculture, as well as banking, trade, investment and
tourism. It also denies Cuba access to markets, aid from
international financial institutions and technology
transfers, and it creates obstacles to the socioeconomic
development of the country. Further, the embargo is
the main obstacle to wider access to the Internet, the
exchange of ideas and the development of cultural,
sports and scientific relations.
The continuation of the embargo is completely
unjustifiable and is inappropriate for our times. It also
runs counter to Cuba’s efforts to attain sustainable
development, including the Goals established in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
economic hardship affecting the Cuban people caused
by the application of the economic, financial and
commercial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba amounts to $822 billion, taking
into account the depreciation of the dollar with respect
to the gold price in the international market. At current

A/72/PV.38

prices, over the years, the blockade has caused damages
of more than $130 billion.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries believes
the establishment of diplomatic relations between
Cuba and the United States of America to be a positive
first step in the process towards the normalization of
bilateral relations. At the same time, it is appropriate
to point out that the implementation of the blockade
against Cuba has not changed. Even some progress in
the normalization of bilateral relations between the two
countries is now threatened, as is demonstrated by the
new policies established in June 2017 by the current
President of the United States of America, acting to
strengthen the embargo against Cuba.
Moreover, although regulations were issued on
15 January 2015 by the Department of Commerce and
the Treasury that amounted to steps in the right direction
in areas such as travel to Cuba, telecommunications and
remittances, those have had a limited scope and modified
only some aspects related to the implementation of the
blockade. Despite the historic decision of former United
States President Barack Obama to notify the United
States Congress of his decision to remove Cuba from
the so-called list of States sponsoring international
terrorism — a unilateral and illegal list that should
never have included Cuba — we have seen no greater
flexibility regarding all of the complexities of the
prohibitions and restrictions that stem from the laws
and regulations of the blockade against Cuba.
In the light of all this, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries reaffirms its call for an end to the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba, as reiterated by
the Heads of State and Government of the Movement
during the seventeenth summit, held on Venezuela’s
Margarita Island, in September 2016.
The fact that 191 States Members of the
Organization voted in favour of resolution 71/5 last
year is an expression of unanimity in the international
community, demanding an end to the 55-year-long
embargo and full adherence to the principles and
purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and to the norms of international law, including
the principles of mutual respect and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. At present, more than
190 nations are economically and politically involved
with Cuba, while the United States of America remains

17-358007/28

A/72/PV.38

01/11/2017

alone in implementing its policy of unjustified and
illegal economic sanctions.

unequivocal decision to build socialism, a new society
according to their own interests and characteristics.

Consequently, the States members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries once again urge the
Government of the United States of America to yield to
the overwhelming will of the international community
and rectify its failed policies in full compliance with
all the pertinent resolutions of this General Assembly.
That requires the immediate and full end of the embargo
imposed on Cuba.

Amid the hostility of the United States and all kinds
of difficulties and hardships caused by the criminal
blockade, Cuba has managed to stand for more than
five decades as a moral and political reference point
for the world. Although it has few resources, that sister
nation has always offered solidarity and assistance
to all peoples, always extending its hand and support
without conditions to countries that need it to fight
poverty or that need humanitarian assistance because
of natural disasters and epidemic outbreaks such as
Ebola and cholera.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, while
reiterating its commitment to the promotion, preservation
and strengthening of multilateralism, reaffirms that
full respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is an essential element
for the effective maintenance of international peace and
security. That is why the international community must
continue working together to reverse and eliminate
unilateral coercive measures, including the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba, given, inter
alia, its illegal character.
I now wish to make the following statement in my
national capacity.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its unequivocal support for the principles of State
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of any country. For us, respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and international law is an obligation
we have assumed within the Organization, and we can
entertain no double standards or biased interpretations.
The blockade against the sister Republic of Cuba
and its people is not only illegal and in violation of the
fundamental principles of the United Nations, but also
constitutes a criminal act of continued aggression by
the strongest Power on the planet against another State.
This savage and disproportionate act in contemporary
history has gone on now for 55 years as the most abject
expression of contempt against the fundamental rights
of an entire people — the Cuban people.
The blockade against Cuba is as illegal as it is futile
in its ridiculous desire to shake the unwavering decision
of the Cuban people to build their own destiny and refuse
to be a colony or a country under any foreign Power. It
fails to recognize the deeply patriotic and revolutionary
character of the people of Martí and Fidel and their
8/28

On the other hand, the noble Cuban people have
played a fundamental role fighting colonialism and
apartheid for the liberation of peoples. The peoples of
Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean can bear
witness to that solidarity and commitment to the cause
of mankind. That is why we will vote overwhelmingly
in favour of draft resolution A/72/L.2, condemning the
blockade against Cuba.
Venezuela once again calls on the Government of
the United States to put an immediate end to the policy
of economic, commercial and financial blockade against
Cuba. Likewise, we categorically reject the recent
actions of the United States Administration that seek
to reverse the process of normalizing relations between
the two countries that began a few years ago. That is the
reaffirmation of interventionist policy and American
interference in our region, which has a long and sad
history of coups d’état, invasions and destabilization.
It is a policy of walls, sanctions and aggression that
threatens the peace and security of our region.
Our country has also been attacked by the United
States. It imposes sanctions on us and destabilizes
us. However, our people will be able to defend their
sovereignty and revolution. We want Cuba to know that
Venezuela and our people stand with it. We shall honour
our friendship and solidarity. The United States hopes
to undermine our loyalty to Chávez and admiration
for Fidel, and our conviction regarding socialism. It
wants to bend the will of our people, and that explains
the blockade, the sanctions, the lies and all kinds of
attacks. The United States is mistaken — we are the
sons of Bolívar and Martí, and we will win.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
start by expressing our condolences to our brothers
and sisters in Argentina and Belgium, whose citizens
17-35800

01/11/2017

numbered among the victims in the terrorist attack
in New York City. While our hearts are broken, our
resolve is strong. They hit our city, where we all come
together and work together, but we always have to be
strong enough to let them know terrorism will not win.
If we stand together, we will once and for all defeat
the evil. We thank everyone for the condolences,
support and good wishes sent our way, which we
certainly appreciate.
For more than 55 years, the Cuban regime has used
this debate in the General Assembly as a shiny object to
distract the world’s attention from the destruction it has
inflicted on its own people and on others in the western
hemisphere. Even during the Cuban missile crisis,
when the Castro dictatorship allowed the Soviet Union
to secretly install nuclear missiles in Cuba, the Cuban
regime and its Soviet allies claimed that the real threat
to peace was not the missiles aimed at America. They
said that the real threat was the United States’ discovery
of those missiles. At the time, Adlai Stevenson, United
States Ambassador to the United Nations, identified the
Cuban regime’s habit of pointing fingers anywhere but
at itself. He said:
“This is the first time... I have ever heard it said that
the crime is not the burglar but the discovery of the
burglar, and that the threat is not the clandestine
missiles in Cuba but their discovery and the limited
measures taken to quarantine further infection.”
(S/PV.1025, para. 7)
Today, the crime is the Cuban Government’s
continued repression of its people and failure to meet
even the minimum requirements of a free and just
society. Our response has been to stand with the Cuban
people and their right to determine their own future.
For that, each year the Assembly’s time is wasted in
considering this resolution, and the United States is
subjected to all manner of ridiculous claims — anything
to deflect attention from the regime that is actually
responsible for the suffering of the Cuban people. But
the United States will not be distracted. We will not
lose sight of what stands between the Cuban people and
the free and democratic future that is their right. For
that reason, and for the twenty-fifth time in 26 years,
the United States will vote against the draft resolution
under this item.
One year ago, the United States abstained in the
voting on resolution 71/5, under this item. The reason
given was that the continuation of the embargo was not

A/72/PV.38

isolating Cuba but was, in fact, isolating the United
States. It is true that we had been left nearly alone in
opposition to this annual resolution. No doubt there will
be some here who do not understand how we can take
such opposite positions, separated by just 12 months.
They will wonder how we could passively accept this
resolution last year and energetically oppose it this year.
To those who are confused as to where the United
States stands, let me be clear. As is their right under
our Constitution, the American people have spoken.
They have chosen a new President, and he has chosen
a new Ambassador to the United Nations. As long
as the Cuban people continue to be deprived of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms and as long
as the proceeds from trade with Cuba go to prop up the
dictatorial regime responsible for denying those rights,
the United States does not fear isolation in this Hall or
anywhere else.
Our principles are not up for a vote. They are
enshrined in our Constitution. They also happen to be
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. As long
as we are Members of the United Nations, we will stand
for respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
that the Member States in this body have pledged to
protect, even if we have to stand alone.
The draft resolution before us (A/72/L.2) aims to end
the United States economic, commercial, and financial
embargo against Cuba. But let us be honest about what
we really see going on here. The Assembly does not
have the power to end the United States embargo. It
is based in United States law, which only the United
States Congress can change. No, what the General
Assembly is doing today — what it does every year at
this time — is political theatre. The Cuban regime is
sending the warped message to the world that the sad
state of its economy, the oppression of its people and
the export of its destructive ideology are not its fault. In
the spirit of sending messages, I would like to direct the
rest of my comments towards the Cuban people.
The American people strongly support their dreams
to live in a country where they can speak freely, have
uncensored access to the Internet, provide for their
families and determine their leadership. We know that
many of them have been made hopeful by the opening
of diplomatic relations between the United States and
Cuba. That status is not changing. Our friendship and
goodwill towards the Cuban people remain as strong
as ever.

17-358009/28

A/72/PV.38

What they probably do not know is that their
Government responded to that gesture of goodwill
not by joining in the spirit in which it was offered,
but by expanding its politically motivated detentions,
harassment and violence against those who advocate
for political and economic freedom in Cuba. What
they cannot know, because their Government will not
let them know, is that there were credible reports of
almost 10,000 politically motivated detentions in Cuba
in 2016 alone. That is a massive increase in detentions
over recent years.
We had hoped our outreach to their Government
would be met with greater freedom for them. Their
Government silences its critics. It disrupts peaceful
assemblies, censors independent journalists and rigs the
economy so that the Government alone profits. Their
Government has exported its bankrupt and destructive
ideology to Venezuela. It has taught the Maduro regime
how to silence journalists, crack down on the political
opposition and impoverish its people. Now, millions of
Venezuelans join them in being denied their basic rights.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
As we speak here today, their Government is busy
choosing the successor to the Castro dictatorship. It
is attempting to fool them into believing they have a
voice by holding local and regional so-called elections.
But the process they are engaged in is not freedom.
The results were determined before the first vote was
cast. When the United States abstained in the voting
on resolution 71/5 last year, its decision was explained
by saying, “we recognize that the future of the island
of course lies in the hands of the Cuban people” (A/71/
PV.32, p.15). There is a casual cruelty to that remark for
which I am profoundly sorry. Regrettably, as of today,
the future of Cuba is not in their hands. It remains in the
hands of their dictators.

01/11/2017

of America, Argentina and Belgium for the loss of
innocent lives caused by the heinous terrorist attacks in
lower Manhattan yesterday, which we condemn in the
strongest possible terms. Our thoughts and prayers go
to the bereaved families of the victims.
I would like to extend my warmest welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba. I would also like to express
our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/72/94) on the implementation
of resolution 71/5.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements made
earlier by the representatives of Venezuela, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of Singapore, on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
respectively.
Our plenary meeting today marks the twenty-sixth
consecutive year the General Assembly is considering
and taking action on a draft resolution entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba”. For so many years, the
Assembly has repeatedly called for the end of the
United States embargo against Cuba, but we have not
yet achieved the ultimate goal of the text.
The economic, commercial and financial blockade
against Cuba runs counter to international law and the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and is the most unjust and longest-lasting
system of unilateral sanctions ever imposed against any
country in our modern world history. It has inflicted
enormous damage on all sectors of the Cuban economy
and caused untold hardship for the Cuban people,
preventing them from fully enjoying their human rights.

The United States opposes the resolution today
in continued solidarity with the Cuban people, and in
the hope that they will one day be free to choose their
own destiny. We might stand alone today, but when the
day of freedom comes for the Cuban people — and it
will come — we will rejoice with them as only a free
people can.

Here I would like to highlight that despite hardships
caused by the blockade, the Cuban Government and
people have always responded generously and in a
timely manner to emergency appeals for humanitarian
aid by sending doctors, medicine and equipment to
many countries severely affected by epidemic diseases
and natural disasters. We highly commend Cuba’s
great contribution to humankind and are grateful to the
Cuban people.

Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Before I begin my
statement, allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to
express our solidarity and deepest condolences to the
Governments and the peoples of the United States

Since 1992, when Cuba first introduced this draft
resolution to the General Assembly, the support of
people all over the world for the legitimate claims of
the Cuban people has been ceaselessly growing. Last

10/28

17-35800

01/11/2017

year, 191 Member States voted in favour of resolution
71/5. At the general debate of the Assembly’s current
session in September, 37 heads of delegations spoke out
against the blockade.
The restoration of diplomatic relations between
Cuba and the United States in 2015 represented an
important step in the right direction and brought hopes
for improved relations between the two countries.
However, measures recently announced by the United
States Government to reinforce sanctions against Cuba
are reversing the positive developments of the past
two years.
It is the consistent policy of Viet Nam to oppose
any imposition of unilateral embargoes and coercive
measures on a sovereign State. We share the view
that the continuation of the embargo against Cuba is
unjustifiable. The strengthening of the blockade is a
severe violation of the human rights of the Cuban people.
It hinders not only the economic development of Cuba,
but also international trade and the realization of the
2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Therefore, today Viet Nam will vote in favour
of draft resolution A/72/L.2. By voting in favour, we
join the international community in calling on the
United States to put an immediate end to that obsolete
policy, lift the economic, commercial and financial
blockade against Cuba and take positive and necessary
steps towards the full normalization of relations with
Cuba. An immediate removal of the blockade would
be beneficial for both Cuba and the United States, as
well as for peace and development in the region and
the world, thereby living up to the overwhelming
aspirations of the international community.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Viet Nam’s strong
support, friendship, cooperation and solidarity with the
brotherly people of Cuba.

A/72/PV.38

States, and the representative of Ecuador, on behalf of
the Group 77 and China.
The Republic of Paraguay joins the voices of the
States that once again, through the General Assembly,
call for the end of the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. We reject the coercive measures
that contravene international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, undermine the foundations
of multilateralism and negatively impact relations
of friendship and cooperation among States and the
economic and social development of peoples. We are
convinced that dialogue and direct negotiation in good
faith between the parties are the appropriate ways to
resolve differences and find lasting and fair solutions
that enable the peaceful and respectful coexistence
among the nations of the world.
Paraguay urges the United States of America and
Cuba not to backtrack on the progress achieved towards
the normalization of their diplomatic relations but to
continue with their best efforts to put an end to the long
blockade and begin a new stage of relationship based on
trust, respect and mutual development.
Finally, Paraguay again supports and promotes the
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”, which for the
twenty-sixth consecutive occasion is before the General
Assembly, and urges all Member States to support it.
Mr. Bandyopadhyay (India): Before I formally
begin my statement, I would like to express my
deepest condolences in connection with the victims
of yesterday’s brutal and heinous attack in New
York, which we strongly and vehemently condemn.
Our thoughts are with the families of those who lost
their lives.

Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Before I begin, allow me to express Paraguay’s
most heartfelt condolences and solidarity to the families
of the victims and to the Government and the people of
the United States of America for the horrific terrorist
attack that took place yesterday in New York, which
we condemn.

India associates itself with the statements made by
the representative of Ecuador, on behalf of the Group
77 and China, and by the representative of Venezuela,
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Regarding the topic that brings us together today,
Paraguay aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representative of El Salvador, on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean

The issue of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed five decades ago by the United States
against Cuba has now been considered annually by the
General Assembly for more than two and a half decades.

We welcome the Foreign Minister of Cuba among
us here today. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/72/94) on the issue.

17-3580011/28

A/72/PV.38

The Assembly has consistently rejected the imposition
of laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and
all other forms of coercive economic measures that
hurt the progress and prosperity of the people around
the world.
Last year, 191 Member States voted in favour
of resolution 71/5, expressing their strong support
for lifting the embargo. The General Assembly has
also called upon all States, in conformity with their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, to refrain from promulgating
and applying, and to repeal and invalidate, laws and
measures that have extraterritorial effects affecting the
sovereignty of other States. The continued existence
of the embargo, in contravention of world opinion as
expressed by the Assembly, undermines multilateralism
and the credibility of the United Nations itself.
As the world’s largest democracy, with abiding
faith in multilateralism, India stands in solidarity
with the international community in its unambiguous
rejection of domestic laws that have extraterritorial
impacts. Embargoes impede the full achievement of
economic and social development by the population of
the affected country, in particular children and women.
They also hinder the full enjoyment of human rights,
including the right to development, food, medical care
and social services, among other things.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General,
including this year’s report, have established that
the embargo, particularly through its extraterritorial
effects, has adversely affected the Cuban people and
the country’s development efforts. At the same time, we
would like to acknowledge the notable achievements of
the Cuban people in the socioeconomic and development
fields, in particular Cuba’s high ranking in the Human
development Index and its achievement of several of the
Millennium Development Goals.
In launching the transformative 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, world leaders have again
strongly urged all States to refrain from any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures that are not in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. The continuation of the embargo
would severely affect Cuba’s ability to implement
the comprehensive 2030 Agenda. Cuba’s expertise in
health care, achieved despite such conditions, enabled
it to respond quickly, effectively and on a large scale to
12/28

01/11/2017

the call made by the General Assembly three years ago
to all nations to respond to the Ebola crisis in Africa.
People-to-people
contact
holds
immense
possibilities for fostering better understanding between
the two nations. The international community should
step up its efforts to promote an environment free
from sanctions and embargoes. India hopes for the
withdrawal of the embargo as soon as possible. India
supports draft resolution A/72/L.2, submitted by Cuba.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Before I begin my statement, let
me say that Bolivia would like to join those expressing
their solidarity with and condolences to the peoples of
the United States, Argentina and Belgium following
the terrible attack that took place some hours ago in
this city.
At the outset, Bolivia welcomes the presence among
us of Comrade Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and of his delegation.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/72/94)
once again highlights the worldwide rejection of the
economic, trade and financial blockade arbitarily and
unilaterally imposed by the United States of America
against the Cuban people and the entire international
community. That blockade affects international
cooperation. It affects health, nutrition, education and
culture in Cuba. It affects Cuba’s foreign trade and
foreign investment. It also has financial and banking
implications with regard to construction, tourism,
transport, civil aviation and industry.
The blockade is an example of the unilateral way in
which the United States acts in the world. Despite the
comprehensive blockade, Cuba is an example of social
development, cooperation and solidarity.
The United States is unilaterally imposing an
unjust, unlawful, immoral embargo. It is imposing an
extraterritorial embargo that contravenes the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United States is imposing an embargo that violates the
principles of sovereignty, non-intervention in internal
affairs, free trade and navigation. The United States
is imposing an embargo that seeks to undermine the
right of the Cuban people to self-determination and
the efforts of their Government to combat poverty
and inequality.
I want to take this opportunity to recall the words
of Nelson Mandela, who told us:
17-35800

01/11/2017

A/72/PV.38

“During all my years in prison, Cuba was an
inspiration. The victories of Cuba destroyed the
myths of the invincibility of the white oppressor.
They inspired the struggling peoples in South
Africa at a key moment in the fight for the liberation
in South Africa of our people from the apartheid
regime. What country other than Cuba could point
to a record of services of such generosity and
solidarity with the causes of liberation in Africa?
Cuba was an example of dedication and service
to others.”

for the tremendous solidarity that has saved hundreds
of thousands of lives in my country: the solidarity of
the Cuban people. That solidarity is evident not only
in my region but also throughout the world. When
Ebola struck African countries, Cuba was there. When
hurricanes struck our brothers in the Caribbean, Cuba
was there. When illiteracy struck my country, Cuba
was there, in the most remote places, with its medical
staff — more than 50,000 medical staff throughout the
world. However, even more important, Cuba stands as
an example with its dignity and its unwavering strength.

I wish to reiterate that last phrase of Nelson Mandela:
Cuba was and is an example of dedication and service
to others.

Bolivia requests, urges and demands that the
blockade be lifted.

They want to teach us lessons about democracy.
Those who turn their backs on international law want
to teach us about democracy. Those who believe that
multilateralism is a theatre want to come and give
us lessons on democracy. Those who organize coups
d’état and who interfere in our political processes with
absolute impunity want to come give us lessons about
democracy. They also want to give us lessons on human
rights — those who promote and have promoted torture
want to teach us about human rights. Those who have
turned the Guantanamo naval base into an illegal prison
want to teach about human rights. Those who want to
teach us about human rights have secret prisons and
detention centres spread throughout the world. They
want to come give us classes on multilateralism, those
who do not believe in science or that climate change is
brought about by human action.
They want us to believe that they are exceptional.
Talk about exceptionalism is not only dangerous and
offensive. It is not only injurious to the purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Organization, it
also demonstrates, as President Morales Ayma himself
says, the arrogance of a Government that opposes all
peoples. The Government of the United States is not
exceptional, although it is unique. That Government is
responsible for that genocidal embargo, unprecedented
in the history of humankind. It is unique in that it does
not respect international law. It is unique in that it is not
interested in multilateralism. It is unique because it acts
with the most blatant impunity.
It is time for the Assembly and for the United
Nations to enforce the decisions we have taken. Bolivia
once again resolutely supports the resolution before the
Assembly. However, we wish to express our gratitude

Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our condolences to and solidarity
with the peoples and the Governments of the United
States, Argentina and Belgium for the tragic incident
that took place in New York City yesterday.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of Ecuador, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China; of Venezuela, on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries; of
Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation; and of Gabon, on behalf of the Group of
African States. Allow me to add the following remarks
in my national capacity.
It is a pleasure for me to welcome Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, and to express to him once again the perennial
and full support and solidarity of Egypt with the people
and Government of Cuba.
The unilateral policy imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba has had implications for the
economic and social lives of the Cuban people, as well
as for their livelihoods. It has had an adverse impact on
the Cuban people’s access to food, medicine, education
and advanced technology. The unilateral blockade has
had a negative impact on the critical sectors of the
Cuban economy. The manifestations of the blockade,
which has been in place for more than five decades,
affect Cuba’s ability to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, along with its Goals and
targets. The blockade runs counter to the commitment
undertaken by Member States to leave no one behind,
which constitutes the bedrock of our collective action.
Egypt will continue to advocate for the rights and
demands of the Cuban people. We call for the full and

17-3580013/28

A/72/PV.38

complete lifting of the coercive measures that have
been imposed by the United States against Cuba since
the 1950s. We hope that the parties will capitalize on
the positive steps and developments that took place
in 2016 as a prelude to the normalization of relations
between the two countries.
Egypt supports the immediate lifting of the
blockade imposed on Cuba, and we reiterate that
continuing to insist on a historical mistake for years
will never make it the right thing to do.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Yesterday in lower
Manhattan, a few blocks away from United Nations
Headquarters, a horrendous terrorist attack caused too
many victims. We of course strongly condemn that
attack, and we pay tribute to the victims and express
our sympathy to our colleagues from the United States,
Argentina and Belgium. It is high time to regroup, to
fight this scourge, and we need everyone on board.
That is precisely why this debate is taking place in this
particular context.
While members of the international community
unanimously welcomed in the Assembly the positive
developments between Cuba and the United States over
the past couple of years, hoping that those steps would
pave the way towards the normalization of the bilateral
relations and the eventual lifting of the embargo
imposed on Cuba, we sadly realize that this embargo
not only remains in place but has been strengthened.
Africa has spoken up, as have the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and even the Group of 77, with which
of course we align ourselves. Algeria will continue
to speak up and state its stance to its friends. And,
because we are friends, frankness is our duty. We
therefore reiterate our stance about the continuation of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo that
has been unilaterally imposed against Cuba for more
than five decades. Those sanctions, which we consider
unjustified, not only exacerbate the sufferings of the
Cuban people but obstruct the economic development
of Cuba and hamper its efforts to achieve sustainable
development, including the Goals set in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The annual adoption by an overwhelming majority
of the members of the General Assembly of a resolution
14/28

01/11/2017

calling for the lifting of the blockade against Cuba is
a message not to be ignored, for it reflects the strong
wish of the international community. Let me recall that
Algeria has always stressed that Cuba, like any other
Member State, has the right to freedom of trade and
navigation and to expand trade on a mutually agreed
basis with any economic partner. Algeria also fully
shares the NAM position that has regularly rejected
the imposition of unilateral acts or extraterritorial
regulations that impede the development of any country,
and all forms of coercive economic and trade measures.
That position reflects our principles of foreign policy.
Algeria considers Cuba to be more than just a
friend who stood by us in dire times. Cuba has done
that in many parts of the world. In that regard, I would
like to acknowledge the commitment and undeniable
expertise of the Cuban doctors, which has always been
demonstrated well beyond their borders. For example,
when many hunkered down, Cuban doctors went to fight
the Ebola crisis in Africa. They did it on our behalf and
for the sake of the whole international community with
no payback whatsoever.
Today more than ever, it is important to rebuild
the momentum and move on the positive achievements
made so far in the relations between Cuba and the
United States. In engaging in a constructive and
respectful bilateral dialogue in full respect of the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, we will certainly chart a new way
forward for the full normalization of relations between
Cuba and the United States, leading to the lifting of
the long-standing, unnecessary embargo for the mutual
benefit of the peoples of both countries and the whole
region and beyond, throughout the world.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin, as other delegations
have before us, by expressing our heartfelt condolences
to the people of the United States, to the families of the
people who lost their lives, and to the American citizens
in the wake of the heinous, fatal and senseless act of
terror yesterday. Our condolences also go to Argentina
and Belgium, which also lost citizens as a result of the
terror attack.
We thank the Secretary-General for preparing
the report on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba (A/72/94).
17-35800

01/11/2017

The position of the Russian Federation on the actions
of the United States remains consistent and unchanged.
In solidarity with the overwhelming majority of the
members of the international community, we strongly
support the urgent abolition of the United States
blockade against Cuba, introduced almost 60 years
ago, in all its manifestations. The embargo against
Cuba is not only a relic of the past, but a glaring
example of gross interference in the internal affairs
of a sovereign State through sanctions, hindering that
State’s socioeconomic development and infringing on
the legitimate interests and rights of its citizens to a
decent life, thereby embodying a policy that is contrary
to human rights and humanitarian values.
We believe that such discriminatory practice is
counterproductive, unjust and senseless. We regard
it as a challenge to the entire system of international
relations, as it undermines the basis for regional and
global stability and normalizes the use of sanctions.
The long-term pressure on Cuba by the United States is
having a destructive effect on the process of Havana’s
full-scale integration into the global financial and
economic architecture and on Cuba’s ability to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
We saw it as a positive when the United States
decided to abstain in the voting on resolution 71/5, on
26 October 2016 (see A/72/PV.32), as that reflected
the emerging general pivot of the United States stance
towards Cuba. However, the full-fledged recovery
of the relations between Cuba and the United States
never took place, following the arrival of the new
Administration in Washington, D.C. On the contrary,
we are now witnessing clear regression: stagnation in
movement on issues that are fundamentally important
for both countries, growing tensions in inter-State
relations and the general deterioration of ties that were
being established between the two countries.
Today, we again hear hostile rhetoric in the spirit
of the Cold War. Instead of trying for normalization,
a course of action has been set to tighten the blockade
and increase political pressure on the Cuban leadership
under far-fetched pretexts. Both chambers of the Federal
Assembly of the Russian Federation addressed an
appeal to the General Assembly and to the parliaments
of States Members of the United Nations condemning
that course of action. The texts of those statements have
been circulated as General Assembly documents under
agenda item 42.

A/72/PV.38

Given the current situation and in accordance with
its principled stance, the Russian Federation will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/72/L.2, calling for the full
ending of the blockade on the basis of the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such
as the non-infringement of national sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States and the need to resolve disputes by peaceful
means in a way that does not jeopardize international
peace, security and justice.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
join in the expression of condolences to the Government
and people of the United States for the despicable
terrorist attack that took place in New York, the home
of this Organization’s Headquarters, and I extend my
condolences to Argentina and Belgium for the citizens
of those countries who were killed in the attack.
Colombia welcomes the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, and his entire delegation. We are
also grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/94), as well as the holding of today’s important
debate in which the membership of the United Nations
will pronounce their positions on a resolution first
adopted 26 years ago, in 1992: “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”
(resolution 47/19).
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made earlier by the representative of Ecuador, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China; the representative
of El Salvador, on behalf of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States; and the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As we have previously stated in this Hall, the
commercial, economic and financial blockade imposed
against Cuba is contrary to international law and the
spirit and principles that inspire the Charter of the
United Nations. Since the adoption of resolution 47/19
26 years ago, Colombia, like the whole of Latin America
and the Caribbean and like the great majority of the
States Members of this Organization, has expressed
its unrestricted support for Cuba by voting in favour
this resolution. That decision is evidence of our stance
with regard to the non-imposition of unilateral coercive
measures by States and is based on international
law and adherence to the principles of political

17-3580015/28

A/72/PV.38

independence, the self-determination of peoples and
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other nations.
Colombia reiterates its conviction that Member
States must increasingly foster relations of cooperation
and friendship based on multilateralism and respect
for the principle of sovereign equality, as enshrined in
Chapter I of the Charter of the United Nations. That
objective will undoubtedly allow us to strengthen
confidence to tackle, together and with greater
determination, the challenges that States face at the
global level.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before I deliver my
national statement on behalf of the South African
Government, I would like to convey our heartfelt
condolences to the United States of America, Argentina
and Belgium for the tragic event that took place
yesterday in lower Manhattan. Our hearts and prayers
go to the bereaved families and those still fighting for
their lives.
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, His Excellency Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, to
this important debate, which seeks to end the longstanding embargo.
South Africa aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Ecuador, on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China; the representative of
Gabon, on behalf of the Group of African States;
and the representative of Venezuela, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
A/72/94, of 26 July, which describes the current state of
affairs under the United States economic, commercial
and financial embargo against the sister country of
Cuba and its people. South Africa has also taken note
of the announcement made on 16 June regarding a new
United States policy towards Cuba, which signaled a
shift from the reconciliation and improved relationship
that had been initiated between Cuba and the United
States under the Obama Administration and reaffirmed
the United States statutory embargo on Cuba. I want
to express our disappointment that the current United
States Administration has chosen a path of regression
in the normalization of relations with Cuba that
reinforces the isolation of the Cuban people and further
harms them.
16/28

01/11/2017

South Africa has a long-standing position of
support for the resolution on the necessity of ending the
embargo against Cuba. The South Africa Parliament
adopted a resolution in August 2014 calling upon the
then President of the United States to lift the blockade
immediately and engage Cuba more decisively. It is a
position that reflects the sentiment of South Africans
and the people of Africa.
We therefore urge the international community
to work together to free Cuba from the political,
economic, commercial and financial shackles under
the embargo that the United States has imposed upon
that country for more than half a century. We believe
that the United States embargo was, and is, a travesty
of justice, which should not continue to be in place in
these modern times, particularly since the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
adverse effects of unilateral, coercive measures by the
United States on crucial sectors in Cuba — such as
public health, nutrition and agriculture, banking, trade,
investment and tourism — deprive the Cuban people of
their basic human rights. They also hinder Cuba’s welldocumented efforts to achieve sustainable development,
including the Sustainable Development Goals.
South Africa and Cuba enjoy solid bilateral and
diplomatic relations. Our diplomatic relations over
the 23 years since the dawn of democracy in 1994
in South Africa serve as a successful and exemplary
model of South-South cooperation. It is a contribution
to international relations and understanding. Our
cooperation, supported by a set of bilateral agreements
covering a wide range of areas, has a direct impact on the
people of both countries. It influences their livelihood,
development and understanding of one another, and it
will be further enhanced once the embargo is lifted.
The unilateral and illegal total blockade of Cuba
by the United States also affects bilateral trade
between South Africa and Cuba, as the extraterritorial
application of the sanctions on third countries has
prevented South African businesses from pursuing
trade and investment opportunities with Cuba. South
Africa therefore joins the international community
in condemning this unilateral action and calls on the
United States of America to implement measures to
immediately repeal those inhumane actions.
Those actions are contrary to the purposes,
principles and spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the principles of the sovereign
17-35800

01/11/2017

equality of States and non-interference in the domestic
affairs of Member States. The severe economic and
financial restrictions that are stifling the economic
and social development of Cuba and thereby further
exacerbating the hardships and suffering of the people
of Cuba are unacceptable.
It is in that context that the Republic of South
Africa reiterates its unconditional support for the
implementation of this draft resolution. We appeal
once again to the international community to redouble
its efforts to promote a constructive and transparent
dialogue between the two countries with a view to
achieving the objectives of all the relevant United
Nations resolutions already adopted on this matter, and
to ensure the sustainable progress of the people of Cuba.
We would like to request third-party countries to also
support Cuba and its people by repealing all domestic
laws and regulations that contribute to hampering
their development.
Let us join hands together in global solidarity
to end the embargo, and let us vote in support of the
draft resolution to end the embargo on Cuba, as we did
overwhelmingly in 2016. We cannot afford to lose this
historic opportunity. Now is the time.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its condemnation of the attack that took place
in New York City yesterday and conveys its condolences
to the bereaved families of the victims and sympathy to
those who were injured.
China associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Ecuador on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
In 2015 the United Nations development summit
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
thereby ushering in a new era for the global cause of
sustainable development and charting a course for
the development of all countries and international
cooperation to that end. The implementation of the
2030 Agenda is the core task of the whole world in the
area of development. All countries need to adhere to the
principles of extensive consultation, joint contribution
and benefit-sharing, and join hands in responding to
challenges, creating new opportunities and seeking
new drivers for development. They should use their
respective advantages to help one another to achieve
mutually beneficial outcomes. Given those ambitions,
the economic blockade and sanctions imposed by the
United States against Cuba should end immediately.

A/72/PV.38

For 26 consecutive years, the General Assembly has
adopted, by an overwhelming majority, the resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba”, urging all States to abide
by the Charter of the United Nations and principles of
international law, and repeal or invalidate all laws and
measure that have extraterritorial effects and affect
the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests
of entities or persons under their jurisdiction, and the
freedom of trade and navigation.
It is regrettable, however, that for years those
resolutions have not been effectively implemented and
that the economic, commercial and financial blockade
imposed by the United States against Cuba continues.
The blockade violates the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
It has caused enormous economic and financial losses
to Cuba and has impeded the efforts of the Cuban
people to realize the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the eradication of poverty. The blockade has
undermined the rights of the Cuban people to survival
and to development and has affected other countries’
normal economic, commercial and financial exchanges
with Cuba.
China has always advocated respect for the right
of every country to independently choose its own
system and path towards development and has opposed
unilateral sanctions against other States by military,
political, economic or other means. China has strictly
observed and implemented the relevant resolutions. We
have maintained with Cuba economic and trade relations
and people-to-people exchanges, and our friendly and
mutually beneficial cooperation in all fields is making
continuous progress. That is in line with the desire of
our two peoples and is conducive to the economic and
social development of Cuba.
Currently, the world is undergoing great
development, transformation and adjustment. Peace,
development, cooperation and win-win outcomes
have become the trend of our time. Exchanges and
cooperation on an equal footing among countries are
part of that general trend, and dialogue on an equal
footing and friendly consultation represent the best way
to resolve differences.
The recent restoration of diplomatic relations
between the United States and Cuba was an important
step towards the normalization of their relations.

17-3580017/28

A/72/PV.38

China hopes that the United States and Cuba will
continue to advance the process of normalization
of their relationship, that the United States will
comprehensively repeal its policy of blockading Cuba
as soon as possible and that the United States and Cuba
will develop normal relations in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter and basic norms governing
international relations. That is in the common interests
of both the United States and Cuba, and their peoples,
and is conducive to the peace and stability of the
Americas, as well as the common development of the
international community.
China will once again vote in favour of the draft
resolution (A/72/L.2), submitted by Cuba under this
agenda item.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico joins in the condolences expressed to
Argentina, Belgium and the United States for the loss
of their citizens, innocent victims of the criminal act
of terrorism that occurred yesterday in this city. We
assure them of the solidarity of the Government and the
people of Mexico.
We welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister
of Cuba, and we thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report on the item we are addressing
today (A/72/94).
Mexico is once again participating in the discussion
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba because we are convinced
that international relations should promote peace
and harmony among States while also promoting the
prosperity of our peoples. Regional economic growth,
sustainable development and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, in a context of mutual respect, are
essential aspects of good-neighbourliness. With this
conviction, Mexico has supported the process under
way of normalizing relations between Cuba and the
United States.
Mexico reiterates its rejection of the unilateral
actions against the Republic of Cuba, including the
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo for more than five decades. That is because it is
contrary to international law and goes against the basic
principles that should sustain friendly and cooperative
relationships between States, principles that are set out
in the Charter of the United Nations and which were
endorsed by the General Assembly.
18/28

01/11/2017

Mexico issues a brotherly appeal to both
Governments to find common ground through dialogue
and in that way resolve their differences in a context
of mutual respect and recognition of the sovereignty of
both nations.
Mexico is convinced that the elimination of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo will
enable Cuba to modernize its social and economic
model and will facilitate its access to the international
financial system. It would help it to rebuild more swiftly
in the wake of Hurricane Irma and would promote
natural trade and investment flows in the region.
The Mexican Government is aiding the process of
modernizing the social and economic model in Cuba
with technical assistance, exchange of experiences and
capacity-building to implement economic reforms,
while recognizing that that process will generate
development opportunities for Cuban society. We
recognize the actions undertaken by the Government
of Cuba to fulfil its international commitments on
development, as social development lies at the heart
of Cuba’s policies, strategies and public programmes.
Cuba has demonstrated a firm commitment to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Mexico and Cuba share a historic and deep-rooted
relationship, which is why the Government of Mexico
reiterates its friendship and solidarity with the Cuban
people and with its desire to continue working together
on matters of common interest.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to express the solidarity of the
Government of Panama in the face of the tragic and
irreparable loss of human lives as a result of the attack
that took place yesterday in this city. We express our
deepest sympathy to the peoples and the Governments
of the United States of America, Argentina and
Belgium. We most vehemently condemn those brutal
and unjustifiable actions, which violate the integrity of
human beings and the stability of the global community.
With regard to today’s agenda item, I wish to
extend our congratulations to Foreign Minister
Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla and to the delegation of
Cuba accompanying him for this discussion of draft
resolution A/72/L.2.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made earlier by the representatives of Ecuador, El
Salvador and Venezuela on behalf of the Group of 77
17-35800

01/11/2017

and China, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, respectively. We wish to make some further
comments in our national capacity.
In keeping with the historic position that we have
maintained on today’s issue, Panama will once again
vote in favour of the draft resolution entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”, for we believe that elimination of that
embargo cannot be postponed any longer in order to
foster the full development of the Cuban people.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report in
document A/72/94, Panama, as a founding Member
of the United Nations and a State that advocates
peace, maintains friendly and cooperative relations
with all States on the basis of inclusion and respect
for the principles of justice and international law. In
that regard, Panama today retains the optimism with
which, during the seventh Summit of the Americas,
in 2015, we witnessed the restoration of diplomatic
relations between the Governments of the United States
and Cuba and with that the possibility of ending their
estrangement for the benefit of both States and for our
entire region.
In September in this very Hall, referring to
Cuban-United States relations, President Juan Carlos
Varela stated:
“As we near the next Summit of the Americas,
in Lima, we must approach it with a constructive
spirit and an openness to dialogue to analyse the
problems of the region and uphold peace and unity
across the Americas.” (A/72/PV.7, p. 16)
As we once again vote in favour of lifting the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, Panama also wishes to see a renewal of the
necessary dialogue between the United States and
Cuba, for we believe there is an opportunity for both to
continue advancing on a shared agenda. As we add our
voice to those of the great majority of nations, Panama
reasserts its firm commitment to multilateralism as a
legitimate means to achieve the resolution of disputes
between States.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): It is now
a real pleasure for me to give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.2.

A/72/PV.38

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the people and the Government of Cuba, I
would like to express to the people and the Government
of the United States, Mayor Bill de Blasio, Governor
Andrew Cuomo and other New York officials, as well
as to the citizens of New York and the families of the
victims in particular, our most heartfelt condolences for
the terrorist act that took place yesterday afternoon. I
also express our deepest sympathy to the peoples and
the Governments of Argentina and Belgium.
I most vehemently condemn the disrespectful,
offensive and interfering statement by the Ambassador
of the United States to the United Nations against Cuba
and against the Cuban Government just a few minutes
ago. I remind her that the United States — where flagrant
violations of human rights are committed that cause
great concern in the international community — does
not have the slightest moral authority to criticize
Cuba, a small, united country with an extensive,
recognized international record. It is the home of noble,
hardworking and friendly people.
She spoke on behalf of the leader of an empire that
is responsible for most of the wars being waged on the
planet today, in which innocent people are murdered
and which is the decisive factor in global instability
and serious threats to international peace and security,
trampling on international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, which she just cynically invoked.
It has not been 55 years; the Ambassador of the
United States erred in her first sentence. There have
been 26 sessions of the General Assembly, and more
than a century has passed since the origin of the events
being discussed today. She is lying. She is using the
same style that prevails in United States policy today. It
all started before the Cuban nation even existed. When
the Cuban people first rose up in armed rebellion in
1868, the appetites for annexation and domination by
what was and is today United States imperialism had
already been unleashed.
In 1898, using a pretext, as is characteristic of the
modern history of the United States — the explosion
of the ship Maine in a Cuban port — the United States
entered as allies of the Cuban independence forces and
then occupied the country as invaders and imposed the
Platt Amendment, which curtailed Cuba’s independence
and sovereignty. Three military occupations were
carried out, imposing 60 years of absolute domination,
which came to an end on 1 January 1959 with the entry

17-3580019/28

A/72/PV.38

of the rebel army into Havana and the triumph of the
Cuban revolution, which wages the same battles today
that have inspired its people for more than 100 years.
She is lying. She used a phrase attributing to a
supposedly Cuban source a statement on the so-called
October crisis, or the Cuban missile crisis. I invite her
to tell us who her source is — who the author is — and
to provide evidence. It sounds like one of the tweets
that proliferate in this country in these times of hatred,
division and dirty politics.
With the triumph of the Cuban revolution, the
Government of the United States made regime change
its objective. The policy announced by President Trump
on 16 June is not new; it is the same policy, an old policy
rooted in the past.
She referred to the eminent United States
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson. She forgot to mention
that he was the person who, deceived by his own
Government, had the unfortunate duty to show, in a
Security Council meeting, photographs of what were
supposedly Cuban aircraft bearing the emblem of the
Cuban Air Force, which on 15 April bombed the city
of Havana, causing much destruction and serving as a
prelude to the attack, the invasion of the Playa Girón,
the Bay of Pigs. Those bombings and the involuntary lie
of Ambassador Stevenson, who had been deceived by
his Government, occurred even before the proclamation
of the socialist character of the Cuban revolution.
She spoke about the October crisis. These days we
are hearing talk of President Kennedy’s assassination
and the declassification of documents. The truth has
been hidden from the people of the United States for
too long. May all documents be declassified. But if
she wants to talk about those issues, I suggest that she
read the book Trained to Kill: The Inside Story of CIA
Plots against Castro, Kennedy, and Che, by Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) agent Veciana, in which he
recounts his meeting with the CIA agent David Phillips
and with Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas during the third
week of September 1963. It is a history of lies and
aggression, of Operation Northwoods and Operation
Mongoose. Recently declassified information reveals
that at that time the United States had 261,000 soldiers
standing ready for direct invasion of Cuba. There were
more than 700 agents at the CIA’s largest base, in
Florida — the CIA’s largest base until it established an
even bigger one in Saigon.
20/28

01/11/2017

She uses a style reminiscent of the trial of Alice in
Wonderland: sentence first, verdict afterwards.
I speak on behalf of my people, and I also speak on
behalf of those who cannot call on President Trump and
the Ambassador of the United States by their names,
but who share my feelings and think as I do.
At least she has recognized the total isolation of
the United States in this Hall and in the world. It stands
alone when it comes to the embargo against Cuba. She
disregards the weight of the truth and underestimates
the strength of one just idea in the depths of a cave,
which is more powerful than an army, as José Martí
said. He wrote, in an unfinished letter that he carried
close to his heart,
“Every day I am in danger of giving my life for my
country and for my duty ... to prevent in time, with
the independence of Cuba, the United States from
extending its hold across the Antilles and falling
with greater force on our lands of America.”
Everything began much longer than 26 years
ago — much longer than 55 years ago. Along with the
military aggression, the fabrication of pretexts, plans
for direct invasion, measures to strangle our economy,
State terrorism, destabilization and subversion, there
was a proposal in the infamous memorandum of
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Lester Mallory,
which was signed on the 6 April 1960. In it, he wrote
that the embargo on Cuba was created to provoke
“disenchantment and disaffection based on economic
dissatisfaction and hardship” by “denying money and
supplies to Cuba, to decrease monetary and real wages,
to bring about hunger, desperation and overthrow
of government.”
Nonetheless, when President Raúl Castro Ruz and
President Barack Obama made surprising and hopeful
announcements on 17 December 2014, President
Obama described the embargo as failed and obsolete,
ineffective in achieving its objectives, causing harm
to the Cuban people and isolating the United States
Government. Later he described it as useless in
advancing the interests of the United States — failed,
senseless, not viable and a burden for citizens.
But the embargo was never recognized as a flagrant,
massive and systematic violation of the human rights of
Cubans, which the United States Ambassador cynically
omitted a few hours ago, nor was it recognized as
inconsistent with international law or as an act of
17-35800

01/11/2017

genocide as defined by the Geneva Convention, nor was
its goal of subjugating our people renounced.
Nonetheless, the then President of the United States
repeatedly stated his decision to use his executive
powers and work with Congress to lift the blockade. A
practical reflection of that intention was the abstention
by the United States in the voting on this resolution
in 2016, which the United States Ambassador has
just mocked.
During that period, substantial progress was
made in terms of diplomatic relations, dialogue and
cooperation in areas of mutual interest and benefit. But
during the past two years the embargo was maintained
in all fundamental aspects, although some executive
decisions were made to modify its implementation in a
very limited but positive way. The way in which the use
of travel licences was expanded was significant, within
the legislative prohibition on travel to Cuba — which is
a violation of the rights and civil liberties of students
of the United States, which the Ambassador also failed
to mention. Tangible results were also achieved in
bilateral cooperation, to our mutual benefit, in areas
as important as confronting terrorism, drug trafficking
and cybercrime.
On 16 June, President Donald Trump proclaimed the
embargo a fundamental axis of his anti-Cuban policy
and announced a series of measures meant to reinforce
it. In an antiquated, hostile speech befitting the Cold
War, and before an audience composed of, among
others, bitter Batista-ists, annexationists and terrorists,
the United States Government returned to worn-out
allegations of supposed human rights violations in
Cuba to justify the tightening of the embargo. In this
Hall this morning we heard his echo.
President Trump does not have the slightest moral
authority to question Cuba. He leads a Government of
millionaires that intends to implement brutal measures
against the poor and the low-income families of this
country, against minorities and immigrants. He pursues
a programme that encourages hatred and division and
preaches a dangerous exceptionalism and supremacy
disguised as patriotism that will lead to more violence.
He ignores the support of his voters — two thirds of
United States citizens, as well as Cuban residents in the
United States — for ending the embargo.
Current United States policies harm citizens.
Corruption of policy — which has been hijacked by socalled special interests, that is, by corporate interests

A/72/PV.38

and money — reigns. There are no guarantees of
education, health care or social security. There are
restrictions on union organizing and terrible genderbased discrimination.
Deserving of condemnation are the use of torture;
murders of African-Americans by the police; the
civilian deaths caused by its troops; the indiscriminate
and racially differentiated death penalty; the murders,
repression and police surveillance of immigrants; the
separation of families; the detention and deportation
of minors; and the brutal measures threatening the
children of illegal immigrants who grew up and were
educated in the United States. This is the Government
that lost the popular vote.
The United States Ambassador has told us her
dream. I prefer to repeat that of Martin Luther King,
when he said:
“I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up
and live out the true meaning of its creed ... that all
men are created equal ... let freedom ring”.
She has come to tell us that she recognizes that the
future of the island rests in the hands of the Cuban
people. She is telling an absolute lie. It was never that
way, throughout history. It is a history of the intent to
achieve domination and hegemony over Cuba.
The announced policy aims to roll relations back to
a past of confrontation to satisfy the spurious interests
of extremist circles of the United States right and a
frustrated and ageing minority of Cuban origin in
Florida. The presidential memorandum establishing the
policy towards Cuba includes, among other measures,
new prohibitions on economic, commercial and
financial relations between United States companies
and Cuban enterprises. It also restricts the freedom to
travel of United States citizens with the elimination of
individual trips under the category of people-to-people
exchanges and establishes surveillance measures for
the rest of visitors from that country.
During the past few weeks, President Trump has on
four different occasions reiterated that his Government
will not lift the embargo against Cuba unless Cuba
introduces changes in its domestic order. Today we
reaffirm that Cuba will never agree to conditions
or impositions. We remind the President and his
Ambassador that that approach, which was used by 10
or so of his predecessors, has never worked and never

17-3580021/28

A/72/PV.38

will. He will be one more in the account of a policy
anchored in the past.
More recently, under the pretext of ailments
affecting some diplomats in Havana, without the
slightest evidence of their cause or origin — they
lie when they talk about attacks or incidents — or
without any conclusions from ongoing investigations,
the Government of the United States has adopted new
political measures against Cuba, which further tighten
the embargo and affect bilateral relations as a whole.
Among those measures, he suspended the issuing
of immigrant and travelers’ visas in the Consulate
in Havana, which prejudices the rights of citizens to
travel freely and visit the country for short periods, as
more than 163,000 Cubans have done this year. It also
seriously hampers the family reunification of others
under the bilateral agreement to issue no fewer than
20,000 immigrant visas every year. The requirement
that travellers have face-to-face interviews at United
States Consulates in third countries and for immigrants
at the United States Consular Section in Bogotá will
enormously increase the red tape and make it unviable
for many people. We did not hear about their rights in
the speeches of the United States.
One can in no way justify the harm caused to
people and their families in order to pursue political
objectives that are against Cuba’s constitutional order.
The United States Government, with the political goal
of restricting travel and harming international tourism
to Cuba, has also issued an unfounded and mendacious
warning to United States citizens to prevent them from
visiting our country.
By the unjustified expulsion of the Cuban staff
working at our Consulate General in Washington, D.C.
— the only one in the United States — they have
seriously impaired its ability to provide services to
American travellers and especially to Cubans residents
here, who have the absolute right to visit and enjoy
normal relations with their nation.
Likewise, the staff of our Embassy has been
arbitrarily and groundlessly reduced, which has led,
among other consequences, to the dismantling of its
Economic-Commercial Office, with the perverse
political purpose of impeding the United States business
sector, which is genuinely interested in exploring the
business opportunities in Cuba that still exist within
the restrictive framework of the embargo regulations.
22/28

01/11/2017

It is no surprise, having heard what the Ambassador
said here, and earlier her leaders, that the President of
the United States ignores the unanimous international
support for the bilateral progress, now reversed, and
the similar demand for the immediate, absolute and
unconditional end to the embargo.
As President Raúl Castro Ruz stated on 14 July,
“We reaffirm that any strategy that seeks to destroy
the revolution, whether through coercion and
pressures, or resort to subtle methods, will fail ... .
Cuba has the will to continue to negotiate pending
bilateral matters with the United States, on the
basis of equality and respect for the sovereignty and
independence of our country, and to continue the
respectful dialogue and cooperation on matters of
common interest with the American Government.
“Cuba and the United States can cooperate and
coexist, respecting their difference and promoting
everything that benefits both countries and
peoples, but Cuba should not be expected to
make concessions inherent to its sovereignty and
independence ... or to negotiate its principles or
accept conditions of any kind, as we have never
done so before in the history of the revolution”.
Today, for the twenty-sixth consecutive time,
Cuba is presenting to the General Assembly the draft
resolution (A/72/L.2) entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. At the
present time, that text has special relevance, given the
setback from the actions taken by the new United States
Administration against Cuba.
The embargo is the greatest impediment to the
economic and social development of our country and to
the implementation of the national plan in accordance
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It is the main obstacle to the development of Cuba’s
economic, commercial and financial relations with the
United States and the rest of the world. According to
figures very carefully calculated by Cuban institutions,
between April 2016 and April 2017 the embargo caused
losses to the Cuban economy in the order of $4.3 billion.
That figure is about twice as much as what would be
needed in terms of annual direct foreign investment
for the Cuban economy to move substantially
towards development.
17-35800

01/11/2017

The accumulated losses amount to the enormous
figure of $822.28 billion, taking into account the
devaluation of the price of gold. At current prices,
that figure is equivalent to $130.2 brillion. Dozens of
banks in third countries have been affected in the latest
period by the extreme and tenacious persecution of
Cuban financial transactions. The embargo is contrary
to international law, and its aggressive extraterritorial
application harms the sovereignty of all States. It also
damages economic and business interests throughout
the world.
The United States Ambassador failed to mention
that the embargo is a flagrant, massive and systematic
violation of the human rights of all Cubans, men and
women. Under the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948, it can be
defined as an act of genocide. It is also an obstacle to
the international cooperation that Cuba offers in terms
of its humanitarian aid to 81 countries in the South. The
human damages caused by the application of that policy
are incalculable. There is no Cuban family or social
service in Cuba that does not suffer the privations and
consequences of the blockade. Cuban emigration also
faces discrimination and prejudice.
Over the past year, the Cuban company that imports
and exports medical products, Medicuba S.A., made
requests to 18 United States companies to buy supplies
that were either refused or never responded to. Others,
such as the United States corporation Promega, which
is recognized for the development of diagnostic kits to
determine the viral load in patients with HIV/AIDS, the
hepatitis C virus or kidney disease, refused in June to
sell its products to Medicuba, alleging that the Treasury
Department maintained commercial sanctions that
prohibited the sale of its products to the island.
On that same date, and with the same argument, the
company New England Biolabs refused to supply Cuba
with its products. It sells a wide range of enzymes, such
as proteinase-K, a reagent that enables the diagnosis of
viral diseases like dengue, Zika and chikungunya, and
other enzymes that have multiple uses for the diagnosis
of congenital malformations and the determination of
compatibility between organ donors and patients in
need of kidney, bone marrow and liver transplants,
among others. Under that same argument, the company
refused to provide to Cuba supplies of an entirely
humanitarian nature.

A/72/PV.38

In April, Radiopharma, a business of the German
supplier Eckert & Ziegler, refused to supply Medicuba
with the GalliaPharm 68Ge/68Ga pharmacy grade
generator with its components, which is equipment that
is used in the diagnosis of prostate cancer. According to
the company, it was not possible to supply the product
directly to Cuba, nor through a third country, because
of the embargo.
The cardiology service of the Hermanos Ameijeiras
clinical surgical hospital urgently needs a circulatory
assistance device to treat cardiogenic shock and for
interventional cardiology and electro-physiology,
which facilitates recovery from heart failure and the
prolongation of the patient’s life. The United States
company Abiomed, a leader in the global market in
those products, has the Impella system, which is ideal
for treating such conditions. In September 2016 and
this February, Medicuba contacted it to discuss the
possibility of incorporating its product into Cuba’s
health system; however, it has so far refused to respond.
We are deeply grateful to all the Governments,
peoples, parliaments, political parties and social
movements,
civil-society
representatives
and
international and regional organizations that have
contributed their voices and votes, year after year, to
support the justness and urgency of the abolition of the
embargo. We also convey our sincere gratitude to the
vast majority of the American people for their support
for this praiseworthy cause.
It offends the conscience of humankind that
the Ambassador of the United States has referred
to the Bolivarian Government of Venezuela in an
unacceptable and interfering manner. It offends the
heroic people of Venezuela, its civil-military union
and the Bolivarian and Chavista Government led by
President Nicolás Maduro Moros. The United States
Government lies when it declares that Venezuela poses
a threat to its national security. It is curious, given that
it has the largest certified hydrocarbon reserves in the
world. As the liberator Simón Bolívar wrote, the United
States seems to be destined by Providence to plague the
Americas with misery in the name of liberty. I respond
to the Ambassador with Bolívar’s words.
We are in the midst of a fair and constitutional
electoral process in Cuba, where votes are not bought,
special interests do not prevail and dishonest campaigns
do not demand money. In our elections, the will of the

17-3580023/28

A/72/PV.38

voters is not manipulated, and division and hate is
not spread.
We especially commend all those who have
expressed their concern and rejection of the coercive
measures announced by the current United States
Government. The Cuban people will never cease in
their efforts to build a sovereign, independent, socialist,
democratic, prosperous and sustainable nation. We will
persist with the consensus of our people and especially
the patriotic commitment of the youngest Cubans
in the anti-imperialist struggle and in defence of our
independence, for which tens of thousands of Cubans
have already fallen, and we have taken the greatest
risks, as we demonstrated in Playa Girón and in the face
of all threats. We will be eternally loyal to the legacy of
José Martí and Fidel Castro Ruz.
Our people are following this debate with hope. On
behalf of them, I ask those present to vote in favour of
draft resolution A/72/L.2, on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/72/L.2.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote should be limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

01/11/2017

policy, the Cuban economy will not thrive until the
Cuban Government allows a free labour market, fully
empowers Cuban entrepreneurs, respects intellectual
property rights, allows unfettered access to information
via the Internet, opens its State monopolies to private
competition, and adopts sound macroeconomic policies.
The United States remains a deep and abiding
friend of the Cuban people. Our policy emphasizes
advancing human rights and democracy on the island
while ensuring that our engagement benefits the Cuban
people and not their dictatorial regime. Our policy
focuses on engagement with the Cuban people so as
to give them the support and tools they need to move
forward independently of the obstacles imposed by
their own Government.
The United States continues to call on the Cuban
Government to allow the people in Cuba to enjoy
political and economic freedom. The Cuban Government
continues its tactics of politically motivated detentions,
harassment and police violence against those who
peacefully seek freedom for political prisoners and
who advocate on behalf of positive political and social
change. These practices fly in the face of the freedoms
of expression and peaceful assembly guaranteed in the
Cuban Constitution.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States believes that the people of Cuba deserve a stable,
prosperous and democratic country. We strongly
support their right to freely determine their own
future. It is the Cuban Government and not the United
States that continues to deprive the Cuban people of
this aspiration. Our sanctions against Cuba are just
one part of our overall effort to help all in Cuba freely
exercise their human rights and fundamental freedoms
and choose their own destiny. For that reason, we shall
vote against and strongly oppose the draft resolution
contained in document A/72/L.2.

This draft resolution is a distraction from the real
problems facing the Cuban people. Therefore, the United
States strongly opposes it. Even if the United States
lifted the embargo today, Cubans would not be able
to realize their potential without significant political,
economic and social reforms by their own Government.
We encourage this body to support the desire of all in
Cuba to determine their own future and enjoy their
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Doing so
would advance the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the purposes for which the
United Nations was created. The Cuban people deserve
no less, and the United States will continue to pursue
policies that aid them in their quest for real freedom
and democracy.

Every year, the Cuban Government uses this draft
resolution to identify the United States as its scapegoat
in order to shift blame away from its own policy
failures. The Cuban Government continues to isolate
the Cuban people while disingenuously blaming the
embargo. In fact, Cuba currently has one of the most
restrictive economies in the world as a direct result of
its Government’s policies. Irrespective of United States

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank our brother, Comrade Bruno
Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, for his words, which always reach the
hearts of the peoples of the world. We thank our sister
delegation of Cuba for being here with us today and for
sharing the information that confirms once again that
the human rights of an entire people are being violated

24/28

17-35800

01/11/2017

by the economic, financial and commercial blockade
against Cuba. Today we confirm our support for and
solidarity and deep friendship with the people of José
Martí and Fidel and Raúl Castro Ruz.
Fifty-eight years after the triumph of the Cuban
Revolution led by Fidel, and almost one year after
his passing, we feel his absence deeply. However, his
historical legacy continues to grow among us and
is enhanced by all his teachings in the struggle for
freedom, dignity and the restitution of rights to the
peoples of Latin America, the Caribbean and the world.
We also want to express our thoughts, prayers and
solidarity with all the Cuban brothers affected by the
passage of Hurricane Irma.
For almost 60 years the Cuban people have
demonstrated an iron will in the face of the imposition
of the dishonourable United States law establishing
the blockade, whose objective is to destroy the tenets
of the Cuban Revolution and hinder the progress of
a whole nation. Cuba, our sister, remains the symbol
of humanism and an example of solidarity and social,
cultural and scientific development in the world. Cuba
stands with its head held high, defending its sovereignty,
self-determination and its socialist revolution. As our
President, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, says,
there is Cuba, firm, unwavering, unbreakable. The
determination of Cuba has led the General Assembly
to vote almost unanimously for the cessation of the
blockade, yet the blockade continues, and the positive
steps taken by President Obama to ease tensions
between the United States and Cuba and to normalize
relations between both countries have, unfortunately,
been reversed.
We applaud the statement of the Government of
Cuba, which reiterates its willingness to continue the
respectful dialogue on and cooperation in matters of
mutual interest, as well as the negotiation of pending
bilateral matters with the Government of the United
States of America. We hope that, as the Government
of Cuba clearly states in its message, the United States
will return to the path that former President Obama
identified — a decisive forward movement on the
lifting of the blockade against Cuba.
Latin America and the Caribbean demand that
the United States Government put an immediate end
once and for all to the blockade against Cuba, that it
return to the Cuban people their legitimate territory of
Guantánamo and that it accept the will of our peoples

A/72/PV.38

to live in peace, without interference, with friendly
relations and mutual respect among all our nations.
I wish to conclude with the words of our President,
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, who has said that the day will
come when the blockade imposed by the empire against
Cuba will be defeated by a multipolar world, when a
unified Latin American and Caribbean has already
determined to put an end to the blockade, and when the
vast majority of the peoples of our planet vote every
year — as they will today — for the United Nations to
demand an end to this blockade. Therefore, Nicaragua
will vote, as it always has, and with much pride, in
favour of draft resolution A/72/L.2, submitted by the
delegation of Cuba.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/72/L.2, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,

17-3580025/28

A/72/PV.38

Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America

01/11/2017

the European Free Trade Association, Liechtenstein,
which is a member of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with my statement.
The economic, commercial, and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba has a damaging
impact on the economic situation of the country and
negatively affects the living standards of the Cuban
people. The recovery and reconstruction after the
devastation wrought by Hurricane Irma this autumn
could also be hampered. External trade and foreign
investment will play a crucial role in setting the country
on a path towards sustainable growth. Therefore, the
EU considers that lifting the embargo could facilitate
the opening of the Cuban economy to the benefit of the
Cuban people.
The EU believes that positive change in Cuba
is best brought about by closer engagement at all
levels — Government, economy and civil society, and
also through people-to-people exchanges. We therefore
deeply regret that the new United States Administration
has announced its intention to reintroduce restrictions
on the country’s relations with Cuba. The proposals to
restrain individual self-directed travel would not only
curtail the possibility for engagement with the Cuban
people, but they would also hit Cuba’s burgeoning
private sector, which has benefited the most from such
visits by individuals.

Ms. Lind (Estonia): Before turning to our
explanation of vote, I would like to add our voice to the
condemnations of the terrorist attack that took place in
New York on 31 October. Our thoughts are with all of
those who have been affected.

Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo on
ordinary Cubans, unilateral sanctions by the United
States, together with other unilateral administrative
and judicial measures, are also negatively affecting
the economic interests of the EU. We have firmly
and continuously opposed any such measures, due to
their extraterritorial impact on the European Union, in
violation of commonly accepted rules of international
trade. We cannot accept that unilaterally imposed
measures might impede our economic and commercial
relations with Cuba. The EU Council of Ministers
therefore adopted a regulation and a joint action to
protect against undue interference and problems
for EU citizens, businesses and non-governmental
organizations residing, working or operating in Cuba.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the country of

It is crucial that the United States continue to fully
respect and implement the agreement reached at the
summit between the European Union and the United
States held in London in May 1998. That agreement
covers waivers to Titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton
Act, a commitment by the United States Government

Draft resolution was adopted by 191 votes to 2,
with no abstentions (resolution 72/4).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote should be limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

26/28

17-35800

01/11/2017

to resist future extraterritorial legislation of that kind
and an understanding regarding discipline for the
strengthening of investment protection.
For the EU, opening doors and closer engagement
are the way to go with Cuba. Today, we celebrate the
start of the provisional application of the EU-Cuba
Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement, which
was signed last year. It will put our bilateral relationship
on a new and solid legal footing and sets out an agenda
of critical engagement with Cuba that will also allow us
to support and assist Cuba on its path towards reform
and modernization.
We will also enhance dialogue and cooperation on
issues on which we still have fundamental differences.
To this end, the Political Dialogue and Cooperation
Agreement establishes a human rights dialogue as
a key pillar of our relationship. We reiterate our call
on the Cuban Government to fully grant its citizens
internationally recognized civil, political and economic
rights and freedoms, including freedom of assembly,
freedom of expression and free access to information, to
ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and, following the visit of
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Trafficking
in Persons, extend invitations to other rapporteurs to
visit Cuba.
In contrast with Cuban achievements in health
care and education, the slow progress of economic
modernization seriously hampers Cuban economic
development. In this context, we call for economic
and social reforms to be extended and implemented
in a manner that will address the key concerns of the
Cuban population.
With the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement, the EU offers Cuba a consistent
and reliable partnership to support it as it seeks
economic and social reforms, sustainable development
and common solutions to global challenges, while the
EU continues to promote democracy and respect for
human rights. It is our considered view that the United
States embargo does nothing to promote those aims,
but, instead, impedes their achievement. Against this
background, the member States of the European Union
unanimously voted in favour of resolution 72/4.
Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s

A/72/PV.38

Republic of Korea voted in favour of resolution 72/4,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, based on the principled stand of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Group
of 77. My delegation condemns the embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba as an infringement
of Cuba’s sovereignty under the terms of the Charter
of the United Nations and as a crime against humanity,
human rights and civilization.
Each year for the past 25 years, since 1992, a
resolution has been adopted opposing the economic
embargo against Cuba, but the United States has turned
a blind eye to its implementation. Today’s resolution
was adopted with all Member States voting in favour,
except for the United States and Israel, which clearly
shows the view shared by the international community,
namely, that it opposes the economic embargo against
Cuba. Mr. Trump’s Administration’s new anti-Cuban
policies are the continuation of the failed United States
policy of embargo against Cuba that have been in effect
since the Republic of Cuba came into existence. It
threatens the sovereignty and right to existence of the
people and the Government of Cuba. It also hinders the
normal development of the region.
Reality shows the hypocrisy of the United States,
which is a country calling for the implementation of
United Nations resolutions and clamouring for the rule
of law and democracy in the world while implementing
an arbitrary, high-handed and arrogant America First
policy that gives greater value to United States federal
law than to the Charter of the United Nations, thereby
sacrificing others as it pursues its own interests.
However, as in the past, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 72/4 by an overwhelming majority, thus
demonstrating its support for and solidarity with the
Cuban Government and the Cuban people’s struggle
for their righteous cause. It also shows the international
community’s condemnation of the America First policy.
The United States has manipulated the Security
Council to denounce the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear tests and ballistic-missile and
satellite launches as a threat to international peace
and security. Its rigged sanctions resolutions have only
pushed the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
become a full-fledged nuclear and missile Power that
is recognized as such by the entire world. Similarly,
the United States’ economic sanctions against Cuba

17-3580027/28

A/72/PV.38

01/11/2017

will only impel the Cuban people to build a more
powerful Cuba.

achieve unity and cooperation in the region in the face
of the unilateral sanctions of the United States.

My delegation takes this opportunity once again to
express its strong support for and solidarity with the
Government and the people of Cuba, who are fighting
to defend their national dignity and sovereignty and to

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote for this
meeting.

28/28

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

17-35800
