United Nations

A/53/PV.107

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-third Session

107th plenary meeting
Monday, 13 September 1999, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Opertti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Uruguay)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Earthquakes in Turkey and Greece

Culture of peace

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like, on
behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf, to
extend deepest sympathy to the Governments and people of
Turkey and Greece on the tragic loss of lives and the
extensive material damage resulting from the recent
devastating earthquakes. May I also express the hope that
the international community will show its solidarity in
responding promptly and generously to any request for help
from those countries at this time of crisis.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/53/1040/Add.2)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In a letter
contained in document A/53/1040/Add.2, the SecretaryGeneral informs me that, since the issuance of his
communications contained in document A/53/1040/Add.1,
Mongolia has made the necessary payment to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?
It was so decided.

99-85768 (E)

Agenda item 31 (continued)

Draft resolution A/53/L.79
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/53/L.79.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): As the coordinator
of the negotiating group of the General Assembly which
met for a number of months on document A/53/L.79, I
have the pleasure to introduce that document for adoption
by the General Assembly. In this connection, I also draw
members’ attention to document A/53/1049 of 8
September 1999, which contains my letter to the President
of the General Assembly on the successful conclusion of
consultations on the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace.
On 9 November 1998, upon conclusion of the
general debate at the plenary level, the President of the
General Assembly mandated Bangladesh to coordinate
consultations for adoption of an agreed text of a
declaration and programme of action on a culture of
peace. Earlier, under agenda item 31 of the General
Assembly, a draft declaration and programme of action
was submitted by the Secretary-General in his
consolidated report A/53/370 of 2 September 1998 in
accordance with resolution 52/13 of 20 November 1997.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
In fulfilment of the mandate, Bangladesh
coordinated a lengthy negotiation process, which began on
2 December 1998 and finally concluded on 2 September
this year. There were many difficulties, but through
cooperation and support from all delegations involved, we
have a consensus text. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all delegations for their active interest in and
contributions to arriving at a forward-looking consensus text
which will advance in a big way the promotion of a culture
of peace in the next century.
Let me also mention here that many representatives of
civil society showed great interest in the work we
undertook. They approached me time and again to find out
how the document was shaping up and were genuinely
excited to learn of our progress in arriving at a consensus.
I mention this because I sense great interest in this
document beyond the walls of the United Nations. This will
have far-reaching implications in its implementation.
The agreed text, as contained in document A/53/L.79,
contains the Declaration on a Culture of Peace in part A,
which highlights the ideals, norms and objectives of a
culture of peace and identifies the actors involved in its
furtherance. The Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace in part B identifies the major areas of action to
promote and strengthen a culture of peace. The areas
identified are education, sustainable economic and social
development, human rights, equality between women and
men, democratic participation, advancing understanding,
tolerance and solidarity, participatory communications and
free flow of information, and knowledge and international
peace and security. Under each of these major areas, the
Programme of Action identifies specific actions that will
foster a culture of peace.
I believe that this document is unique in more than
one way. It is a universal document in the real sense,
transcending boundaries, cultures, societies and nations.
Unlike many other General Assembly documents, this
document is action-oriented and encourages actions at all
levels, be they at the level of the individual, the
community, the nation or the region, or at the global and
international levels. The document also brings together the
various actors who have a role in advancing a culture of
peace. They include States, international organizations, civil
society, community leaders, parents, teachers, artists,
professors, journalists, humanitarian workers — in a way,
all people from all walks of life and all sorts of
backgrounds can contribute to its implementation.

2

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
For an international forum like the General
Assembly, this document really goes ahead in terms of
bringing in various subjects that the Assembly has rarely
touched in its 50 years of existence.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the significant
role which the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has played in
highlighting the cause of culture of peace. DirectorGeneral Federico Mayor has been a great champion and
this document owes a lot to his direct and persistent
efforts to make a culture of peace a global charter
universally accepted and supported.
I would like to mention here some editorial changes
that appear in A/53/L.79 from the text we adopted at the
informal consultations on 2 September. These are as
follows:
Paragraph 10 (j) of the Programme of Action now
reads as follows:
“Removing obstacles to the realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination, in particular
of peoples living under colonial or other forms of
alien domination or foreign occupation, which
adversely affects their social and economic
development.”
In paragraph 11 (g), the word “for” in the first line
should be replaced by the word “to”.
The first clause of paragraph 16 (i) now reads:
“Recommends to give proper consideration to
the issue of humanitarian impact of sanctions”.
These are the editorial changes that have been made.
I think that, through these changes, the editors have tried
to make a good English text. But, as members know, in
this house we are working for a good consensus, not for
good English.
I believe that we should adopt by consensus
document A/53/L.79, as amended orally by me. By
adopting this document, the General Assembly at its fiftythird session will leave it as its legacy that will endure for
generations.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the States members of the Central American group —

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama and Costa Rica — on agenda
item 31, entitled “Culture of peace”, to which we attach the
greatest importance.
At the outset, allow me to convey our warmest
congratulations to you, Sir, on your outstanding and
valuable leadership as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session. We wish you continued success in
the service of the people and Government of the sister
Republic of Uruguay.
Allow me also to express the pleasure of the States
members of the Central American group at the imminent
adoption, at this fifty-third session of the General
Assembly, of the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace. This adoption will bring to a successful
close the arduous work and efforts undertaken in
accordance with the mandate contained in resolution 52/13.
Here, we pay tribute to Ambassador Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, for his dedicated and effective coordination
of the negotiation of these texts and for introducing them to
the Assembly. We wish also to convey our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, who, in coordination with the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), has
submitted the report before the Assembly containing a draft
declaration and programme of action on a culture of peace.
We wish further to thank all our counterparts in the
negotiations for their valuable contributions.
The cornerstone of the draft declaration is the
statement that
“ since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed'”. [A/53/L.79, part A]
That philosophy is the ideological basis of the very concept
of a culture of peace; it is not a new statement, but is
drawn from the constitution of UNESCO. Hence, the
delegations I represent believe that UNESCO can and must
continue to play a central role in the promotion of a culture
of peace.
History proves the predominance of a culture of war.
For century, people have used weapons to resolve their
conflicts, both between States and within their own
communities. Violence reigns in human relations, and there

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
is no sign that this is on the wane. Events of recent
months are testimony to this unfortunate dominance.
But we must recognize that the establishment 50
years ago of the United Nations and of the organizations
linked with it was an act of faith in the goodwill of
human beings and a reflection of a profound hope in our
capacity and determination to live in peace. The creation
of the United Nations was a categorical declaration of
universally shared values and purposes aimed at and
committed to transforming the reigning culture of war
into a culture of peace and non-violence. Achievements
of the past 50 years have shown that, with the firm desire
to do so, it is indeed possible to replace a culture of war
by a culture of peace.
Today, with the cold war nothing more than a
footnote in the history books, and when we can tell our
grandchildren of it as though telling of a bad dream, there
are new conditions for the construction of a true culture
of peace. All of us, States and individuals alike, have the
moral obligation to take advantage of these circumstances
to shape a culture of peace through education and, in
particular, through human-rights training.
It is undeniable that human rights have a central
place in a culture of peace. When those rights are not
respected, when human dignity is violated, and when
human beings are dehumanized, it is impossible to hope
that peace will exist. Respect for and promotion of human
dignity, and the quest for the common good are
indispensable for the existence of peace. Hence, we
cannot fail to state our concern that, 50 years after the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
much still remains to be done to guarantee the enjoyment
of the inalienable rights of all human beings: women,
men, children, young people, older people, the aged, the
disabled and members of ethnic, religious, educational,
linguistic or social minorities alike.
We know that a culture of peace will not come
about this year or next; we are realistic. But we hope that
the adoption and dissemination of the draft declaration
and programme of action on a culture of peace will
broadly promote the philosophy and lofty purposes of a
culture of peace. Here, we feel we should take maximal
advantage of the fact that the year 2000 has been
proclaimed the International Year for the Culture of
Peace, and that the period 2001-2010 has been declared
the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Nonviolence for the Children of the World. The latter is
especially critical for the international community, and

3

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
demands a great effort by the United Nations, as set out in
the valuable reports of Ms. Graça Machel and of
Ambassador Olara Otunnu. We consider that, for young
people and for civil society in general, the media, nongovernmental organizations, universities and secondary
schools must play a central role in creating this culture of
peace, through their ability to teach and to disseminate.
Here too, we believe that the promotion and dissemination
of a culture of peace should play an important role in the
Millennium Assembly to be held next year.
Let me highlight one of the actions to promote
international peace and security set out in paragraph 16 of
the draft programme of action, the one relating to the
ability to learn valuable lessons conducive to a culture of
peace from “military conversion” efforts as evidenced in
some countries of the world. That indeed is our experience
in Central America. The situation in El Salvador is proof of
the positive effects of that country’s experiences in this
sphere. My own country, Costa Rica, began its military
conversion experiment in 1948, when it abolished the army
and devoted its resources to improving the quality of life of
its people, to education and to health. This experiment has
borne fruit, and today we are proud of a literacy rate of
94.5 per cent, and of excellent health conditions. We
sincerely desire that all nations should earmark their
resources for meeting the basic needs of their peoples rather
than using them on unnecessary military expenditures. We
sincerely hope that all peoples will be able fully to enjoy
their inalienable rights and that they will benefit from the
transformation of the culture of war into a culture of peace.
Let me recall in conclusion that tomorrow, on the first
day of the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly, we
will mark the International Day of Peace, proclaimed in
resolution 36/67 of 30 November 1981. That day is
dedicated to commemorating and strengthening the ideals
of peace in every nation and within every people, and
among nations and peoples. The proclamation of this Day
was proposed by Costa Rica, with the generous support of
all the countries of Central America and Latin America, and
it was adopted by the General Assembly by consensus. Let
me quote the then Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar:
“The celebration of this International Day of
Peace reflects not only the age-old aspiration for a
world without war, but also the present-day awareness
that we live in a situation of unprecedented danger.
From this awareness will undoubtedly come the
wisdom and determination to face responsibly the
sources of conflicts and mistrust in accordance with

4

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
the principles of the Charter. It is time that the
international community responded to the challenge
posed by this day dedicated to peace.”
Ms. Korpi (Finland): On behalf of the European
Union, it is a pleasure for me to say a few words of
appreciation on this very important day.
Let me first thank you, Sir, on behalf of the
European Union, for your excellent and outstanding
presidency during the fifty-third session of the General
Assembly. Today we will adopt a Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. Tomorrow
the General Assembly will reconvene to open its fiftyfourth session, the session which will guide us into the
“International Year for the Culture of Peace”.
Coincidentally, this year is also the year which in our
calendar marks the turn of the millennium. This
Declaration and Programme of Action could be
considered one of the milestones in promoting a culture
of peace.
The European Union has participated closely in the
consultations on the draft Declaration and Programme of
Action. We would like to commend the Chairman of
these consultations, Ambassador Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury of Bangladesh, for his commitment to the
process and for his tireless efforts to arrive at a good
result. We would also like to pay special tribute to
Ambassador Emilia Castro de Barish of Costa Rica, who
from the beginning of the consultations to this very day
supported our work with admirable devotion and
determination, fully commensurate with the extraordinary
role that her country has played in its region for the
promotion of a culture of peace. We also would like to
express our sincere appreciation to the many delegations
from all parts of the world that, like the European Union,
committed themselves to work together with the
Chairman to polish the draft, which now enjoys the
support of the whole United Nations membership.
As we can conclude from the content of the
document that we are about to adopt, the history of the
United Nations itself is the history of the promotion of a
culture of peace. The very foundation of the Organization,
more than half a century ago, was indeed a major
milestone in this endeavour. As a first priority after the
scourge of the Second World War, the United Nations
undertook to codify and encourage respect for the
universally recognized human rights and fundamental
freedoms inherent in humankind. The role that the United
Nations has played in promoting a culture of peace

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
through the pursuit of justice, tolerance, solidarity and
pluralism at all levels can hardly be overestimated. The
educative role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in this endeavour has
been crucial. Its post-war Constitution proclaims
“That since war begins in the minds of men, it is
in the minds of men that the defences of peace must
be constructed”.
We pay special homage to the tireless determination of
UNESCO to promote human rights education.
Peace, justice, human rights, development and
democracy are all interdependent and interrelated. This
Declaration and Programme of Action is a strong
pronouncement of all Member States in favour of a holistic
view of the vocation of the United Nations. Peace cannot
be pursued in isolation from justice, and development
cannot be induced in the absence of democracy. A key to
progress in all these fields, and thereby a key to the fuller
development of a culture of peace, is the recognition that
the human person is ultimately the central subject and
principal beneficiary of all the purposes of the United
Nations. Therefore United Nations policies and programmes
systemwide should be human-centred and should be guided
by, and based on, the promotion of full respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Alemán (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Since this
is the last day of the fifty-third session of the General
Assembly, permit me, on behalf of the Government and
people of Ecuador and on my own behalf, to extend to you,
Mr. President, our deep gratitude for the work you have
done over the last 12 months. Undoubtedly your
contribution to the Organization will be remembered by
generations to come.
Many of the elements of my statement, including
expressions of gratitude to those who worked so hard to
bring about the adoption of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace — particularly those
conveyed to the Ambassador of Bangladesh — have
already been expressed. Nevertheless, I should like, on
behalf of the Government of Ecuador, to make the
following comments.
In 1998, when Mr. Federico Mayor, at the request of
the General Assembly, submitted his proposed Declaration
and Programme of Action, the Government of Ecuador
publicly supported the contents of the text under
consideration by the States and expressed its readiness to

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
support it without amendment. Nevertheless, loyal to its
principles of respect and solidarity, it agreed that the draft
should be changed as many times as necessary in order to
bring about consensus.
From the time of the original proposal to the
Declaration being adopted today, much water, as we say
in my country, has flowed under the bridge, bringing with
it ideas that have been deemed very valuable by the
Government and people of Ecuador.
We trust that one day soon, the Assembly will give
serious thought to the human right to peace; that the
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders will not give rise
to concern on the part of any delegation; that a systematic
investigation will be undertaken of the factors relating to
differences between men and women that impede or
promote the development of a culture of peace; and that,
in the same way we are discussing this, we will be able
to discuss openly any subject that may arise.
The time has passed when we could speak
conditionally. All documents can be improved, including
this one, whose importance is clear. We have adopted a
Programme calling for hands-on action. Let us make a
reality of the constitutional principle of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), which states that
“since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed.”
More than 30 years ago, the former Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, Mr. Luis Bossano, said:
“What we must do ultimately is to carry out a
direct and frontal assault — if I may use the
expression — on the conscience, at the deepest
level, of all social groups. We must take a doctrine
of peace and make of it a specific discipline
accompanied by a carefully prepared programme, in
order to develop, with logical rigour and an adequate
foundation, an entire body of principles and
pronouncements of a scientific, ethical and
pragmatic nature in the service of the categorical
human imperative for peace”.
Today that doctrine of “the disarmament of
consciences” is known as “Towards a culture of peace”.
The name may have changed, but the ideal is the same.
Let us move forward in the search for the new human

5

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
being — peace-loving and tolerant in a spirit of solidarity
that springs from conviction.
Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): This is
the appropriate opportunity to extend to you, Mr. President,
our warmest congratulations and thanks for your leadership
of this session of the General Assembly, which is coming
to a close. The quality of your leadership and the
transparency of your work will be a reference point for the
future work of the General Assembly.
On behalf of the Government of Colombia, I wish to
recognize the joint work carried out by the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) to present to the General Assembly today, at
this final meeting of the current session, the draft
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace. I would also like to recognize the efforts and
dedication of the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Ambassador Chowdhury, and his colleagues at the Mission,
as well as those from other missions who followed the
negotiations over several months.
Colombia welcomes the conclusion of one stage of
work on the theme of peace. We have before us a
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, the implementation of which should be undertaken
with firmness by the international community, particularly
the United Nations. This must be a basic tool so that the
system can carry out its fundamental task of saving future
generations from the scourge of war. In addition, we
envision the year 2000 as the “International Year for the
Culture of Peace“, and the next decade as the “International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the
Children of the World”.
In an international system stricken with conflicts,
where wars arise on such a persistent basis, we must accept
that we need a change. We must move from the culture of
war with which we have been afflicted to the culture of
peace which we so much desire. We all know that the
homogeneity of cultures is a myth, but we can learn to seek
similarities instead of differences. There may be hundreds
of differences between us human beings, but we have
thousands of things in common, and those are the things we
should identify in order to come closer to one another.
The responsibility of UNESCO is clear. Education is
the fundamental pillar of a culture of peace and the school
is the basic vehicle for education and early socialization of
children and adolescents, the transmitter of cultural

6

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
elements and a reflection, laboratory and shaper of reality
that must be an essential instrument for implementing the
Programme of Action.
If we look at the future, it is the children whom we
must make the principal actors of a culture of peace in
the new world order. They, on their own initiative and as
victims of war, have already begun to work and have
made important achievements. In my country, for
example, the Colombia Movement of Children for Peace
carried out work that last year led to nomination for the
Nobel Peace Prize.
The emphasis that this document places on nonviolence and on the prevention of violent conflicts should
reflect the commitment of the international community to
respecting human rights, ending the arms race and
respecting sovereignty and the self-determination of
peoples.
We have a valuable document before us that is
without doubt a step forward for this community of
nations. It involves emphasizing the prevention of
violence as the sure way of solving future conflicts. If
this document leads us to reflect on peace and on the
need to build a culture that will sustain and strengthen
that peace and make it viable, then it will have already
achieved a very important objective. If the issue of peace
becomes an obsession for the community of nations, we
will have taken a major step forward.
Mr. Londono (United States): Permit me to join
other delegations in extending to you, Mr. President, our
most sincere appreciation for your leadership and efforts
during your presidency.
The United States joins the consensus adoption of
the draft Declaration on a Culture of Peace and its
Programme of Action and wishes to commend its authors
for their efforts to conceptualize and to promote this ideal
to which we strive. We particularly want to express our
thanks to Ambassador Chowdhury, the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, for his efforts to bring this
document to the light of day.
We find that the concept of the culture of peace was
most clearly stated by Director-General Mayor of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) when he stated that a culture of
peace consisted of a set of values, attitudes and
behaviours that inspired social interaction based on the

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
principles of freedom, justice, democracy, tolerance and
solidarity.
Permit me to state our understanding of a few specific
passages in the document. We interpret references to the
right to development in article 1 of the Declaration and in
paragraph 11 of the Programme of Action to be consistent
with our view that the right to development is focused on
the individual and that it is up to national Governments to
create conditions conducive to the progressive realization of
economic development. The right to development is not a
collective right of groups or States and it is not a legal
entitlement to a set of standards of living or a transfer of
resources.
We do not interpret the reference to combating
violence in the media in paragraph 15 of the Programme of
Action as in any way intending to restrict press reporting of
the kinds of violent actions we have seen in Bosnia,
Kosovo, Rwanda, Burundi and elsewhere in recent years. In
fact, we would have liked to have seen in paragraph 15 of
the Programme of Action UNESCO’s enshrined language
on free press, namely, that “an independent, pluralistic and
free press is essential to the development and maintenance
of democracy in a nation and for economic development”.
Finally, we understand the reference to priorities
established by the United Nations in the field of
disarmament in paragraph 16 of the Programme of Action
to mean priorities that were adopted by consensus.
Mr. García González: (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation shares and supports the views
expressed by Ambassador Bernd Niehaus, the Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica, on behalf of the Central
American countries on the occasion of the adoption by the
General Assembly of the draft Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace.
We would also like to repeat our gratitude to
Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury, the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, for his extraordinary
diplomatic effort, which has enabled us to arrive at an
important text that will, arguably, help us to build a culture
of peace in the next millennium.
I shall refer to just one aspect which the Government
of El Salvador believes it important to emphasize.
Unfortunately, it has not been reflected in the final text of
the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, but
because of its intrinsic value it can be considered to be one
of the subjects on which the international community

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
should take a stand in the near future. I am referring to
resolution 39/11 of 12 November 1984. In the annex to
that resolution, the General Assembly stated that “the
peoples of our planet have a sacred right to peace” and
that “the preservation of the right of peoples to peace and
the promotion of its implementation constitute a
fundamental obligation of each State”.
If individual liberties have been recognized as firstgeneration human rights and have not been subject to any
major criticism, the second- and third-generation rights,
which are known as the rights of solidarity, have given
rise to controversy among various international players,
and even among jurists, because from an international
standpoint the post-cold-war scenario has changed
substantially and consequently there has been a change in
the nature of conflicts. Ideological confrontation has given
way to new manifestations of violence which are
contributing to an increase in poverty, exclusion and
ignorance. As these conflicts are of a different nature, we
must look for solutions that are adapted to a new world
dynamic. On the one hand, there is the application of the
collective social and economic rights of mankind and, on
the other, the rights to peace, the environment,
development and the common heritage of mankind. These
rights are found at the intersection of the individual, the
people, the State and of humanity, enriching international
law while at the same time making it more complicated.
They should not, however, prevent us from moving
forward in innovative ways, as they show clearly that the
problems of peace call for solutions that are both local
and global, individual and universal. In the context of this
controversy relating to the supposed hierarchy of rights,
the General Assembly, in subparagraph (a) of paragraph 1
of resolution 32/130, stated:
“All human rights and fundamental freedoms
are indivisible and interdependent; equal attention
and urgent consideration should be given to the
implementation, promotion and protection of both
civil and political, and economic, social and cultural
rights”.
This same spirit was taken up by the World
Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in 1993 and was
given form in the Declaration and Programme of Action,
which bears out El Salvador’s argument that the right to
peace, a healthy environment and development cannot be
relegated to a lower rank.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the fact that
the Government of El Salvador believes that building a

7

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999

culture of peace would make it possible to adopt a common
system of fundamental and universal values of peace, nonviolence and tolerance through the resolution of differences
and conflicts; to use dialogue, negotiation and mediation or
arbitration by third parties; to recognize cultural diversity,
plurality and participation; and also to recognize the right
to be different, establish an intercultural dialogue and
ensure the application of the cultural rights of people
belonging to minorities and of indigenous peoples, thereby
contributing to the elimination of potential sources of
conflict resulting from discrimination and the violation of
those rights.

marked by the globalization of social inequity. There must
not be a globalization of unemployment or of injustice
leading to cuts in social programmes and leaving a
growing number of people without protection. We must
work to ensure that globalization means fraternity and
cooperation among all peoples, sustainable development,
the fair distribution and rational use of the abundant
material and spiritual wealth that humankind is capable of
creating. That is an indispensable condition for the
common heritage of humanity that can and must survive.
Otherwise, talking about a culture of peace would be
inconceivable.

To sum up, the Government of El Salvador agrees that
education for a culture of peace must take into account a
broad and polysemic understanding of peace, because we
must build it at various levels simultaneously: within
society, at the domestic level among individuals and
different groups, and at the international level among States
and nations.

How would it be possible to talk in philosophical or
practical terms about a culture of peace in a world in
which the number of poor is growing and their poverty
increasing and in which more than 1.3 billion human
beings live in absolute poverty while the 225 richest
people possess a fortune equal to the annual income of 47
per cent of the world’s population? Some 800 million are
suffering from hunger, and 95 per cent of all cases of
AIDS occur in the South? How can we agree today to
talk about the 1.45 billion illiterate adults, the 110 million
children who do not attend primary school and the 275
million older children who do not receive secondary
education? How can we talk about a culture of peace
while 12 million children under five years of age die of
curable diseases every year and 200 million children
younger than five years of age are suffering from
malnutrition?

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased that today we will be adopting the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace — texts which have been arrived at after a long and
complicated process of negotiation. Ever since the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
and in particular its Director-General, Mr. Federico Mayor,
originated the proposal, we have been closely following its
evolution. My delegation would like to take advantage of
this solemn occasion to express its gratitude to Mr. Mayor
for his hard work and determination to involve the whole
of the United Nations system in the discussion and debate
on this draft from a broad and all-embracing perspective.
We should also like to thank in particular Ambassador
Chowdhury for his tireless efforts.
According to Thomas Mann, man is above all himself
and his circumstances. The causes of the ills that we want
to eradicate lie, essentially, in the inequality and injustice
prevailing in the world, in the growing and abysmal
differences between the rich and the poor, in social injustice
and in the inequality among nations. The documents that
we will adopt will act as an important guide and point of
reference for action, especially if we create a socioeconomic foundation to guarantee that children, men and
women are able to gain equal access to science, to enjoy
everything that is fine and beautiful — the heritage of
mankind — and to develop their intellect.
On the eve of the new millennium, the world seems to
be characterized by neo-liberal globalization, and it is also

8

Peace is much more than the absence of war. There
can be no peace without social and economic
development and vice versa. Peace involves the
commitment to renounce force or the use of force in
international relations, entailing observance of the United
Nations Charter, respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-intervention in internal affairs,
and respect for peoples’s right to self-determination.
Peace also means resistance to all manifestations of
neocolonialism, racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia,
terrorism and violations of all human rights, wherever
they may occur.
We cannot think of peace when, under the diktat of
a great Power, attempts are made to impose unilateral
laws and measures of an extraterritorial nature, designed
to subjugate independent nations and peoples by force and
coercion. We are therefore pleased that many of these
principles have been embodied in the document we are to
adopt today.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
My delegation reiterates today its commitment to
continuing to work for a genuine culture of peace that is
based in a world of equity and justice, in which the right to
development will no longer be a mere mirage and the
human right to life and peace will be fully exercised.
Mr. Zmeevski (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to open my statement with words of
gratitude to you, Sir, for your leadership of our work to
reach a consensus on the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace, as well as of the work of the
General Assembly at its fifty-third session, which is closing
today.
The General Assembly’s adoption today of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace has been a kind of prelude to the International Year
for the Culture of Peace and the International Decade for a
Culture of Peace and Non-violence for the Children of the
World.
However, the significance of these documents goes far
beyond the framework of those measures. The fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter laid down in the
Declaration and the complex concrete measures set out in
the Programme of Action open broad prospects for the
building, in the third millennium, of a culture of peace that
must replace the culture of force and save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
It is very important that, in the Declaration and
Programme of Action, it is precisely the United Nations
system that is given a leading role in affirming the culture
of peace. This is weighty proof of the central role of our
Organization as a unique mechanism for maintaining
international peace and security, a universal forum for the
development of multilateral cooperation and the practical
embodiment of the concept of the multipolar nature of the
modern world.
Russia’s commitment to the ideals of the Declaration
and Programme of Action, manifested by our active
participation in the preparation of these documents and
reflected in their provisions, prompts us to consider genuine
ways of ensuring peace, security, stability and prosperity
and of defending human dignity in the next century. It is no
accident that many provisions of the Declaration and
Programme of Action are in harmony with the concept of
the twenty-first century world, the formulation of which
began with an initiative of the President of the Russian
Federation in June this year.

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
We are grateful to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the initiator of this
fruitful and topical theme, and to all delegations that
participated in drafting the Declaration and Programme of
Action for their thoughtful approach, flexibility, wisdom,
spirit of cooperation and tremendous desire to achieve the
final result.
We particularly wish to convey our gratitude to the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United
Nations, Ambassador Chowdhury, who assumed the
difficult task of coordinating the consultations, for his
major contribution to the production of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.
With the Assembly’s adoption of the Declaration and
Programme of Action, their provisions will become the
heritage of the entire world community, providing clear
guidelines for educating people in a spirit of peace, nonviolence and creativity. We are convinced that the
documents to be adopted today will strengthen the
foundation of the building of peace and international
legality to the benefit of future generations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/53/L.79.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/53/L.79, entitled “Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace” and which
has two parts. Part A is entitled “Declaration on a Culture
of Peace” and part B is entitled “Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/53/L.79?
Draft resolution A/53/L.79 was adopted (resolution
53/243).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
concluding this item, I should like to thank Ambassador
Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh for
undertaking the necessary consultations on the Declaration
and enabling us to arrive at a consensus.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
31?
It was so decided.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Agenda item 59 (continued)

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Question of equitable representation on and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and related
matters
Report of the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters related to the Security
Council (A/53/47)
Draft decision (A/53/47, para. 28)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In light of the fact
that we held intensive discussions in the Open-ended
Working Group, I would hope that we can adopt the draft
decision recommended for adoption by the Working Group
without any further discussion.

Note verbale (A/53/1048)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 96th plenary meeting on 24 March 1999,
the General Assembly concluded the debate on this item.
In connection with this item, I should like to draw
the attention of members to document A/53/1048, which
contains a note verbale dated 7 September 1999 from the
Permanent Mission of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which it is requested that item 167 be included
in the agenda of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth session?

We shall now proceed to consider the draft decision
contained in paragraph 28 of the report of the Open-ended
Working Group (A/53/47).

It was so decided.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision contained in paragraph 28 of the report of the
Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the
Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security
Council.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In the note
verbale contained in document A/53/1048, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
indicated that it would like this item to be considered
directly in plenary meeting. This information will be
conveyed to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft decision?

167.

The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should now like
to express sincere thanks to Ambassador Hans Dahlgren of
Sweden and Ambassador John de Saram of Sri Lanka, the
two Vice-Chairmen of the Open-ended Working Group,
who have undertaken the challenging task of conducting the
discussions and complex negotiations of the Working
Group. I am sure members of the Assembly join me in
extending to them our appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 59?

This concludes our consideration of agenda item

Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services
Note by the Secretary-General
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed that, in the light on ongoing consultations,
consideration of this sub-item should be deferred to the
fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 167 (continued)

10

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this sub-item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth session?

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 17 and of
agenda item 17 as a whole.

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to defer consideration of this
item and to include it in the draft agenda of the fiftyfourth session?

Agenda item 57
It was so decided.
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President (spoke in Spanish): It is my
understanding that, after the necessary consultations,
consideration of this item may be deferred to the fiftyfourth session of the General Assembly.

The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes
our consideration of agenda item 61.
Agenda item 62
Question of Cyprus

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to include
it in the provisional agenda of the fifty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 57.
Agenda item 60 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 70th plenary meeting on 25 November
1998, the Assembly held a debate on this item.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it, then, that it is the
wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth
session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 60.
Agenda item 61
Restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations
in the economic, social and related fields
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, on 15 September 1998, the Assembly decided to
include this item in the agenda of the present session.

The President (spoke in Spanish): Members may
recall that, on 15 September 1998, the Assembly decided
to include this item in the agenda of the present session
but deferred a decision on the allocation of the item to an
appropriate time during the session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it, then, that it is the
wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth
session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes
our consideration of agenda item 62.
Agenda item 115
Improving the financial situation of the United Nations
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members may
recall that, on 15 September 1998, the Assembly decided
to include this item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it, then, that it is the
wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth
session?
It was so decided.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999

The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 115.

session: items 10 to 12, 20, 30, 37 to 40, 43 to 45, 47,
58, 93 and 94, 108, 110 to 114, 117 to 128, 130 to 143,
145, 152, 155, 161, 163, 165 and 170.

Agenda item 129
Financing of
Mozambique

the

United

Nations

Operation

in

The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, on 15 September 1998, the Assembly decided to
include this item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth
session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 129.

As members are aware, these items, with the
exception of item 47, entitled “Election of the judges of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994” and item 121,
entitled “United Nations pension system”, have been
included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that
discussion of these items at the present session is
concluded?
It was so decided.
Closing address by the President

Agenda item 144
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members may
recall that, on 15 September 1998, the Assembly decided to
include this item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it, then, that it is the
wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-fourth
session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 144.
Agenda items that remain for consideration during the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
remind delegations that the following agenda items, on
which action has been taken at previous meetings, have
remained open for consideration during the fifty-third

12

The President (spoke in Spanish): I see the session
of the General Assembly that is closing today, the
penultimate session of this century, as a preparatory
exercise in meeting the problems awaiting us with the
arrival of the new century — in other words, problems
that are already here. It is a century that, on the one hand,
shows both promising and disturbing signs and appears to
be marked by the existence of serious contradictions that,
in turn, are the major challenges to which mankind must
continue to respond. In our view, those contradictions
take primarily three aspects.
First, the world continues to move towards the most
complete achievement of individual freedoms and towards
the democratization of national societies and the
international community. Despite the fact that much
remains to be done, it is true that never before in history
have the ideals of democracy and freedom achieved such
broad application, or at least recognition, as they have
now. However, the progress made in this field has not
done away with violence aimed at imposing the ideals
and purposes of heightened nationalism, religious
fundamentalism or supposed ethnic supremacy. The fact
that in the past ten years only a half dozen of the more
than 100 conflicts that have affected international peace
and security were territorial conflicts clearly shows the
kind of problem we will be facing in the future.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
During the 12 months since the Assembly began its
fifty-third session, violence in vast regions of the world has
dominated and affected people’s lives, in many cases
depriving them of life and hence generating a legacy of fear
and, in many cases, rancour in the hearts of human beings.
These events categorically disprove the prophecies of those
who have predicted the end of history.
In Europe, Africa and Asia old and new conflicts
continue to call for the attention of the international
community and increasingly cry out for the adoption of
attitudes and signs of solidarity inspired by tolerance.
Naturally, the world is not a homogeneous place. There are
regions where peace prevails and where there is agreement
and where peaceful settlement of controversies takes place.
Clear proof of this has been offered by our region — Latin
America and the Caribbean — where certain historical
conflicts among States were brought to a peaceful end in
the course of this year. I cite this fact with undisguised
pride, while at the same time not failing to note clearly our
brotherly worry over the internal situation that prevails in
some of those States.
The African continent has been particularly affected by
various factors, some due to nature and others to the
activities of man. The General Assembly has given
particular attention to this situation. Proof of this was the
adoption by consensus of a resolution on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, which set out the main principles
for providing assistance to the continent. The General
Assembly must persist in its efforts to assist our African
brothers to overcome this situation of crisis and
underdevelopment in which they have been placed as a
result of a history of colonialism and discrimination.
The prevailing political conditions in the Middle East
during the session ending today were not the most
propitious for advancing the peace process. The General
Assembly dealt with the various aspects of this complex
problem in the hopes that the situation would develop along
more favourable lines. Fortunately, this appears to be the
situation today. I therefore trust that during the coming
session the Assembly will be able to adopt significant
decisions that will contribute to consolidating a lasting and
just peace in the region.
But it has undoubtedly been the conflict in Kosovo —
because of its magnitude and consequences — that has
been the most important international political event of the
year. Allow me here to express some of my personal views.

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
I see it as a lamentable coincidence that during the
year I was chosen to preside over the General Assembly
the credibility and efficacy of this body, which is the
most genuinely democratic and representative body of the
international community, has been subjected by that
conflict to the harshest test in its history.
The conflict in Kosovo brought to light several
aspects that I cannot fail to mention. First, it showed that
the Security Council, whose commitment is to the
preservation of peace, has been kept from pursuing that
commitment by virtue of the fact that it was not able to
agree on decisions in this matter. The possibility of using
the veto played its role, showing that this mechanism
supposedly conceived to, among other things, avoid the
use of force, has ultimately led to its being an enabling
factor in removing the use of force from the Council and,
hence, from the entire Organization.
Secondly, it is necessary to recall that the General
Assembly, which, under the Charter, in particular Articles
10 and 11, is competent to deal with the maintenance of
international peace and security, has not been in a
position to exercise that competence — not because of a
lack of a legal framework but because the predominant
political will was that it should not make use of that
capacity. In the past that responsibility was assumed by
this body when the Security Council was kept from acting
in situations that threatened or breached peace. On those
occasions, the international community formally declared
that the inability of the Security Council to discharge its
functions did not deprive the General Assembly of its
rights or relieve it of its responsibilities under the Charter.
Finally, let us recall that the Charter is based on the
principle of legitimacy, which provides a basis and raison
d’etre for the entire international legal order. As a result,
the most important lesson we must learn from the case of
Kosovo is that we should continue diligently to seek ways
to fully guarantee respect for that principle of legitimacy.
It may be premature to make a conclusive
assessment of the Kosovo crisis, but it is clear that it has
affected and will affect the functioning and credibility of
this Organization. Perhaps the only positive element of
that conflict is that it has clearly shown that any further
delay in reforming the United Nations cannot be allowed
or justified. I hope that resolution 53/30, adopted by the
General Assembly last December during the current
session, on the majority required to make any changes in
relation to the Security Council, will facilitate an
acceleration of the process of reform.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
As for the current worrying situation in East Timor,
we must hope that this time United Nations mechanisms
will work effectively and an end will be put to the
violations of human rights that are taking place in that
region.
The results achieved at this session in the sphere of
disarmament and arms limitation can be considered
encouraging given the context in which the negotiations
took place. Among the various resolutions adopted, I should
like to highlight the one relating to the convening of an
international conference on the illicit trade in weapons in all
its aspects, including small arms and light weapons. The
entry into force last March of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction is a
comforting indication that there is a general aversion to
such cruelly indiscriminate weapons.
Peacekeeping operations have received particular
attention in the General Assembly during this session. The
financing of various such missions was approved, including
the complex Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Furthermore, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of peacekeeping, the international
community paid tribute to this indispensable instrument of
peace and to the men and women who have taken part in
it and in many cases given their lives in this endeavour.
The year of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was one of great activity for
the General Assembly. Among the various resolutions
adopted, I should like to highlight the one by which the
General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society
to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The adoption of that
Declaration after 13 years of negotiation is an important
new milestone in the process of consolidating and
improving the international system for the protection of
human rights.
Above all, through the resolution adopted last
December on the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, at this session the General Assembly joined in the
search for the most effective measures to ensure the
international protection of human rights and to bring to
justice those who violate them. In that resolution the
Assembly recognized the historic importance of the Statute
and adopted measures for setting up the Court and setting
it under way. That was the best way to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

14

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
the cornerstone of one of the most inspired and
momentous political and institutional creations of the
twentieth century.
The second major contradiction to which I should
like to refer relates to technological progress, to the
revolution in communications and transportation and to
the extraordinary expansion of scientific knowledge,
which have led humankind to unprecedented levels of
material development. But the benefits of this progress
are distributed unequally among the various sectors of
humanity. This has produced a disturbing split, caused by
the fact that the technological explosion is taking place in
the developed countries, where a lesser portion of the
world’s population lives, while elsewhere a demographic
explosion is accompanied by an acute technological
deficit. As a result, in a world that is increasingly small
and interdependent, we have the dangerous coexistence of
prosperous and technologically advanced societies with
populations living in conditions of poverty and insecurity.
The process of globalization does not, on its own,
help resolve this contradiction. On the contrary, it is
generally accepted that the rapid acceleration of
globalization in recent years, resulting from the opening
of markets and the liberalization and modernization of
trade, may well heighten social differences and economic
contradictions in international society as well as within
national societies. If we do not rapidly take effective
measures to correct the negative effects of that process,
the threats of social disintegration will become
increasingly real and disturbing, and the possibility of
establishing stability and lasting peace even more remote.
The uncertainty resulting from this process that we
are witnessing led to our holding, at the beginning of this
session, a high-level discussion on the economic and
social impact of globalization and interdependence and
their political consequences. On that occasion, it became
clear that there was great interest on the part of
Governments, international bodies and civil society in this
area. In order to continue to deepen our consideration of
this phenomenon, which affects the lives of all present
and future inhabitants of the planet, we must adopt rules
for clarification and guidance.
In the dynamic context of growing globalization and
interdependence, the United Nations is called upon to play
a fundamental role as the body promoting cooperation and
guidance for development. The General Assembly
assumed that responsibility when it adopted the important
resolution entitled “Role of the United Nations in

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence”. The question has remained open for
analysis and consideration by Governments. It is to be
hoped that we will adopt as soon as possible specific
measures that will ensure that the benefits of globalization
are distributed equally and in particular that we will avoid
marginalizing developing countries and reduce their
vulnerability.
Of equal importance and closely related to this matter
is the resolution on the financial crisis and its impact on
growth and development, especially in the developing
countries. In this resolution, the Assembly, inter alia, has
stressed the need to strengthen and improve mechanisms to
prevent, manage and solve international financial crises and
proposes measures most effectively to address these issues
and to mitigate their negative effects on the development
prospects of developing countries.
The third and last major contradiction to which I wish
to refer arises from the fact that while, in many societies,
a high level of social integration has been achieved, with
high levels of knowledge, culture and creative activities,
those same societies appear nevertheless to be extremely
vulnerable to such dangers as drug trafficking, organized
crime, terrorism and environmental degradation. It is among
the capacities of this Assembly to establish defences against
these enemies — the United Nations has indeed been
involved in this task — and to carry out a vigorous
educational campaign to contribute to developing a culture
of health, a culture of legality and a culture of
environmental conservation. There is no greater cause of
environmental degradation than poverty.
The grave concern of Governments regarding the
negative impact that current economic trends may well have
on social development has been seen at this session on an
ongoing basis. Prompted by this concern, the Assembly has
adopted several resolutions on important social issues,
among which I would mention those on international
cooperation to address the world drug problem, on
transnational international crime, the situation of women
and the rights of the child and refugees, among others.
I must also highlight the convening of the twenty-first
special session of the General Assembly to assess the
further implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development.
This event was evidence of the democratization and
universalization of information and knowledge in this
sphere. It reaffirmed the will of the international community
to continue to address questions of population and

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
development that are affected by decisions in the spheres
of science, culture and tradition, considering all as
ineluctable aspects of the same problem. That problem,
ultimately, must be solved at the human level with a
responsible use of freedom.
Finally, without claiming to have drafted an
exhaustive list, I wish to refer to the resolutions on
decolonization, cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space, questions related to information — in particular the
resolution reaffirming a series of principles and guidelines
for international negotiations. I consider of particular
importance the resolution on dialogue among civilizations
and the resolution by which the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace was adopted
earlier today. Both are cornerstones on which the
international community can in the future build an ethical
legal system to govern future relations among States and
peoples. The ethical content of that commitment is an
element which, in my view, is unavoidable.
The Millennium Summit, to be held at the fifty-fifth
session of the General Assembly to begin in September
2000 — in preparation of which a great deal of work has
been done at this fifty-third session — will provide a
unique opportunity to consider the role which the United
Nations is to play in the new century. In this connection,
I am pleased to note that, at this session, intensive
negotiations have been held on this issue, thanks to which
substantive progress has been made towards determining
the format of the meeting and the bases or content of that
important event. I have no doubt that, on the basis of this
work, the preparations for the Summit will be
successfully completed at the fifty-fourth session.
In short, at its fifty-third session, the General
Assembly considered a total of 170 items at 107 plenary
meetings and nine informal meetings. It adopted 309
resolutions — 248 by consensus — and 130 decisions.
The variety and importance of the questions
discussed at this session ending today and the earnest and
constructive spirit in which they were considered show
that, because of its representativeness, its universality, its
capacity to listen and to see things from all angles, the
United Nations continues to be the sole and central forum
for pursuing global dialogue on the fundamental world
problems facing mankind. This is the unshirkable role
which we must continue to play in the future of conflicts
awaiting us in the new millennium. To do this effectively
will depend on two factors.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
First, the Organization must have the necessary
financial resources to fulfil its commitments. In this regard,
it is to be hoped that the major debtor States of this
Organization will pay their international financial
obligations as soon as possible. Secondly, it will depend on
our adopting the necessary reforms to make this institution
capable of meeting new challenges and needs. We must
step up our efforts to restore the primacy of the
Organization in leading international affairs, particularly
those affecting peace and security. We must strengthen and
improve it, bringing its structure and functioning in line
with the requirements of new needs and challenges. This,
ultimately, does not depend on one or several us; it depends
on each of us, on all of us.
In the General Assembly, in recent years we have
noted an effort along these lines that has continued
throughout the session ending today. The general process of
reform in the United Nations, which was invigorated at the
last session, has continued under my presidency. The
Assembly has continued to work primarily on the basis of
ideas and proposals of the Secretary-General, to whom we
reiterate our thanks and recognition for his genuine
commitment to the cause of reform. The process of putting
these initiatives into practice has been slower than it was at
first. However, significant progress was achieved at this
session in the sphere of the environment and human
settlements through the adoption of a series of important
measures and recommendations that will undoubtedly
improve the functioning and efficiency of the Organization
in this sphere.
If, before assuming my responsibilities as President of
this Assembly, I was convinced of the need to change the
functioning of the main organs of the United Nations and
their interrelationship, today, after a year of experience in
this post, I am far more convinced of it than ever. I must
confess that, more than once, I was surprised and even
perplexed and pained to note that, despite sporadic contacts
with their respective representatives, the organs with the
major political responsibilities in the Organization — the
Security Council and the General Assembly — act in
isolation from one another, without coordination or
transparency.
Security Council reform is undoubtedly the most
controversial element of the United Nations restructuring
effort, and the one with the greatest political implications.
The ambitious intention to transform the Council into a
more representative, more democratic, more open, more
transparent, and hence more effective body makes for an
extraordinarily complex and delicate task that requires

16

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
effort and time, enormous patience and firm political will
from all participants in the exercise. We can now say that
all of us, myself included, have invested great effort in
this task and that we have given and received generous
demonstrations of patience. But quite frankly, I do not
perceive general true political will for reform that would
facilitate agreement on the basic matters.
Nonetheless, I am pleased to report that despite
continuing deep differences on the fundamental elements
of this matter, the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in
the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council succeeded in
reaching agreement on certain basic, very general, ideas.
Unlike earlier reports, the report adopted earlier this
morning is not limited to a description of the programme
of meetings and of the documents produced — a
description necessary from the historical standpoint; it
also indicated for the first time in seven years a consensus
on some formal and substantive elements which, although
modest, could be used in future discussions. Moreover,
substantive progress was made on the Council’s working
methods and on the transparency of its work. I must add
that, in addition to the valuable oral statements made in
the Working Group, many delegations responded to the
Chairman’s invitation by setting out their positions in
writing; these notes, along with the oral presentations,
constitute valuable working material for future meetings
of the Working Group.
After 53 long and sometimes tense meetings of the
Working Group, these results might well seem very
meagre. But, looking at them from the proper perspective
and considering the importance of the item and the fact
that the vital interests of States are at stake, we can
affirm, without making the error of excessive self-esteem
or, worse, self-congratulation, that we have achieved
limited but significant progress. After all, it is not by
great leaps but by small and cautious steps like those
taken at this session that we can cover the greatest
distance and avoid the most obstacles. It is important also
to note that during the meetings of the Working Group,
we finally achieved, not without difficulty, a high level of
substantive participation by delegations and of frankness
in the expression of their views.
To be sure, resolution 53/30, which requires a twothirds majority of Members of the General Assembly on
any question relating to reform of the Security Council,
allayed certain fears and eliminated certain
misapprehensions that had had a negative effect on the

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
work of the Group. It undoubtedly provides a solid basis
for consolidating the spirit of trust needed to carry out the
task of reforming the United Nations.
Let me make a personal comment that I consider to be
very important. Suggestions or proposals relating to
working methods made by the Chairman were always based
firmly on the fundamental principle, accepted from the very
outset, of transparency in negotiations. It is to be hoped that
mistrust — which at times, happily briefly, was nearly at
the level of belligerence — will yield to greater flexibility
in our discussions, without this ever implying that we
should ignore the extremely high level of sensitivity and
political importance involved in reform of the Charter.
It remains for me to convey my deep and sincere
thanks to all who accompanied me in the complex and at
times arduous task of presiding over the work of the
General Assembly. I know full well that I carried out that
task well at times, reasonably well at other times, and not
so well on occasion. But it was always my intention to
perform well. I wish to acknowledge in particular the VicePresidents, especially those who were always ready to take
the Chair when my presence was required elsewhere,
including in my own country, whose Ministry of Foreign
Affairs I continued to head. My thanks go also to the
Chairmen, Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteurs of the Main
Committees, to the coordinators of the various consultations
and negotiations, and to the two Vice-Chairmen who
worked with me in guiding the Open-ended Working Group
on Security Council reform.

107th plenary meeting
13 September 1999
As usual, the Secretariat fulfilled its responsibilities
with the effectiveness to which Member States are
accustomed. I wish publicly to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the staff of the Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, and the
interpreters, translators, conference officers and security
officers. The help I received from all who worked with
me was even more valuable since throughout the year I
continued to fulfil my responsibilities as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, which is a member of the
Latin American Integration Association and of the
Southern Cone Common Market, as well as an active
negotiator within the Free Trade Area of the Americas; all
of these are responsibilities of the highest order for my
country and for my region. Believe me when I say that I
devoted maximal time and energy to respond properly to
the trust placed in me a year ago by my regional group,
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, to
which my country is honoured to belong, and by all other
members, by which I was highly honoured. I hope I did
not let them down, but that is but a hope.
As I leave you — representatives, colleagues,
Secretariat staff — I want to express my sincerest wishes
for the success of the next President.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President (spoke in Spanish): I invite
representatives to stand and observe a minute of silent
prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the fifty-third session
The President (spoke in Spanish): I declare closed
the fifty-third session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

17
