S/2005/440

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 July 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 7 July 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolution 1575 (2004) of 22 November
2004, I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 16 June 2005, which I
received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the report on the
activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR), covering the period from 1 March to 31 May 2005 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-41319 (E) 120705

*0541319*

S/2005/440

Annex
Letter dated 16 June 2005 from the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union addressed to the Secretary-General
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1575 (2004),
I attach the second three-monthly report on the activities of the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) (see enclosure). The report
covers the period from 1 March to 31 May 2005. I would be grateful if you would
transmit this report to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2005/440

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Introduction
1.

This report covers the period from 1 March to 31 May 2005.

2.
The Security Council, by its resolution 1575 (2004), of 22 November 2004,
requested Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the European
Union, to report to the Council on the activity of the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), through the appropriate channels and
at a minimum of three-monthly intervals. The present document is the second such
report to the Council.
Political background
3.
Overall, during the reporting period, the political and military situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained stable, although there have been some
difficult events.
4.
On 2 March, the Bosnian Croat member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Dragan Covic, was indicted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Prosecutor for abuse of office/official authority and links to organized crime in his
capacity as former Minister of Finance of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The indictment
was confirmed by the State Court on 10 March. The Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board took the view that the indictment should be confirmed and, given the
international community’s long-standing emphasis on raising standards in public life
and the public perception in Bosnia and Herzegovina that corruption is endemic in
the political classes, it expected Mr. Covic to resign, while it, at all times,
acknowledged his right to the presumption of innocence. President Covic signalled
his intention not to stand down, so Lord Ashdown, in his capacity as High
Representative, decided to remove him from office on 29 March. President Covic’s
removal took place relatively quietly, without any significant interruption in the
exercise of government or the reform process and, on 9 May, the House of Peoples
confirmed Ivo Miro Jovic as the new Croat member of the Presidency.
5.
On 16 April, two conscript induction ceremonies in Republika Srpska were
seriously disrupted by displays of nationalist Bosnian Serb sentiments. The
ceremonies were the first in the Republika Srpska at which Bosnia and Herzegovina
flags were displayed and the national oath, which includes a commitment to defend
Bosnia and Herzegovina, was to be taken in accordance with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina defence law of December 2003. At one ceremony, in Manjaca, the 551
conscripts, in unison, substituted “Republika Srpska” for “Bosnia and Herzegovina”
in the public affirmation of the oath and 99 of them subsequently refused to sign the
oath correctly. Media coverage of the Manjaca ceremony has had a significant
impact on the public of Bosnia and Herzegovina, calling into question the
constitutional loyalty of the Bosnian Serb part of the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed
forces and the judgement and military professionalism of its leadership as well as
undermining confidence in the reliability of the Republika Srpska component of the

3

S/2005/440

armed forces. An inquiry has been held, but the report, issued on 6 May, left a
number of important questions unanswered. Furthermore, the corrective measures
proposed were limited to reprimands and disciplinary proceedings against 11 lowranking individuals. The High Representative and European Union Special
Representative, the Commander of EUFOR and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Senior Military Representative have all called on the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that senior commanders are
properly held to account.
6.
On a more positive note, since the creation of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia monitoring group by Prime Minister Terzic and
the High Representative and European Union Special Representative in early
February, a total of 50 action points have so far been reported on. Progress on
remaining Tribunal issues is now followed up by a joint working group between the
Prime Minister’s cabinet, the Office of the High Representative and the Tribunal.
This working group oversees the continued efforts by State and entity law
enforcement and security agencies to fully cooperate with the Tribunal. The
cooperation of the Republika Srpska with the Tribunal has significantly improved,
although pressure must continue to be upheld until all remaining indictees, including
Karadic and Mladic, are transferred to The Hague.
European Union Stabilization and Association Process
7.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made commendable progress in recent months on
a number of European Commission feasibility study’s priority reform areas. Several
difficult areas remain, however, where further progress is needed for the European
Commission to consider that significant progress has been achieved across all 16
reform priorities. Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia continues to be a key condition, although recent events have
been an encouraging first step. Police restructuring and the creation of a unified
public broadcasting system are the main obstacles on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
road to a positive Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) recommendation
from the European Commission.
8.
On 16 May, multi-party negotiations on police restructuring suffered a serious
setback when key party leaders of the Republika Srpska failed to accept policing
districts that would cross the Inter-Entity Boundary Line (IEBL) and thus meet the
requirement of European Union for policing areas drawn up on the basis of
functionality. The Republika Srpska National Assembly rejected this requirement
again at its special session on 30 May, insisting that any model of police
(re-)organization in which local police regions would cross the Inter-Entity
Boundary Line was unacceptable. The feasibility study requires structural police
reform with a view to rationalizing police services. Bosnia and Herzegovina
political leaders need to reach a comprehensive agreement that conforms to
European Union principles: all legislative and budgetary police competencies must
be vested at state level and be applied in functional areas, so as to achieve
technically efficient policing; and there must be no political interference in
operational policing. Without this, it will not be possible for the European
Commission to recommend the opening of negotiations on a Stabilisation and
Association Agreement.

4

S/2005/440

Activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
9.
EUFOR currently comprises some 6,500 troops from 22 EU member States
and 11 other countries,1 which are deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina in
three regional multinational task forces and EUFOR headquarters. Cyprus and Malta
also contribute to the common costs of this operation. Over the reporting period,
EUFOR has continued to consolidate its position as a credible and robust military
force, conducting operations in line with its mandate.
10. EUFOR task forces continue to carry out a variety of operations, including:
patrolling to demonstrate EUFOR’s presence, particularly in sensitive and remote
areas; liaison and observation activities; collection of illegal weapons from the
community; and specific operations to ensure compliance with the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and prevent antiDayton activities.
11. A sound information strategy underpins all activities. These operations have
successfully accomplished the desired effects of reassurance, deterrence and
maintaining a safe and secure environment. During April, the European Union also
successfully exercised its ability to deploy a strategic, over-the-horizon reserve
force and tactical in-theatre reserve forces into Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
additional forces also provided a useful contribution to the ongoing activities of
EUFOR during the deployment period.
12. Routine liaison activities are also conducted to assist and support capacitybuilding in the local police and other agencies such as the State Border Service and
the Indirect Taxation Authority, as appropriate and in coordination with the EU
Special Representative, the European Union Police Mission and European
Commission delegation. The EUFOR Integrated Police Unit capability is, in
particular, continuing to assist the State Border Service in preventing illegal
activities along the borders, helping prevent the unauthorized entry of people and
goods into Bosnia and Herzegovina and thus deterring potential smuggling activity.
Indications are that the local agencies and authorities, such as the police and the
State Border Service are benefiting from the support and encouragement of EUFOR.
13. The combined European Union effort has gained momentum as it has
synergized the military, police and economic lines of operation, including by
conducting a series of well-coordinated operations. Over the last three months,
EUFOR has carried out some large scale operations aimed at assisting Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in cracking down on organized crime networks. These
operations have contributed to the objectives of the Mission Implementation Plan of
the Office of the High Representative and the European Union Police Mission and
have raised public awareness by their visibility throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The major discovery thus far was on 11 April, when the State Border Service,
supported by EUFOR, found approximately 27 kilograms of high-grade heroin at a
border crossing point, while elsewhere, on the same day, the Service, with the
__________________
1 The countries contributing to EUFOR are: Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Estonia,

Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Albania, Argentina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Morocco, Norway,
New Zealand, Romania, Switzerland and Turkey.

5

S/2005/440

support from other EUFOR units, disrupted a human trafficking gang and arrested
three people.
14. Close working relationships have also been forged with wider international
and national agencies. The Commander of EUFOR recently hosted a high-level
meeting where, for the first time, the senior staff of all Bosnia and Herzegovina
crime and security related organizations (the Indirect Taxation Authority, State
Investigation and Protection Agency, State Border Service and the local police)
were brought together with EUFOR, European Union Police Mission, the European
Union Customs Financial Assistance Office and personnel from the Office of the
High Representative, to discuss current and future military operations, including
those in support of the fight against organized crime.
15. There is still a large volume of illegally held weapons and ammunition in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite nearly 10 years of collection. Specific operations
are conducted in conjunction with the appropriate authorities, to either collect
voluntarily surrendered arms or ammunition under amnesty conditions, or, if
necessary, to collect weapons and ammunition in more invasive operations. Between
1 February and 30 April, almost 2,000 small arms, over 300,000 rounds of
ammunition, over 5,000 hand grenades and mines and over 7,000 kilograms of
explosives have been recovered.
Outlook
16. EUFOR has continued to carry out its operations successfully, maintaining the
comprehensive and inclusive approach adopted since the mission was launched.
Task force framework operations will continue as described while valuable
information and lessons will continue to be drawn from all EUFOR operations and
activities. Coordination and cooperation with the international community as a
whole has been firmly established. Efforts will continue to support local capacitybuilding, including bringing local organizations and authorities together in the
planning and conduct of operations, especially in support of the fight against
organized crime.
17. Working closely with the European Union Special Representative, EUFOR
will continue to monitor developments on the political front, in particular further
efforts towards achieving police restructuring and any ongoing consequences of the
events of the conscript induction ceremonies.

6
