S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6299th meeting
Friday, 16 April 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Nina
Mr. Long Zhou
Ms. Dumont
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Morales Barba
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Mugerwa
Mr. Harvey
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/167)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-31773 (E)

*1031773*

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Armenia, Bangladesh and Nepal, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for Costa Rica to speak today,
in its capacity as Chair of the Human Security
Network, on behalf of Network members Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand and Slovenia, and
of South Africa as an observer.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for having organized this timely debate
on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which reminds us of the importance of
taking a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
whole concept of peacebuilding in order to achieve
greater clarity and coherence. We also welcome the
presence of the various ministers here today and the
statements by the Secretary-General, the Chairman of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Managing
Director of the World Bank.
The Human Security Network would like to take
this opportunity to reflect on the achievements,
existing gaps and priorities in our peacebuilding
endeavours from a human security standpoint.
In recent years, we have witnessed how decisions
within the United Nations system have increasingly
taken the peacebuilding perspective into account. The
United Nations has recognized that preventing the

2

recurrence of conflict goes beyond the mere
implementation of any peace agreement, and that an
early peacebuilding strategy is indispensable to
fostering development and creating conditions
conducive to sustainable peace. The institutional
expression of that conviction was the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2005.
Reinforcing the effectiveness of our collective
peacebuilding efforts remains one of the greatest
challenges to keeping the 2005 promises. The
Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) makes a
useful contribution to our discussions on this issue.
We must continue to promote a synchronized and
integrated
approach
to
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding should no longer be
considered the last stage or an exit strategy for
peacekeeping
operations.
On
the
contrary,
peacebuilding is now mandated in some peacekeeping
operations. The Human Security Network calls for the
inclusion of peacebuilding activities in all operations,
beginning with the early stages, that is in the drafting
and strategic planning of missions. There should also
be regular communication and ongoing coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the bodies within the peacebuilding architecture and
the relevant national agencies.
As stated in the Brahimi report,
“When complex peace operations do go into
the field, it is the task of the operation’s
peacekeepers to maintain a secure local
environment for peacebuilding, and the
peacebuilders’ task to support the political, social
and economic changes that create a secure
environment that is self-sustaining.” (S/2000/809,
para. 28)
From a human security perspective, the Network
believes that strengthening the capacity of local
authorities is key to meeting the basic needs of their
populations.
In terms of United Nations capacities in
peacebuilding, the Network believes that it is important
to strengthen the bodies that make up the
peacebuilding architecture, namely, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard, we look forward to
discussions on the issue of expanding the pool of

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

experts and civilian volunteers for rapid deployment in
providing assistance in peacebuilding tasks. Those
duties include security sector reform, strengthening
institutions and reinforcing judicial systems —
activities that depend upon good cooperation between
military and civilian actors. As such, we also look
forward to the recommendations of the United Nations
civilian capacity review.

included as an important component of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy. The United
Nations has built up valuable experience in providing
assistance to Member States that have requested help in
facilitating a steady democratic transition. In that
regard, the role and support of the international
community are fundamental to ensuring an adequate
peacebuilding process.

In order to promote peacebuilding, more
technical, legal and financial assistance for the
strengthening of national democratic institutions and
governance needs to be provided on the basis of
process-oriented and sound strategies. Political
stability largely depends upon the legitimacy,
credibility, integrity and transparency of those
institutions, in particular in areas such as security,
justice and elections.

Peacebuilding processes are an opportunity to
rebuild social relations. Socio-economic development
models and the design of public policies should
promote social stability through the protection of
human rights and the participation of every individual
and social group. Promoting social integration is also
important for political dialogue, national reconciliation
and the peaceful co-existence of communities with
profound post-conflict resentments and grievances.
Increased funding is required for supporting
reintegration programmes for internally displaced
persons and to support refugees, as well for
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes for former combatants. In addition, the
need for assistance to victims should be recognized.

Security sector reform is a crucial element in the
stabilization
and
reconstruction
process.
In
acknowledging that there is no exclusive model in
place for security sector reform, we are certain that the
ongoing goal of United Nations security sector reform
will make a valuable contribution to supporting States
and societies in developing effective, inclusive and
accountable security institutions. The Human Security
Network encourages the work carried out by the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force as the mechanism that ensures a broad and
coherent approach as part of the mandates of each of
the Organization’s entities. Furthermore, we support
the role of the United Nations in mobilizing
coordinated and comprehensive international support
for national security-sector reform programmes.
Supporting the consolidation and ownership of
national justice institutions is fundamental to building
the capacity of States to peaceably settle disputes. That
could be supported by both judicial and non-judicial
transitional justice mechanisms, such as prosecutions,
truth commissions, reparations for victims, institutional
reform and commissions to resolve post-displacement
disputes over property and land. That should be done
while taking the national context into account.
Mechanisms such as those could, in the end, contribute
to increasing accountability and facilitating the
consolidation of peace and stability.
In post-conflict societies, elections are also a
central element of national ownership in rebuilding the
State. When necessary, electoral assistance should be

10-31773

Extreme poverty and inequality are threats to the
consolidation of peace. Greater investment in short-,
medium- and long-term programmes would contribute
to reactivating economies and creating employment
opportunities, as well as to reducing the social risk of
vulnerable groups and helping them to have more
confidence in the peace process. It is important to
ensure an adequate programmatic response that has a
human-centred approach, helps fragile Governments
that face difficulties in providing access to basic
services and avoids the risk of the re-emergence of
chronic vulnerabilities. Areas such as health and
education are of strategic importance in ensuring that
peace dividends are realized as soon as possible.
The Human Security Network welcomes the work
being done by the Peacebuilding Commission thorough
the country-specific configurations to include women
and young people in peacebuilding processes. The
Network would like to highlight the need to include the
gender perspective and to promote equal participation
for women in peacebuilding activities while taking into
account their specific interests and needs. The
empowerment and participation of women and young
people have been recognized as crucial elements in the
success of any peacebuilding strategy, given their
potential for restoring the social fabric.

3

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

Finally, we would like to highlight the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and its efforts to build
and expand alliances between the United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, donors, the private
sector and civil society. Those synergies will contribute
to establishing a common vision in support of
peacebuilding processes in a coherent, comprehensive
and strategic manner. We look forward to the upcoming
review of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which is being facilitated by the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland, Mexico and South Africa.
We also look forward to the important discussion on
how to improve and scale up the Commission’s work.
That will be a valuable opportunity for assessing
results, considering lessons learned and strengthening
the Commission’s work and its relationship with other
organs and agencies of the United Nations system. We
call on the Security Council to make greater use of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s advice in the Council’s
deliberations on the relevant situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. This
debate is opportune and takes place at a time when the
general membership of the United Nations is seized
with the review of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). In that regard, the views of Member States will
be critical as we take these discussions forward.
Allow me also to welcome the presence and
participation earlier today at this important meeting of
the Secretary-General, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone
and the Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste.
South Africa wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the Ambassador of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission almost five years ago by both the General
Assembly and the Security Council was a step in the
right direction in an effort to address the challenges of
preventing countries emerging from conflict from
relapsing into conflict. The critical role of
peacebuilding, therefore, is both to consolidate the

4

gains achieved as a result of the peace process and to
prevent relapse into conflict.
South Africa is of the view that peacekeeping
operations have an important role to play in early
peacebuilding efforts and as such should create an
environment conducive to establishing the foundations
for sustainable development, the rule of law and good
governance. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
therefore not be viewed as linear, sequential processes.
An integrated approach that incorporates early peace
building activities during the start up of peacekeeping
missions is required to create, maintain and sustain
peace. This will ensure the early delivery of peace
dividends, which is critical to sustaining and
consolidating the peace process. In this regard,
integrated peace missions have an important role to
play in maximizing the impact of the United Nations
response on the ground.
Our experience in African peace missions has
shown that peace agreements alone are not sufficient to
bring stability to a country and that the holding of
successful elections does not on its own ensure longterm stability. Effective communication and inclusive
dialogue between national actors and the civilian
population are critical to building confidence in the
peace process.
South Africa believes that the success of
peacebuilding must be directly linked to measurable
impacts and concrete deliverables on the ground. These
should include the improvement of socio-economic and
security conditions. As such, the priorities in the postconflict environment should centre around four basic
pillars of post conflict reconstruction: security sector
reform, socio-economic development, justice and
reconciliation, and good governance and inclusive
participatory systems.
Peacebuilding can be successful only when it is
done with the Governments concerned; it cannot be
done on behalf of a Government or a country. National
ownership must therefore be ensured by aligning
peacebuilding activities with the national priorities of
the Government concerned. This, we believe, will
ensure ownership and the long-term sustainability of
the process.
More often than not, countries emerging from
conflict are faced with the challenge of a lack or a
shortage of the resources needed for immediate
reconstruction and development programmes. Ensuring

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

that sufficient resources are mobilized to assist these
fragile States is an important investment in the longterm stability and sustainability of the peace process.
The international community has been willing to
contribute generously to peacekeeping efforts; it is
important that this commitment also be carried into the
post-conflict peacebuilding phase. The international
community has to avoid putting countries emerging
from conflict into the challenging position of having to
graduate from a well-resourced peacekeeping operation
to an under-resourced peacebuilding process.
It is very important in this regard to devise a
funding mechanism that would ensure adequate and
sustainable resources to countries emerging from
conflict. Financial and flexible donor support is
therefore critical to allowing post-conflict States to
deal with the myriad challenges that confronts them.
The role of the international financial institutions in
recognizing the peculiar needs of post-conflict
countries and in providing flexible financing can
therefore not be overemphasized.
In conclusion, my delegation is of the view that
the review of the Peacebuilding Commission will offer
yet another opportunity for the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, to
reflect on these challenges and to position themselves
to address peacebuilding in a more integrated and
holistic manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to
Foreign Minister Okada and Ambassador Takasu of
Japan, in the presidency of the Security Council, for
convening this very timely open debate on postconflict peacebuilding.
Post-conflict peacebuilding plays a crucial role
for countries recovering from strife, as it aims to
preserve the results achieved after hostilities have
ended and to prevent the recurrence of conflicts. We
established the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) five
years ago so that such countries might smoothly
undergo the transition from a situation of conflict to
that of reconstruction and development. However, the
PBC has experienced a number of difficulties in
fulfilling its goals due to a lack of financial and human
resources, and also as a result of the shortcomings
inherent in having neither a comprehensive mandate

10-31773

nor an integrated modus operandi. Against this
backdrop, I would like to convey some of my thoughts
on the pertinent issues concerning peacebuilding.
First of all, we need to closely examine the issue
of how to secure financial resources and effective
budget allocation. I recently had the privilege of visited
Sierra Leone as a member of the PBC to review the
peacebuilding process there. During the visit, I was
glad to see that substantive progress had been made in
a number of areas. I was also impressed with the
coordination between the country-configuration Chair,
based here in New York, and the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, fulfilling the
role of a one-stop service as the United Nations
figurehead in the field. However, I was quite surprised
to learn that there had been no contributions to the
multi-donor trust fund for Sierra Leone, other than that
made by Canada. The situation is similar in other
country configurations, where there are little or no trust
funds available, aside from the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). Budget allocations cannot be redirected to meet
changing and evolving needs.
On a related topic, the funds available to
peacebuilding are very small in comparison to the
various financial resources disbursed for peacekeeping
operations. Since the PBF is funded on a voluntary
basis, whereas the peacekeeping budget is an integral
part of the United Nations budget, the two cannot be
combined or redirected from each other. Hence, we
should bear in mind that the funds used for
peacebuilding flow directly into the host country,
thereby creating an economic benefit as well. As such,
I hope that issue can be viewed in the broader
perspective of comprehensive United Nations system
reform.
Lastly, with regard to the relationship between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, there is a misguided
and widespread conviction that the two processes
ought to be pursued in a sequential approach, in which
peacebuilding picks up where peacekeeping left off.
However, it is obvious that peacebuilding work cannot
suddenly take place in the absence of sustained
peacekeeping efforts. Instead, the two processes should
be pursued in a two-track parallel approach until
security and the rule of law are restored to an adequate
level.
For certain candidate countries that have some
interest in establishing a new configuration of the PBC,

5

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

there are concerns that the initiation of the
peacebuilding process will trigger or expedite the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations. To alleviate
such concerns, we could look into the possibility of
providing military and police training to local forces
during the short- and mid-term stages of the
peacebuilding process, in tandem with a prolonged
phase-out of peacekeeping troops, with a view towards
easing apprehensions about the process and facilitating
a smooth transition.
On the issue of coherence and linkage in and
among individual policy areas, I should like to point
out that we need to determine and prioritize the
individual policy areas themselves before we talk about
issues regarding their coherence and linkage.
The mandate of the PBC needs to be further
elaborated upon, so that it may provide more
comprehensive and concrete guidelines. We need to
flesh out what the priority areas are for peacebuilding
in general and, if possible, what portion of the
available resources should be allocated to each of those
priority areas. One size will not fit all, so there will be
a need for custom tailoring for specific countries, but
we do need some sort of measuring stick to go by.
I would like to stress that we need improved
coordination in the work of the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office so that they can mutually reinforce one
another in an effective, dynamic and synergistic
manner. In that regard, I sincerely hope that a tangible
outcome will be attained during the PBC review
process later this year so that we can get a clearer
picture of the tasks ahead of us and proceed with a
concrete course of action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, the delegation of Egypt welcomes your
efforts and those of the delegation of Japan, which
holds the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April. We also welcome your convening of
this open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, one of
the most pertinent issues within the Council’s mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
As Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, I would like
to express my support for the statement to be delivered

6

by the delegation of Bangladesh, coordinator of the
Movement, on this very important issue.
Over the past few years, post-conflict
peacebuilding
has
witnessed
unprecedented
developments, such as the General Assembly’s
establishment of an integrated system enabling it to
play a pivotal role in the coordination of international
peacebuilding efforts. In this respect, Egypt reaffirms
its full commitment to support the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations through the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Commission’s activities have gained increased
importance through several years of accumulated
experience. It is playing an important role in
coordinating international and United Nations efforts
to prevent countries from relapsing into conflict.
Peacebuilding
is
a
multifaceted
and
multidimensional process. For one thing, international
peace and security cannot be successfully maintained
without ensuring the centrality of security sector
reform in both the military and social spheres;
furthermore,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration processes may not achieve their
objectives unless the essential development, social and
economic needs are met. In addition, ensuring
sustainable peace requires an enabling environment
based on comprehensive national dialogue, social
justice, judicial integrity and independence, and the
rule of law. These factors must go hand in hand with a
comprehensive socio-economic development process
based on the national strategies and priorities of
countries emerging from conflict.
In this regard, we are witnessing the fading of the
clear boundaries which used to define the stages of
succession and overlap between conflict resolution,
peacekeeping,
post-conflict
peacebuilding
and
sustainable development; that is true also of the less
well defined interconnection and synchronization
among those phases and the roles of the principal
organs of the United Nations in dealing with them
within a coordinated, mutually reinforcing and
inclusive framework.
Recently, calls for the simultaneous start of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations have
increased. Egypt believes that such views merit
detailed and cautious consideration and recognizes the
need to comprehensively study this approach with a

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

view to strengthening the capacity of Governments in
post-conflict
countries
to
shoulder
their
responsibilities — but without undermining the flow of
resources needed to support these efforts. Successful
peacekeeping depends on comprehensive peace
agreements to which all involved parties adhere and
that enjoy wide popular support, in order to create the
enabling environment needed to sustain the peace and
lay the foundations for a peacebuilding process that
will provide Governments with what they need to
shoulder their responsibilities in the security and
defence sectors. This in turn will make it easier to
formulate exit strategies for peacekeeping operations in
the countries concerned.
Similarly, due consideration must be given to the
overlap between peacebuilding processes and the
launch of sustainable development efforts in postconflict countries. Efforts to lay the foundation for
good governance, the rule of law and the application of
the principles of democracy and justice in societies will
not realize their full potential in communities plagued
with poverty, disease, hunger and continued lack of the
basic living standards as enshrined in internationally
agreed development goals. Thus, it is of the utmost
importance to launch a peacebuilding process in an
appropriate manner and at the proper time to ensure the
successful establishment of the key political, economic
and social pillars needed to create an enabling
environment
for
implementing
comprehensive
development
strategies
supported
by
timely,
predictable and sustainable financial resources.
The building of comprehensive and sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries requires our sincere
commitment to several objectives. First, we should
maximize the chances of success of peacebuilding
efforts through an unconditional and total commitment
to the principle of national ownership by post-conflict
countries of their national peacebuilding strategies, in
which the national authorities are fully responsible for
defining, planning and implementing peacebuilding
strategies, with the support of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in accordance with clear and
objective national political, economic, social and
development priorities defined without any external
pressure.
Second, we should ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission continues to effectively provide advice
and proposals, based on in-depth studies and in
coordination with all influential actors, with a view to

10-31773

formulating
and
implementing
comprehensive
integrated peacebuilding strategies that lay the
foundation for sustainable development in countries
emerging from conflict.
Third, we should build on the accumulated
multidimensional experiences of the United Nations
system in the field of peacebuilding through the
development of clear, defined, balanced, synchronized
and equal relations among the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, with
full respect for their mandates as defined by the
Charter.
Fourth, we should ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission is actively involved at the early stages of
peacebuilding processes, which can coincide with
peacekeeping operations, and that it cooperates fully
with national stakeholders to create an enabling
environment and incentives to launch a comprehensive
peacebuilding process within the country concerned.
Fifth, we should ensure a genuine international
political commitment to peacebuilding processes and
provide the needed civilian capacities, technical
capabilities, financial resources and best practices,
through the Peacebuilding Commission, to support
these processes.
Sixth, we should maximize benefits from
available capacities of the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and donor countries
to support peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, it is
imperative to establish a monitoring, evaluation and
follow-up mechanism to ensure the implementation of
all national and international commitments made
within the framework of nationally agreed
peacebuilding priorities.
Seventh, and finally, we should ensure that the
priorities of international funding mechanisms,
including the Peacebuilding Fund, are consistent with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the countries
concerned. We must consider innovative methods to
bolster the resources of such mechanisms, in particular
through the Peacebuilding Fund, so that these
resources can be the cornerstone of the funding of
peacebuilding strategies.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Guatemala.

7

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting on peacebuilding, as
well as for having prepared the concept paper
circulated on 1 April (see S/2010/167).
We would also like to thank the Ministers from
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste and the
representative of the World Bank for their
participation.
As is well known, after an internal conflict of
over four decades, Guatemala signed its peace
agreements in December 1996. The process that led to
that act and, in particular, the subsequent peacebuilding
process, has left us with many lessons, some of which
we would like to share in the context of the questions
raised in the concept paper. Unfortunately, in a fiveminute statement, only some general concepts can be
formulated, which, though they may not sound like
anything new, do contain important observations. I will
mention eight points.
The first thing is that every peacebuilding process
is unique and that in this area, as in so many others,
there is no universally valid formula. We are often
asked if our own experience is transferable to other
countries. Rather than respond with a clear yes or no,
we tend to say that it depends on the specific
circumstances of each country and each situation.
The second point that stands out for us is the
cardinal importance of domestic actors — former
parties to a conflict and civil society — having a sense
of ownership of the process. Not only is this logical,
but, in the absence of a sense of ownership, it would be
difficult to build productive relationships between
domestic actors and international cooperation entities.
Thirdly, if there is a sense of ownership and
functioning national institutions, the country will be
paradoxically better prepared to tolerate a higher level
of participation on the part of the international
community in the decision-making process. Guatemala
serves as an example of this. The United Nations
played a fundamental role in every step involved in the
winning and building of peace, but it carried out this
role at the request of the domestic parties and not as an
external actor with its own agenda. Thus, many viewed
the Organization as another stakeholder in the peace
process, and not as an extraneous presence.

8

This leads me to our fourth point, which is the
crucial importance of international cooperation in
peacebuilding processes. Without a doubt, during the
first years of implementation of the commitments
contained in our own peace accords, external financing
acted as a catalyst for many projects, programmes and
policies that would have been hard to carry out without
such support. Guatemala underlines the importance of
avoiding what the concept paper (S/2010/167) calls the
“peacebuilding gaps” between security and economic
recovery.
The fifth point is that peacebuilding must
necessarily address those sources of tension that led to
conflict in the first place, be they due to ideological
polarization, different historical grievances or serious
economic and social disparities. At least in our case,
the peace accords can be interpreted as a sort of road
map that enabled the peacebuilding process to tackle
head-on the main sources of tension that fueled the
conflict. The very titles of the various accords illustrate
the point — including, in particular, the Human Rights
Accord, and the Accords on the Identity and Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, on Socioeconomic and Agrarian
Issues, and on the Strengthening of Civilian Power and
the Role of the Army in a Democratic Society.
A sixth lesson to be drawn from our experience is
that peacebuilding is by definition a holistic process.
Multiple and diverse commitments must be addressed
simultaneously, and not in an isolated or sequential
way. This, too, makes clear the enormous complexity
of moving forward with such a process.
Seventh, it takes a long time to reverse a number
of aspects of the conflict that existed prior to the
peacebuilding process, since they have become
entrenched in attitudes and modes of behaviour. For
example, Guatemala still suffers, to this day from the
culture of impunity that was born in the shadow of the
internal conflict and now shelters delinquent activities.
We therefore turned once again to the United Nations,
devising an innovative arrangement to strengthen the
rule of law in the form of the International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala. My main point is that,
16 years after our internal conflict came to an end, we
continue to suffer its consequences.
Eighth and last, just as the concept paper has
identified a gap between security and economic
recovery, peacebuilding is often accompanied by a gap
in expectations. At least in our case, logically, the

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

peace accords did not resolve all the age-old and
structural problems facing our society, but we continue
to strive to close that gap.
That concludes the essence of the experience that
we wished to share with the Council today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the permanent representative of Bangladesh in his
capacity as the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
coordinator for the Non-Aligned Movement. In
addition, my delegation should like briefly to address a
number of issues that we believe to be relevant to the
matter that brings us together today.
The convening of this Security Council debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding at a time when we are
immersed in the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission gives us the opportunity to emphasize the
importance of making substantive progress in that
process. We hope that the process will result in
agreement on the provision of sufficient means and
capacities to enable the PBC to fully carry out its
advisory role to both the General Assembly and
Security Council, and to work more effectively in
adopting comprehensive peacebuilding strategies that
promote security, development and governance, in
close coordination with all the agencies of the United
Nations system.
A specific goal should be to enable the PBC,
equipped with the necessary means and human
resources, to fulfil its advisory role while consistently
and coherently articulating cooperation policies aimed
at strengthening peace processes in countries emerging
from conflict.
A quick review of history will show that a
number of countries that emerged from situations of
conflict relapsed into violence or that they lacked the
capacity to stay on the path to sustainable socioeconomic development and were thus vulnerable to the
latent possibility of renewed conflict. This is further
confirmation that priority should be given to the link
that exists between the concept of security, on the one
hand, and social inclusion, the fight against poverty,
the strengthening of institutions and the promotion of
human rights, on the other. All of these components are
integral to the timely re-establishment of peace.

10-31773

When we speak of peacebuilding, we think of
existing conflict situations that, because of their longstanding nature, generate a perverse dynamic of
violence and destruction. In order to counter this trend,
it is essential to build the social fabric of the country,
generate political awareness, implement measures that
favour inclusion and convince the private sector of the
important role it has to play in the process of
reconstructing its country, together with the other
national institutions. Furthermore, the principal of
national ownership is the main foundation upon which
the entire peacebuilding process should be built. On
this point, I should like to reiterate that the
commitment and participation of the private sector are
key to ensuring the economic recovery of a country
emerging from conflict.
We have already mentioned the intrinsic
relationship between security and development. Trade
and business can flourish only in an atmosphere of
peace and stability. At the same time, however, peace
requires significant flows of trade and investment that
generate employment in order to combat pockets of
poverty and establish a framework for sustainable
development, which is an effective component for
neutralizing the threat of violence.
In this context, it is essential, in economic and
development terms, that the PBC, in coordination with
the international financial institutions and regional
organizations, be able to continue carrying out
medium- and long-term follow-up to establish the
conditions needed to attract private investment and
ensure the effective channeling of cooperation flows
through effective accountability mechanisms.
In securing and consolidating peace in nations
embroiled in conflict, we do not always follow the
logical chain of first establishing security and stability,
then maintaining peace and, after that, setting up
comprehensive
development
plans
aimed
at
consolidating that peace. Historically, experience has
shown us that there is an increasing need to include
early peacebuilding activities in the implementation of
peacekeeping processes. In this regard, it is vitally
important that, in the implementation of such
measures, the PBC can play a relevant advisory role in
planning those efforts, in close coordination with the
other relevant United Nations bodies that are directly
responsible for economic and social development, such
as the Economic and Social Council.

9

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

At the same time, bearing in mind the role of the
peacebuilding architecture in consolidating peace, Peru
believes that it is not viable to keep the work of the
PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund on separate tracks.
On the contrary, there must be close interaction
between them. The Commission must play a relevant
role in the formulation of resource allocation policies
for specific areas. Given the follow-up role played by
the PBC in peacebuilding processes, it is time for us to
consider creating a mechanism that would provide for
synergies and feedback between the Commission and
the Fund, bodies that share one common goal and
value: promoting and building peace.
All Members of the Organization have a shared
responsibility to strengthen the United Nations system
in order to maintain, preserve and build peace
worldwide. Today we have an opportunity to bring this
important goal closer by taking concrete steps to
strengthen the capacity of the Peacebuilding
Commission to fully and faithfully carry out the role
entrusted to it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): My delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your participation
in today’s open debate and for the important statement
of your Foreign Minister. We would also like to
express our appreciation for your usual and very able
stewardship of the Security Council.
In
our
view,
conflict
prevention
and
peacebuilding remain the greatest challenges facing the
United Nations today. While peacebuilding is an
essential component of conflict management that
entails parallel and coordinated efforts on the security,
political, humanitarian and development fronts, time
has shown that it remains a complex undertaking,
requiring further and closer review of ground realities
and expectations, as well as continued extensive
consultations. The inputs thus gathered needs to be
factored into our collective action to forge a coherent,
efficient and predictable response to the peacebuilding
needs of countries emerging from conflict.
As pointed out by some speakers, the task of
peacebuilding is further complicated by the proven
risks of relapse into conflict. It is therefore very
important for the international community to pay
special attention to the stresses and strains on the
system, particularly in the immediate aftermath of

10

conflict — a period normally marked by challenges
and opportunities alike. The challenges of a relapse
into conflict can be tackled by undertaking more
coordinated assessment and planning for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities, in which both processes
must be explicitly defined and clearly identified to
ensure a coherent approach to a sustainable peace.
We must learn to recognize that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are each specialized disciplines, though
with cross-cutting themes. These disciplines can work
together by exploring pragmatic avenues of partnership
through a dynamic interplay between the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the international financial institutions,
the troop-contributing countries and the relevant
departments of the Secretariat. As experience has
shown, regrettably, this does not necessarily happen.
Early conflict management also offers some
unique opportunities. There are the aspirations of the
people affected by the conflict, who are determined to
seize the opportunity of peace and to turn a new page
for a better future. We must learn to build upon these
aspirations by giving them full ownership of the
process through active engagement in decision-making
and investment in national capacity-building. At the
same time, the international community rightly expects
the local actors to inculcate the required sense of
responsibility and values of governance that
correspond to the ownership, and to infuse confidence
among the partners.
We understand that there is no silver bullet that
can precipitate conditions conducive to implementing
peacebuilding strategies. Such conditions — security
and political stability — can be attained only if the aim
of the collective peacebuilding endeavour is to win
peace and not to earn or impose it. Building such peace
would require the right prioritization of the targeted
areas of development, while tapping and harnessing the
civilian capacities available locally before resorting to
regional or international expertise. Similarly, some
level of understanding of local sensitivities and a
degree of flexibility in imposing conditionalities are
also essential. Further progress on democracy, gender
issues and human rights can only be incremental.
Undue emphasis on these issues, especially in the early
recovery phase, would remain counterproductive.
Sustained peacebuilding efforts also require
predictable and sustained funding and the allocation of

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

adequate resources. This requires the cooperation and
support of Member States, particularly the donors, as
well as enhanced collaboration with the international
financial institutions, which need to show more
operational ingenuity in their assistance programmes.
From the point of view of enhancing national
ownership and capacity, it is also important that most
of the funding be provided through Government
channels. In the context of resource allocations, the
steady portfolio growth in the Peacebuilding Fund is
indeed gratifying, and the efficiency of the Fund will
only increase with more transparency.
Pakistan is committed to the objectives of United
Nations peacebuilding. As the largest troopcontributing country, we are cognizant of the
importance of this endeavour. We were among the
pioneers of the concept of a dedicated United Nations
institutional mechanism for peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is an embodiment of
that idea.
The PBC, with its unique composition and
specific mandate, holds a pivotal role in the
peacebuilding architecture. We are happy to note that
the PBC has made steady progress in the first five
years of its existence. For this, the role of the Chair,
previous Chairs, and the Chairs of the various countryspecific configurations, is definitely commendable. As
Member States review the peacebuilding architecture
this year, it is important to note that the objectives of
peacebuilding will be advanced by utilizing the full
potential of the PBC, as outlined in General Assembly
resolution 60/180, and also by aligning its functions
with lessons we should have learned thus far.
For effective response in the immediate aftermath
of conflict, it would make more sense if the PBC were
engaged from the outset of United Nations
involvement,
particularly
where
integrated
peacekeeping missions are deployed. This would only
facilitate more cohesion between the objectives of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
I will conclude by urging a more sustained focus
of the Member States on peacebuilding. In this regard,
our delegation greatly values your presence in the
Council, Sir, as well as Japan’s active engagement over
time in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.

10-31773

Ms. Graham (New Zealand): Peacebuilding is
one of the most complex and important challenges we
collectively face. Its effectiveness helps to determine
whether post-conflict societies achieve sustainable
peace and development or descend once again into
bloody conflict. It also strongly influences prospects
for preserving and building upon the gains achieved
through the considerable investments made in postconflict countries by the international community. With
peacebuilding tasks increasingly forming an important
and sometimes central element of Council-mandated
missions, it is important that there be a shared
understanding of what is required for their effective
implementation and that lessons learned be applied
system-wide.
New Zealand has been a key contributor to
numerous peacebuilding operations, including United
Nations missions in Timor-Leste and United Nationsmandated operations in Bougainville, Afghanistan and
Solomon Islands. We have also provided significant
bilateral peacebuilding assistance within our region
and beyond. Our experiences have taught us much
about both the very real impact such programmes can
make on the ground and the practical challenges in
their effective implementation. Our views on this topic
are set out more fully in the written statement we have
distributed, and I will focus my comments on a number
of key messages we would like to convey to the
Council, based on our peacekeeping experiences.
First, while the crucial importance of meaningful
national leadership, ownership and engagement, and of
the need for this to inform every stage of planning and
implementation are widely acknowledged, all too often
this awareness is not adequately reflected in practice.
Early attention to mechanisms for building and
sustaining national ownership is essential.
The partnership framework agreed last year
between the Solomon Islands Government and the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
(RAMSI) is one example of how this can be achieved
in practice. In addition to facilitating national
ownership and aligning national and mission priorities
and expectations, it has provided a mechanism for
establishing agreed benchmarks for monitoring
progress. Moreover, it is also a living document that
can be adjusted to meet changing circumstances.
Secondly, national capacity-development lies at
the heart of peacebuilding and must be a central

11

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

consideration in the formulation and implementation of
peacebuilding mandates from day one. To be effective,
capacity-building programmes must be based on
coherent strategies developed in cooperation with local
partners. These strategies should be drawn from robust
needs assessments to ensure that they are guided both
by realities and by requirements on the ground and that
they can effectively identify and further develop
existing national capacities, rather than automatically
substitute international personnel.
These issues must be fully addressed before
significant investments are made in capacity-building
activities with long-term implications. The availability
of effective analytical tools has the potential to assist
with this. We welcome in this regard the Secretariat’s
current efforts to develop a more strategic approach to
identifying, prioritizing and sequencing critical early
peacebuilding tasks.
Thirdly, national capacity-building requires
specialized skills and experiences beyond those
required for traditional peacekeeping operations. But it
is clear that our current ability to identify, recruit and
deploy sufficient numbers of personnel who possess
these skills is inadequate. The completion of the review
currently under way of civilian personnel required for
peacebuilding operations is therefore a priority of the
utmost importance. We hope the review will also
include suggestions on how to achieve appropriate
balance between the technical knowledge and
development
expertise
required
for
effective
peacebuilders.
Given the central importance of rule of law
capacities in many post-conflict situations, New
Zealand supports in principle the Secretary-General’s
call for enhanced police standing capacity and the
establishment of a limited standing capacity for justice
and corrections expertise, provided they are based on a
clear needs assessment and undertaken in the context
of a broader framework for generating civilian
capacities.
We also hope that the review will consider the
full range of other possible options for sourcing
civilian expertise, including better use of United
Nations Volunteers, standby arrangements, regional
pools of expertise and, potentially, partnerships with
the private sector. We will also look to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposed staff mobility policy to provide
options for better leveraging existing peacebuilding

12

expertise from within the United Nations system when
it is presented to the Fifth Committee later this year.
Fourthly, effective leadership is a potentially
decisive factor in the success of peacebuilding
operations. We welcome the steps taken by the
Secretariat to enhance the selection and preparation of
appropriately skilled, experienced and balanced
leadership teams and to provide these teams with
sufficient in-country support. These efforts must be
intensified.
Finally, effective coordination and synergies
among the broad range of actors on the ground are
essential to preventing gaps or duplication of effort and
to providing an environment with the agility to respond
effectively to crises and to rapidly changing
circumstances.
New Zealand welcomes improvements made to
the coordination of humanitarian response in recent
years as a result of the introduction of the cluster
approach. Likewise, the strengthening of United
Nations efforts to deliver as one is also important
throughout the life of a peacebuilding mission to
enable the most efficient and effective application of
peacebuilding resources across the United Nations
system.
Providing missions with coordinated and
coherent support is also important. New Zealand has
welcomed the recent steps to implement more
integrated planning and operational management
processes at United Nations Headquarters, and we
encourage the Secretariat to keep this work under
continuous review.
New Zealand is proud of its contribution to
peacebuilding operations to date, but we are also very
aware of the complex challenges such missions pose
and of how much we and the international community
have yet to learn about how best to tackle these in
practice. I hope that today’s open debate can take us
another step closer towards such an understanding.
The President: I
representative of Kenya.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Muita (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to share my thoughts on this very
important debate. We view this debate as being most
timely, given the current review of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). It is our hope that the

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

deliberations in the Council today will serve to enrich
this ongoing process.
The Secretary-General, in his 2009 report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304), notes that threats to peace are often more
imminent in the earliest post-conflict stages. It is this
crucial period that offers us a window of opportunity to
build lasting foundations for durable peace. It is
therefore imperative that peacebuilding commence at
the very outset of the cessation of hostilities.
Thereafter, peacebuilding efforts must be nurtured and
sustained until stability is re-established.

identify with those objectives and feel that they own
the peacebuilding process for sustained and meaningful
peace to be established.
The potential inherent in the PBC as an advisory
body of the General Assembly and the Security
Council should be fully utilized. The ongoing review
should therefore define how the PBC can create a
positive synergy in order to consolidate the efforts of
all partners. The United Nations agencies, the private
sector and civil society organizations can all
complement the PBC’s efforts to ensure a successful
peacebuilding strategy.

It was with great foresight that the 2005 World
Summit decided to establish the PBC to fill the
peacebuilding gaps in United Nations efforts to
consolidate peace in countries coming out of conflict.
Countries emerging from conflict are fragile and could
easily slide back into war after the Blue Helmets
depart. They need to be helped to build sustainable
peace through security, development and human rights
being integrated into a single coherent approach to help
close gaps inherent in such situations. That also calls
for the marshalling of the resources required to target
those national capacities that offer the best chance of
making peace irreversible and those that address the
root causes of conflict.

Kenya, as a member of the PBC’s Burundi
configuration, would like to emphasize the importance
of economic recovery, socio-economic integration and
the development dimension in any peacebuilding
process. From that perspective, my delegation would
like to emphasize the need to anchor peacebuilding
gains to regional integration initiatives. It is important
to assist countries emerging from conflict in integrating
their economies in the wider benefits accruing from
regionalization. In the case of Burundi, my delegation
reiterates its support to help the country nurture its
fledgling peace by enhancing its greater economic
development through mutually beneficial membership
in the East African Community.

Kenya recognizes the pivotal role that the PBC
has been playing in consolidating peace in countries
emerging from conflict situations. We have witnessed
first-hand the PBC’s engagement in several such
situations on our continent, for example, in Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic. However, we must help the PBC to better
deliver its mandate to the affected countries. In that
regard, my delegation believes that the PBC should
come into the picture at a very early stage in the
peacebuilding process. There is equally the need for
the PBC to work very closely with national and
regional actors in peace consolidation efforts.

To conclude, let me once again reaffirm Kenya’s
full support and commitment to ensuring that the
Peacebuilding Commission is better adapted and suited
to fulfilling its mandate in order to ensure sustainable
peace and development are attained in those countries
emerging from post-conflict situations.

To ensure that countries emerging from conflict
do not relapse into chaos, peacebuilding strategies
must dedicate a larger portion of their work to
promoting
sustainable
economic
development,
strengthening
institutions
of
governance
and
maintaining democratic norms while involving women
in the process. Equally important in peace
consolidation is the principle of national ownership. It
is imperative that countries on the PBC’s agenda

10-31773

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, and Japan for organizing this timely and
important debate.
Peacebuilding is rightly emerging as one of the
central challenges facing the United Nations. Conflicts
can erode State capacity, unravel the fabric of society
and hinder economic development. They also
undermine regional stability and create ungoverned
spaces within which armed groups and organized crime
can flourish. Far too frequently, countries emerge from
violence only to return to conflict within a short period
and at tremendous cost. As the Security Council
considers this question, it is important to analyse the

13

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

record so far. In that respect, there is much to be
learned from the international engagement in
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste. Canada
has supported peace consolidation in all three
countries.
In Afghanistan, Canada’s approach marshals
civilian and military contributions behind a single
comprehensive strategy that aligns Canadian support
with the priorities of the Government of Afghanistan.
As a result, Canada has focused on six mutually
reinforcing priorities: enabling the Afghan National
Security Forces to sustain a more secure environment;
strengthening Afghan capacity to deliver basic
services; providing humanitarian aid; facilitating crossborder dialogue with Pakistan; enhancing capacity for
democratic governance; and, finally, facilitating
Afghan-led political reconciliation.
In addition, Canada strongly supports the
international community’s renewed commitment to
supporting the transition to full Afghan leadership of
security issues, as agreed during the London
Conference in January. While the context of each postconflict country differs, in our view the underlying
principles behind that approach are an important step
forward and should be applied more widely.
Canada is also honoured to chair the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
As a success story for multilateral peacebuilding,
Sierra Leone’s experience highlights several important
factors. First, strong national leadership has enabled
political reconciliation and set the stage for several
rounds of successful elections, thereby cementing
democratic governance and rebuilding trust. Similarly,
efforts to combat corruption, decentralize Government
and provide essential services are helping to provide
Sierra Leoneans with a tangible peace dividend.
Secondly, Sierra Leone’s success has been
accomplished with steady international support. Strong
international military commitment, including a sizeable
United Nations peacekeeping force, helped stabilize
the country and end the civil war. Considerable budget
support and a comprehensive security sector reform
programme in the years immediately following the
conflict laid solid foundations for further progress.
Since 2007, the Peacebuilding Commission has also
worked to ensure that Sierra Leone has the
international attention and political support needed to
complete the peacebuilding process.

14

Thirdly, the approach to peacebuilding in Sierra
Leone is a model worth replicating. The international
community has aligned its efforts with the priorities
outlined in the Agenda for Change and Sierra Leone’s
own national strategy for peace consolidation and
economic development. In that context, the United
Nations family has also united its various mandates
and resources under a common strategy, the United
Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone. The Sierra
Leone configuration of the PBC has not only endorsed
that approach, but also actively oriented its work
according to national priorities. Such steps have
emphasized national leadership, reduced duplication,
eliminated unnecessary administrative burdens and
strengthened coordination.
Finally, it is worth noting that the outstanding
peacebuilding issues in Sierra Leone are representative
of challenges elsewhere. A large unemployed youth
population represents a latent risk of instability. While
a longer-term solution depends on economic growth
and private sector investment, immediate action is
needed to ensure that the youth contribute to peace
consolidation instead of being used by political or
criminal actors for violent purposes.
Canada has also provided support to
peacebuilding in Timor-Leste. From 2006 until early
this year, Canada contributed police experts to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
through the Canadian Police Arrangement, helping to
increase stability and further professionalize the
national police force. Since 2008, Timor-Leste has also
been a member of Canada’s Military Training and
Cooperation Programme, which provides capacitybuilding through military and language training. In
Timor-Leste,
as
elsewhere,
the
international
community also learned a vital lesson. Successful
peacebuilding requires sustained commitment.
(spoke in French)
Much remains to be done but several overarching
principles are emerging. It is clear that peacebuilding
should start as early as possible, that it is
complementary to peacekeeping, and that it requires
considerable resources and sustained commitment. The
Security Council should continue to ensure that the
core risks of relapse into conflict in a given context are
identified and addressed in a targeted manner,
including through closer cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

Similarly, international support must be more
comprehensive, better integrated and more sensitive to
local context. Enhanced coordination among security,
humanitarian and development actors is also essential,
including between the United Nations and the World
Bank, as well as with respect to the promising work of
the Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development on principles and modalities for
engagement in post-conflict States. Fully implementing
the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304) is one key component
in achieving these objectives.
Finally, peacebuilding must above all strengthen
national ownership. The international community
should work to establish capacity for effective
governance and align support behind national priorities
as quickly as possible. By drawing on local, regional
and
international
expertise,
the
international
community also can and should do a better job
mobilizing the civilian expertise necessary to support
national authorities, including through enhanced
South-South cooperation. Canada awaits with interest
the completion of the Secretariat’s study on civilian
capacity within the United Nations system.
As
a
country
strongly
committed
to
peacebuilding, Canada is contributing to progress in
each of these areas and will continue to do so in the
future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Croatia attaches great
importance to this timely and relevant debate, the
relevance and importance of which are undoubtedly
confirmed by the high level of participation in this
gathering.
Croatia has aligned itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union. However, let me take this
opportunity to share a few additional remarks on this
important topic.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) was
established with the main aim of filling peacebuilding
gaps between security and reconstruction through
innovative yet coordinated, coherent and integrated
approaches directed at post-conflict recovery,
reconstruction and institution-building. In that regard,

10-31773

the PBC’s primary task of supporting countries
emerging from conflict was conceived as one bringing
together all relevant actors, marshalling the requisite
resources and providing strategic and concrete
recommendations in order to improve the coordination
of those efforts within and outside the United Nations.
Croatia
strongly
believes
that
effective
implementation of the PBC’s mandate by all
stakeholders offers the best way to achieve the three
United Nations pillars — security, development and the
protection of human rights — all of which are
indispensable prerequisites for sustainable peace and
long-term stability.
Post-conflict peacebuilding, a phase that should
follow the cessation of hostilities, is, in our opinion,
just as important as bringing a conflict to an end. In
order to prevent the recurrence of conflict, a strong
nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
be established as soon as possible, based on a
coordinated, coherent, integrated approach, the prompt
implementation of a peace agreement and in-depth
knowledge of the situation on the ground.
In that regard, Croatia would like to stress the
important and supportive role played by the
Peacebuilding Support Office in drawing up
peacebuilding strategies, as well as the valuable
contributions of the PBC through its useful and
innovative working methods, making use of countryspecific configurations and meetings, which have
brought new and thought-provoking dimensions to the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
On the basis of its own national experience
regarding one of the most successful United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, which contained significant
elements of peacebuilding, including demilitarization,
reconciliation
and
institution-building,
Croatia
supports the Council’s intention to further strengthen
coherence between peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in its work. In particular, we view the
Council’s practice of transforming some former
peacekeeping missions into integrated peacebuilding
missions as an important step in the right direction
towards assisting the PBC in implementing the
respective integrated strategic frameworks. Therefore,
cooperation between the Council and the PBC in that
regard is of utmost importance. However, we still see

15

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

room for further improvement. In particular, we should
consider the insight that the PBC could bring to
Council deliberations regarding specific issues on
countries that are on the agendas of both the Security
Council and the PBC.
Efforts to date by the PBC to simultaneously
address key security, political and social issues through
the development of integrated peacebuilding strategies,
as witnessed in all four countries on the PBC’s agenda,
have been extremely important. They have clearly
demonstrated that the correlation and synergy among
these areas are elements necessary for successful
peacebuilding. Furthermore, we believe that a single
national strategy instrument encompassing all relevant
peacebuilding programmes and activities is a useful
innovation deserving further thorough consideration.
Equally, the United Nations, for its part, should
follow suit by unifying its own programmes and
activities so as to ensure it delivers as one. At the same
time, we should not overlook the lessons learned from
the country-specific approach: that, while some
commonality exists, no one size fits all and that each
and every country situation should be thoroughly
discussed and acted upon according to its own merits
and needs.
In all these efforts, national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is of paramount importance.
Peacebuilding should not evolve in a vacuum for its
own sake, but should build upon available domestic
resources and expertise, which introduces a unique
perspective otherwise not available to outsiders. This
approach allows for the appropriate development and
consolidation of necessary national governing
structures and policies that are in line with national
priorities. This, in turn, opens the way for greater
acceptance of a peacebuilding mission by the local
population.
In that context, Croatia strongly supports the idea
of developing a pool of civilian expertise drawn
primarily from regional resources, which would
significantly improve delivery by shortening the
preparation period and enable immediate deployment
of post-conflict stabilization teams. Moreover, Croatia
recognizes that the strengthening of civil society is of
particular importance in peacebuilding, where
non-governmental and civil society organizations may
be able to provide a valuable link between the PBC and
the strategy endorsed by the local population.

16

In underscoring the increasing regional
dimension of contemporary conflicts, we would
encourage further engagement and a deepening of
cooperation between the PBC and regional and
subregional organizations. A variety of United Nations
entities active in particular regions should also be part
of the equation.
It is clear that peacebuilding requires a
multidimensional approach supported by timely,
sustainable, predictable and flexible resources. As a cofounder of the Peacebuilding Fund, Croatia fully
recognizes the critical role that peacebuilding funding
plays as an early investment towards sustainable peace
and development. In this regard, we note with
appreciation the special roles that the Fund and the
international financial institutions have been playing in
peacebuilding efforts. Furthermore, Croatia welcomes
efforts by the PBC to engage non-traditional donors
and partners in financing its activities, as well as its
attempts to ensure that national peacebuilding
obligations are fully matched with fulfilled promises
by the international community.
Croatia believes that, five years after its
establishment, the PBC is now ready to take on further
specific situations and add more countries to its
agenda. At the same time, we strongly support the
PBC’s efforts to develop assessment tools to monitor
and measure the progress achieved in the
implementation of peacebuilding strategies and related
activities.
In conclusion, we express our hope that the
outcome of this debate will provide an important input
to the 2010 review process of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way, while
fully respecting the mandates of the different bodies
involved in this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): It is an especially
encouraging moment for Australia to speak today
before the Council under Japan’s presidency, and you,
Mr. President, are to be commended for convening
today’s debate.
There is a lot of discussion, as we know, currently
under way in different forums about the importance of
peacebuilding. It is essential that that discussion also
continue in the Security Council, since peacebuilding

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

is a necessary — and often the most difficult —
element in preventing future conflict and in
consolidating the gains achieved by peacekeeping
missions. Both of these tasks, of course, are central
aims of the Council’s work.
I would like to focus today on only a few
overarching points that have been borne out of
Australia’s engagement in addressing current
peacebuilding challenges in Timor-Leste, Afghanistan,
Solomon Islands, earlier in Bougainville, and more
recently through our engagement with Sierra Leone
through the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). We are contributing further to this debate
through the current review of the PBC.
First, we think that peacebuilding needs to be
considered at the inception of a peacekeeping mission.
There is increasing international recognition that
beginning recovery efforts as early as possible in postconflict situations is critical to helping countries
stabilize and provide essential services to their
population. As such, the planning of peacekeeping
missions should not be seen, of course, as a military
task alone, but rather as one that demands a
multifaceted
effort
that
combines
political,
humanitarian and development considerations with the
security dimension. This also demands a closer and
more organic relationship between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission throughout the Council’s
consideration of a situation.
Secondly, there are of course no quick fixes to
intractable problems. The transition from post-conflict
to what we might call normal, while unique in each
case, typically takes a long time. There is an imperative
to balance the need for rapid and flexible responses to
short-term issues against our steady efforts on longerterm goals. Scaling back our engagement too quickly
can result in relapse into conflict. Australia learned this
lesson the hard way in Timor-Leste, most obviously
with the need in 2006 to return peacekeepers who had
been withdrawn too quickly. We need to be cognizant
of and able to respond to the rapidly changing political
and security context and, of course, be prepared to see
a challenge through to its conclusion.
Thirdly, while creating and sustaining peace and
security is a critical component of peacebuilding, it
also requires efforts at State-building. This requires all
international actors — whether political, security,
humanitarian or development — to develop a shared

10-31773

understanding of all the factors affecting a nation’s
ability to build a sustainable peace. They need to align
their respective efforts with Government priorities and
harmonize their activities to get the best results.
Australia’s long-term approach to helping post-conflict
countries aims to address security, development,
economic and political issues in this kind of
comprehensive and sequenced way.
In Timor-Leste, the United Nations Mission and
the Australian-led International Stabilization Force are
not only helping to create and sustain peace and
security, but moreover significantly providing TimorLeste with the space to develop its Government and
security institutions so that there will not in the future
be any need for such an international security presence.
They are also providing the space for economic and
social development and investment in human
resources, both of which will be decisive for the longterm future of Timor-Leste.
Australia’s efforts in Timor-Leste in the earliest
stages placed priority, obviously, on stabilizing the
security situation, responding to humanitarian needs
and helping the new Government to start immediately
to rebuild the institutions it needed to govern.
However, with the benefit of hindsight, we now
recognize that a much earlier transition to also ensuring
visible, tangible benefits to the poor living in the
countryside and the very large numbers of people
without jobs throughout all of Timor-Leste was
desperately needed. Our new country strategy seeks to
correct this imbalance, placing most emphasis on
working with the Government to deliver health and
education services, improve agricultural productivity
and address employment challenges for youth. This last
need is perhaps the most imperative of all. It is
indispensable to future stability.
In Afghanistan, our military efforts in Oruzgan
province are complemented by similar development
programmes. Our efforts to meet the population’s
needs have highlighted the inextricable link between
military, diplomatic and development efforts in
establishing a sustainable peace.
Finally, Australia agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that there is a need to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian experts, including from
developing countries, to help develop national capacity
in post-conflict societies. The Australian Civilian
Corps was established in late 2009 to enable the rapid

17

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

deployment of Australian civilians into post-conflict
countries in coordination with the local Government
and other international actors. We look forward to
playing an active part in the forthcoming review of
international civilian capacities.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
(EU) to this timely and important debate.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
Following the established practice, the full
version of the European Union statement is being
circulated. I will read out an abridged version.
At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the
important statements delivered by the Foreign Minister
of Japan, the Secretary-General, the ministers of
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, and the
Managing Director of the World Bank. Let me also
commend you, Mr. President, for your personal
commitment to the peacebuilding cause.
The follow-up to last year’s report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), the 2010
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) review, and the
ongoing reflection on United Nations peacekeeping
represent three key priority areas. The European Union
will follow and engage in these processes very closely,
and certainly in the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and the United Nations civilian
capacity review.
On several occasions we have failed to break the
cycle of crisis and have missed windows of opportunity
for decisive action. The international community has
witnessed too many countries relapsing into conflict
within short periods of time. The figure of 30 per cent
of countries falling back into conflict within five years
of a peace agreement is unacceptable in terms of
suffering, in terms of missed opportunities and in terms
of lost investments. Reversing this trend is a shared

18

responsibility and something we owe the people most
affected by conflict.
Building peace is about much more than ending
war. Peacebuilding aims at building a vital bridge
between short-term crisis management and longer-term
efforts to consolidate stability by preventing the
recurrence of the conflict cycle through human
development, State-building and support to civil
society.
We have learned from our common experience
over the past decades that no single template can be
applied to complex situations in which priority areas
span the areas of peace and security, development,
humanitarian affairs, human rights and the rule of law,
including the fight against impunity.
In order to meet this daunting challenge, the
European Union believes that additional efforts should
be devoted not only to generating greater national
ownership as the foundation for peacebuilding efforts,
including by supporting increased participation by
women, but also to identifying credible priorities, to
designing coherent peacebuilding strategies, to
providing rapid, flexible and predictable financial
support, and to forging effective national, regional and
international partnerships.
The Peacebuilding Commission has the potential
to champion that agenda. The case of Sierra Leone is
an excellent example that demonstrates the PBC’s
added value. The European Union is contributing
substantially to efforts there, while focusing on good
governance, the rehabilitation of priority infrastructure
and general budgetary support.
At present, the European Union is engaged
worldwide in 12 civilian and military crisis
management operations that cover a wide array of
activities. We are also cooperating actively with the
United Nations in eight different theatres.
The new structures for the management of the
EU’s external relations, under the leadership of High
Representative Ashton, aim at bringing closer together
all the instruments at the EU’s disposal and at
increasing the coherence of the European Union’s
short-, medium- and long-term actions.
In Timor-Leste, the European Union has provided
more than $400 million since 1999 in development and
humanitarian assistance. For the period 2009 to 2013,
the European Union will continue to provide support to

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

the people of Timor-Leste, in the amount of
$100 million, in areas such as rural development,
health and food security, security sector reform and the
social integration of internally displaced persons.
Finally, on Afghanistan, contributions to
improving governance, electoral reform, the rule of
law, respect for human rights and Afghan institutionbuilding are at the heart of the European Union’s
support in that country. Through its action plan, the
European Union, in cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and other
international partners, continues to provide long-term
assistance to Afghanistan in institution building and
civilian capacity programmes, including at the subnational level.
Let me conclude by reiterating that we cannot fail
to meet the challenge of supporting post-conflict
countries in building lasting peace. The United
Nations, with its global legitimacy and in close
partnership and coordination with the main actors, has
a central role to play. The European Union remains
resolutely determined to actively support those
collective efforts to better assist countries in building
sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
Let me join others in thanking Japan for
organizing this timely debate, and the Ministers for
their valuable remarks.
Five years ago, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan observed that there was a gaping hole in the
United Nations institutional machinery. No part of the
United Nations system effectively addressed the
challenge of helping countries with the transition from
war to lasting peace. Member states agreed with
Mr. Annan’s
observation. The
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Fund were established. This
year, we are assessing how well they have filled that
gap and how to improve common peacebuilding
efforts. The Nordic countries will continue to stay
actively engaged in the review process.
However, peacebuilding is not confined to the
PBC alone, but also embraces the much broader scope

10-31773

of policies, interventions and processes, as this debate
demonstrates. Indeed, it is very much a collaborative
effort of the whole United Nations and beyond. Most
important, it is a national task of the country
recovering from conflict. We look forward to the
discussion later this year on the results of the
implementation of recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Peacebuilding (S/2009/304).
Allow me to highlight a few points that the
Nordic countries believe are important for the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, and
for peacebuilding more generally.
Peace is much more than the mere absence of
violence. Building sustainable peace requires much
more than a short-term strategy for security, political
stability and the initial dividends of economic
recovery. Sustainable peace requires that the
foundations of a peaceful society are restored and that
a State be accountable to its people. It requires respect
for the fundamental rights of each individual,
professional and trustworthy rule of law and security
institutions and a social compact based on an inclusive
and transparent reconciliation process.
The current approach to peacebuilding falls well
short of that vision. Mandates and strategies tend to
concentrate on short-term deliverables, because
ensuring measurable progress on security and political
stability is so difficult. But we must try and, in so
doing, we must acknowledge the diversity of postconflict situations.
No peacebuilding policy will be valid in all postconflict situations. What builds peace in one country
does not necessarily build peace in another.
International assistance to post-conflict countries must
build on an understanding of the country context and
allow for more flexibility and adaptability. The
international community must move away from
imposing unrealistic expectations and timelines for
sweeping reforms, keeping in mind that sustainable
peace requires a holistic long-term vision and
resilience to stay on course.
National ownership built on an inclusive and
transparent political process is the basis for effective
peacebuilding interventions. That is why the review of
the Peacebuilding Commission must focus on
delivering added value at the national level and assess
whether the United Nations peacebuilding architecture

19

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

is sufficiently able to foster and promote nationally
owned and coordinated peacebuilding efforts.

conflict peacebuilding and for your concept note
(S/2010/167).

The role of the international community, in our
view, should be to ensure not only the principle of
national ownership but also national accountability to
the local population. While supporting transitional
governmental structures, the international community
should act as a guarantor of the emergence of truly
inclusive political processes. Civil society needs to be
supported and genuinely consulted. It goes without
saying — even though I am saying it — that women,
who make up more than half of the population, should
be fully included in all peacebuilding and political
processes from the beginning.

At the outset, let me echo the Secretary-General’s
assertion in his report last year on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict. The imperative of national
ownership and the anchoring of international
peacebuilding efforts at the country level cannot be
overemphasized.

When the going gets difficult, and it will, it is the
role of the international community to stay focused on
the goal of inclusive national ownership while
accepting necessary risks, including financial ones.
That is mutual accountability and partnership with a
society recovering from a conflict.
Coordination is another key pillar of mutual
accountability. Countries recovering from conflict have
to be able to expect a coordinated and supportive
approach from the international community. That
includes a more coordinated approach from the United
Nations intergovernmental bodies, better integration of
all relevant United Nations actors and improved
coordination between the United Nations and other
organizations, such as the international financial
institutions. That requires leadership that is able to cut
through turf battles. The Nordic countries encourage
the Secretary-General and the Security Council to
continue to demonstrate proactive leadership in their
efforts to achieve that.
Finally, as Member States, we must also look at
our own responsibilities. Coordination begins at home.
We need to speak with one voice at all levels and
pursue a consistent peacebuilding policy in the various
multilateral and bilateral settings. As contributors to
the broader peacebuilding architecture, we must
recommit to that agenda, including by promoting and
applying a whole-Government approach, however
difficult and challenging that may be.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on post-

20

Security is a key pillar of peacebuilding. It is
equally important to focus on building economic
opportunity, particularly for young people, along with
political and social stability. This requires a holistic
approach that is sensitive to the economic, social and
political milieu of the post-conflict situation. It is also
critical to ensure that there is a real stake for the
country involved in the peacebuilding efforts. It also
means that, even in cases where it is difficult to locate
national ownership, international peacebuilding efforts
are geared towards strengthening the capacity of a
post-conflict State to govern effectively and to govern
well. Capacity-building also assumes importance
especially in instances where countries find it difficult
to completely utilize the financial assistance with
which they have been provided.
My delegation is therefore of the view that the
international
community,
acting
through
the
instrumentality of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), must always strive to ensure that there is
effective two-way dialogue between countries on the
agenda of the PBC and the Commission itself through
all stages.
Another key issue is that of financing. Let us be
clear and acknowledge the fact that the lack of funding
continues to be a major impediment to the success of
peacebuilding initiatives. It goes without saying that
other elements — such as human resources, technical
assistance, managerial assistance, assistance in kind
and other programmes of assistance through the
provision of appropriate technologies — are also
important.
Given the sensitive nature of such peacebuilding
tasks as security sector reform and development
administration, there must be a high degree of
coordination within the United Nations system. Work
in the country-specific configurations has been a
positive dimension. In particular, the Council would do
well to really consult major troop- and policecontributing countries, both individually and through

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

the instrumentality of the PBC, while formulating and
revising the mandates of United Nations missions.
India has shared its unique nation-building
experience and expertise with a number of countries
transiting from conflict to peace. We are very happy to
continue to make available our capabilities in nationbuilding to countries in post-conflict situations and to
cooperate with the United Nations in its various
peacebuilding activities.
Ever since the creation of the PBC in December
2005, India has actively participated in its work as a
member of its Organizational Committee and by
contributing to the resources of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). We will continue this active association with
the PBC and the PBF with a view to enabling those
institutions to fulfil in their entirety the tasks assigned
to them by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Further, we are of the view that the Fund
should act as a catalyst for good governance. In this
regard, we note with approval the creation of the
Senior Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, in fulfilment of the agenda for
action outlined by the Secretary-General in his 2009
report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.
We need to be cognizant that peacebuilding is
still a concept in its infancy and is continuously
evolving. The international community has taken on
board the idea of peacebuilding to fulfil the important
need of handling post-conflict situations. It is therefore
imperative that we ensure that peacebuilding and the
institutions
that
constitute
the
peacebuilding
architecture are successful.
The President: I give the
representative of Solomon Islands.

floor

to

the

Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to acknowledge your country’s
initiative in convening this open debate on the topic
“Post-conflict
peacebuilding:
comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy to prevent the recurrence of
conflict”.
I contribute to the discussions as the
representative of a country emerging from conflict and
as a current recipient State under a Pacific
peacebuilding model, led by Australia and strongly
supported by New Zealand, together with the
participation of the 14 other Pacific small island
developing States. My country receives assistance

10-31773

under the regional arrangement known as the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
The six-year old regional Mission is composed of
military, police and civilian personnel. The relationship
and partnership have generated a tsunami of valuable
lessons that I hope will garner the interest of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and this Council.
The Pacific model is provided for under Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter under the
subheading “Regional arrangements”. It is my wish
and hope that we can draw on other peacebuilding
experiences and take a fresh look at other models that
will enrich today’s debate.
I am mindful that our United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission has a narrow agenda that
focuses only on four countries. The question remains:
What happens to other countries emerging from
conflict? Who deals with them, if not the PBC?
In sharing my country’s experience, let me give
the Council some brief information on my country.
Solomon Islands has a population of more than half a
million people, speaking some 87 different languages.
More than 85 per cent of the population is located in
the rural areas. Back in late 1998, ethnic tension
erupted, leading to a two-year conflict between two
ethnic groups that brought the country to its knees and
saw law and order take an ugly turn. RAMSI entered
the country in 2003 at the invitation of the Government
of Solomon Islands, and today continues to play a
supporting role in rebuilding the country.
For many countries ravaged by wars,
peacebuilding is about security, development and
nation-building. Security is a priority in all early
phases of peacemaking, and remains so within a
changing environment. Sufficient investment must be
made within the development sector if true peace is to
be attained. This means that the PBC must understand
the environment in which it is operating, be flexible in
its approach in order to adapt to the changing
environment and, most important, anticipate change in
any form of crisis, be it climate change, energy, food or
financial. Any of these crises will shock national
systems and exacerbate the problems therein.
Security, human rights and the rule of law
naturally follow the lead of development. The
argument is that we cannot guarantee security or
human rights to populations until they are provided
with economic opportunities and become active

21

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

participants in the economy; otherwise, any peace gain
will remain fragile and unpredictable.
On security sector reform, if any peacebuilding
mechanism is to succeed, it is important that
confidence in the State institutions be restored. This
means allowing the State to lead in all initiatives and
providing it with the necessary tools and equipment.
The United Nations can build confidence in State
institutions by providing space for locally trained
police forces to participate in the Organization’s
missions. This would be tantamount to a
pronouncement and announcement by the international
community that public trust in new State security
institutions has been restored.
On Governance, more attention also must be paid
to provincial and community governance structures. In
many peacebuilding initiatives, the focus remains on
State institutions within the capital. The paucity of
investment in the other arms of Government outside
capitals have hampered States in their efforts to carry
out their core functions on behalf of their scattered
populations.
Many of the governance systems adopted by
developing countries do not always recognize
traditional and customary laws in a specific way. At
times, modern legislation clashes with traditional
mechanisms. These are issues that should not be
allowed to fester and grow.
One area I wish to bring to the Council’s
attention, and that is not covered in the concept paper
before the Council (S/2010/167), is that of partnership
between the PBC and the receiving State and the
management of that relationship. Solomon Islands
enjoys stability under the RAMSI partnership.
However, sporadic flare-ups on the law and order front
have allowed Solomon Islands and RAMSI to fine-tune
their cooperation in containing emerging national
security problems. The partnership framework,
previously referred to by New Zealand, provides for
dynamic and robust cooperation between the two
parties.
There must be a smart partnership between the
PBC and the receiving State — a partnership that is
about increasing the State’s system-wide capacity with
skills and support to improve its delivery of services to
its populations; that addresses the underlying causes of
conflict; and that avoids ad hoc coordination assistance
outside the Government machinery and an unbalanced

22

assistance that further undermines the State, making
the support unsustainable in the long run and turning
State actors into spectators.
My final point concerns international efforts. Any
country emerging from conflict must be able to create
funds from within the State. In the Solomon Islands,
this can be done with investment in selected areas,
such as energy, which accounts for a third of its
national budget, and agriculture, mainly in rice. This
will free up millions of dollars in allowing the country
to ensure that much of its peacebuilding programme is
sustainable.
Let me close, Sir, by once again thanking you for
this opportunity. I also take this opportunity to thank
my Pacific colleagues — in particular Australia, New
Zealand and my colleagues from the Pacific small
island developing States — for their support to the
Solomon Islands via the Regional Assistance Mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation welcomes your initiative,
Sir, to convene this open debate of the Security
Council on post-conflict peacebuilding, in particular
during this year, 2010, when we will review the
progress made by and challenges facing the
Peacebuilding Commission five years after its creation.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his ongoing
support for peacebuilding efforts through the
Peacebuilding Support Office and his leadership at the
head of the Peacebuilding Fund.
El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to the
objectives and goals of the Peacebuilding Commission,
given the Commission’s significant contribution in
support of the efforts of countries emerging from
conflicts, in particular those now on the Commission’s
agenda.
It is also worth noting the importance of the
valuable lessons learned that we have been able to
identify collectively within the framework of the
Commission’s Working Group on Lessons Learned,
which El Salvador was honoured to chair for three
years. These lessons must serve us in all peacebuilding
processes being carried out in countries on the agenda
of the Commission, as well as in others.
We are aware that each conflict has its own
specificities. The Commission must therefore make an

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

even greater effort to promote a comprehensive
approach that devotes special attention to these
particular characteristics and also takes into account
the priorities agreed upon by domestic actors and
national ownership. In this regard, my delegation
wishes to reiterate the need to continue to involve all
relevant bodies of the United Nations system in the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, including the
Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies,
in particular the agencies, funds and programmes that,
let us not forget, are carrying out operational activities
for development in the field.
The country-specific configurations continue to
play a special role in the activities of the Commission.
In this regard, the effectiveness of their work is
essential if we wish to achieve the goals and objectives
that the Peacebuilding Commission has set for itself.
We also recall the importance of strengthening
coordination and cooperation among the various
national and international actors in the field and here at
Headquarters, in order to ensure that the synergies that
emerge between the two can make an effective
contribution to Governments’ national peacebuilding
efforts and do not become an obstacle to the process.
Moreover, in the view of my delegation, the time
is ripe for us to give further thought to the nature,
scope and time frame in which the comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy is to be carried out. While this
tool was provided for in the founding resolutions of the
Commission, practice has demonstrated that we need to
show some flexibility during the design and
implementation phase so that it does not become an
obstacle to the peacebuilding process. Furthermore, it
is important for the Commission to seriously consider
those elements or conditions that must be observed in
the deployment of an exit strategy. The Commission’s
work in a given country cannot last indefinitely. The
successful experience of El Salvador is proof of that.
The Security Council undoubtedly has an
important role to play in supporting the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Therefore, we believe it
appropriate
to
strengthen
the
channels
of
communication and exchange of views between this
organ, the country-specific configurations and, in a
broader context, the Commission’s Organizational
Committee.
In the view of El Salvador, the Security Council,
acting in coordination with the General Assembly, can

10-31773

provide a genuinely strategic, more in-depth vision for
the Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, the
existing ties between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations can be strengthened. This relationship must
also be reflected in greater cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Support Office in order to maximalize
the vision, the follow-up and, of course, resources. We
also believe it important to strengthen synergies and
coherence between the strategies of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, and to
redouble in turn the cooperative efforts between the
Commission and relevant regional bodies.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the conviction of
the Government of El Salvador that the new
peacebuilding architecture is a very valuable tool for
the international community to the extent that it will
enable us to meet the challenges facing countries
emerging from conflict. That will benefit peacekeeping
and security worldwide, as well as peoples that, like
ours, have undertaken efforts to build lasting peace.
The President: I call on the representative of Sri
Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
appreciates the initiative of the Japanese presidency in
organizing this important debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is a most timely initiative. I also wish
to extend, on behalf of my delegation, our warmest
greetings to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan
and the other Ministers who are with us here today for
this important meeting.
Sri Lanka associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The United Nations, as we all know, was
established in the hope that it would contribute to the
collective effort to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. We can all take pride in the fact
that, in the 65 years since then, the world as a whole
has not been at war. However, in the same period,
intra-State and inter-State conflicts have become
widespread. Therefore, our collective efforts to bring
conflicts to an end and to prevent the recurrence of
conflicts in post-conflict contexts cannot cease.
The Peacebuilding Commission was conceived
with an awareness of the characteristics of successful
peacebuilding efforts. We must nevertheless not ignore

23

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

the lessons of the other home-grown strategies that
countries have successfully implemented to achieve
and consolidate peace. There are many instances in
which strategies developed on the basis of national
experience have succeeded much better than those
prescribed in hallowed academic institutions. We must
accept that all peacebuilding efforts are unique, as the
nature and context of individual conflicts are different.
There must be no one-size-fits-all principle applied in
supporting the specific situation of any given country.
Any tendency to impose predetermined solutions for
achieving peace and reconciliation must be resisted,
however much we are attached to them.
We recognize that the international community
has a responsibility to ensure that post-conflict
situations do not relapse into conflict and to encourage
and facilitate national efforts to achieve lasting peace.
We need to listen to national Governments and
communities, which understand better what a country’s
and a people’s priorities are. Peacebuilding must
squarely be a nationally owned process, and peace
must come from within and not from the outside. Our
own experience has shown that some in the
international community expect benchmarks to be
achieved according to artificial timelines and feel that
external pressure could help speed up a process,
disregarding complex domestic sensitivities and
ground realities. Quite often, the progress made is
ignored when it is not consistent with external
prescriptions, and there is a constant focus only on
what remains to be achieved. This approach has
resulted quite often in the rejection of external
interference and confusion in the domestic processes,
thereby weakening the influence of the international
community.
In many situations, time can heal many wounds,
provided it is augmented by necessary confidencebuilding measures. Quite often, a great deal of
emphasis is placed on political reconciliation alone,
without
the
realization
that
the
economic
empowerment of people needs to be given equal
priority. Poverty, unemployment, unequal opportunities
and an ensuing sense of grievance have often led to the
radicalization of communities and provided the base of
support for armed conflict. Whilst these social issues
may manifest themselves as ethno-national or religious
conflicts, the core grievance may very possibly be a
sense of marginalization, especially economic.

24

Peacebuilding is a multidimensional task that
requires a comprehensive approach. The immediate
needs of people in post-conflict societies include
rehabilitation, resettlement, basic services, safety and
security, the rebuilding of basic infrastructure,
economic opportunities through employment and the
regaining of lost livelihoods. Unless economic
opportunities are provided, no amount of political
facilitation or punitive measures will bring peace. One
classic definition of peace is the normalization of the
life of the people. No peacebuilding can be successful
without winning the hearts and minds of the people.
Economic recovery must take place in parallel with the
strengthening of democratic processes, the rule of law
and human rights. The international community has a
significant role to play in assisting with the economic
recovery phase in post-conflict scenarios.
Considerable focus needs to be placed on healing
the wounds and achieving reconciliation among
peoples in countries where conflicts have divided
communities for decades. Those who shout from the
rooftops for justice or revenge against the alleged
perpetrators of crimes come from a certain sociocultural milieu where revenge is seen as a healer. In
our part of the world, a culture going back millennia
dictates that mercy must be shown by the victor.
Mercy, forgiveness and a need to come to terms with
the past, however bitter it may have been, on a morally
acceptable basis, in order to advance the cause of
reconciliation and long-term stability are key to our
cultural experience. As the Bard so aptly wrote of the
quality of mercy “is twice blest. It blesseth him that
gives and him that takes”. Forgiveness, rather than
punishment and revenge, is the major influence in our
context. Therefore, we need to recognize the different
approaches to addressing the ways conflicts last and
can be resolved, and once again agree that there is no
one-size-fits-all formula.
Our own experience has shown us that we must
allow democratic processes to be established for the
people to elect their leaders and to allow the people
who have lived through years of conflict to come
forward and take the initiative in rebuilding their
communities and deciding their political future, rather
than having solutions based on a judgmental
assessment of their aspirations imposed upon them.
Those who have been through long-running conflicts
often take a very different approach to how they would
want to shape their future, and, very often, old ideas

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

that gave rise to the conflicts in the first place no
longer remain a priority for these communities.
Therefore, political solutions in post-conflict societies,
in our experience, should not precede the firm
establishment of democratic processes and proper
consultation.

The goal of attaining sustainable peace is not an
event, but a process requiring the sustained attention of
the international community. To be sustainable,
peacebuilding processes should aim at deepening the
culture of peace, democracy and respect for the rule of
law, justice, human rights and international legality.

Post-conflict
peacebuilding
also
requires
considerable financial resources, and, in many
countries emerging from conflict, one of the major
challenges is finding the resources to consolidate
peace. Very often, support from the donor community
is conditional upon our accepting its formulas for
peacebuilding. We believe that the Peacebuilding Fund
could be a channel through which national processes
can be supported on their own merits.

The PBC is a conflict-prevention mechanism to
the extent that it is mandated to mobilize resources and
seek the support of the international community to
prevent post-conflict countries from suffering relapses.
Thus, in the course of the ongoing review exercise,
attention should be given to the need to strengthen the
PBC as an early warning mechanism, relying on
lessons learned not only for the benefit of countries on
its agenda that stand the risk of relapsing into violent
conflicts, but also for pre-conflict countries.

We hope that our candid views on post-conflict
peace building strategies based on our own experience
may contribute to the ongoing dialogue on how best to
sustain and achieve durable peace. Sri Lanka fully
supports the major review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture being conducted under the
auspices of the General Assembly, and we hope this
debate may contribute to that review.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): On behalf of the
delegation of Ghana, I wish to congratulate Japan on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April and on having organized this debate. I
also congratulate Gabon on having ably presided over
the affairs of the Council in March. We appreciate the
statement made by the Secretary-General this morning.
When, in April 2005, the Governments of Ghana
and Denmark jointly organized a workshop on
peacebuilding in Accra to mobilize support for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), many participants had no doubt in their minds
that peacebuilding pre-dated the PBC. Nonetheless,
they were quite convinced that the notion of
peacebuilding — as variously articulated in the reports
of the Secretary-General entitled “An Agenda for
Peace” (S/24111) and “In Larger Freedom”
(A/59/2005) — was that it should enable the United
Nations to add value by filling an institutional gap and
ensuring that peacebuilding efforts became sustainable
and effective. In the ongoing review exercise, the
added value of the PBC must be kept in mind.

10-31773

This perspective may be better appreciated when
one considers that, in some cases, the international
community has failed to respond in a timely manner
when danger has loomed in some countries in postconflict situations, as the peace they had once enjoyed
was taken for granted. The PBC should be able to
advise the Security Council on situations on the
Council’s agenda, taking advantage of the lessons
learned in cases where there is credible information
pointing to the possibility of a violent conflict
occurring while giving due deference to national
sensitivities. In doing so, the PBC would fulfil the
objective of filling an institutional gap within the
conflict-prevention apparatus of the United Nations in
a more holistic and comprehensive manner.
The PBC must pay equal, if not more, attention to
the need to mobilize not only the international
community but also national stakeholders for
sustainable peace, as a nation cannot have peace
without the active engagement of its homegrown
peacebuilders. Thus, although Ghana is not a country
in a post-conflict situation, it is now implementing a
peacebuilding framework, the National Architecture for
Peace in Ghana. The broad policy objective is to
facilitate the development of mechanisms for
cooperation among all the relevant stakeholders in
peacebuilding in Ghana by institutionalizing responses
to conflicts aimed at achieving social, political and
religious reconciliation and transformative dialogues.
The National Architecture also includes the
introduction of the culture of peace into the curriculum
of schools in Ghana and building the capacity of
national and local institutions to manage grievances in

25

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

a democratic environment anchored in the rule of law
and access to justice. A key component of this
architecture is the promotion of free and independent
media to create a space for public debates on issues
before the nation in a manner that allows all voices to
be heard without fear.
The National Architecture for Peace in Ghana
obviously takes inspiration from the national
Constitution, which provides for an independent
judiciary, an independent media free from all
governmental control, and an independent electoral
commission, as well as the directive principles of State
policy, which call for equitable national development
and social inclusiveness and non-discrimination.
Education should play a key role in almost all the
national dimensions of peacebuilding identified in the
concept paper for this debate (S/2010/167), whether
they be security sector reform, the reintegration of
soldiers, alleviating poverty and unemployment,
avoiding discrimination against women or ensuring
gender balance. For example, a society cannot
effectively integrate its former child soldiers or help
them to obtain decent jobs without first giving them
books instead of bullets. High unemployment among
women and girls can be mitigated by ending
discrimination against women in many societies in the
areas of access to education and social life. In
recognition of the value of education, Ghana’s national
Constitution provides for free, compulsory universal
basic education targeting girls and boys in equal
measure. To this end, Ghana welcomes the efforts by
the PBC and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon aimed at
mainstreaming women in peacebuilding.
Ghana also welcomes the emphasis placed on
national ownership. In the context of ensuring
sustainable peace in post-conflict countries, the
principle of respect for national ownership or
sovereignty should accommodate the principle of
solidarity. Ghana will therefore urge the PBC to
continue to explore appropriate strategies to engage
regional and subregional organizations in order to
enhance coordination and coherence through an
integrated approach to the delivery of their respective
peacebuilding mandates, in collaboration with civil
society and donors.
The promotion of coordination and cooperation
among various stakeholders interested in assisting
countries on the PBC agenda will help minimize or

26

avoid situations in which national authorities are
compelled to choose between conflicting priorities that
might be set by competing stakeholders in such a way
that competition to claim exclusive peacebuilding
credit becomes the enemy of cooperation.
Ghana acknowledges the efforts made by
successive Presidents of the PBC and Chairpersons of
the country-specific configurations to reach out to the
African Union (AU) in order to dialogue on
peacebuilding issues. However, more needs to be done
to achieve an effective triangulation of efforts among
the United Nations, the AU or the regional organization
concerned, and the countries on the PBC’s agenda in
order to more effectively deliver as one. It is the Ghana
delegation’s view that, to this end, the convening of a
joint session of the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council to review the peacebuilding strategy
for the countries on the PBC’s agenda would be a step
in the right direction.
In the area of capacity-building, the mere
existence of the Peacebuilding Commission should not
lead to a misleading assumption that the United
Nations is adequately equipped with the requisite range
of tools — be they human and material resources,
information or other — to carry out peacebuilding
tasks, let alone to assist countries on its agenda to
improve their capacity for post-conflict peace
consolidation. The test of any effective peacebuilding
capacity should be to pose the question “the capacity to
do what?” and to put in place the appropriate
monitoring or evaluation mechanisms to ensure the
effectiveness of capacity-building for peacebuilding.
The adoption of the African Union Framework
for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
speaks to the necessity to look at development in a
broad sense in terms of its contribution to peace
consolidation, thereby moving beyond the question,
often asked, of whether the PBC is designed to handle
development.
Moreover,
peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping should not be seen as mutually exclusive.
The question that must be addressed is how to employ
the entire available and legitimate range of tools and
resources in order to prevent a country in a postconflict situation from relapsing into violent conflict
and to ensure that it is in a position to achieve
sustainable peace, including by addressing the root
causes.

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

We hope that Ghana’s statement will contribute to
the search for ways to move the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Let me join others in commending your
delegation for convening this debate and for the
instructive concept note (S/2010/167) distributed to
facilitate this discussion. We are grateful for and
welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate,
and we thank the Secretary-General and all those who
have put forward recommendations that we believe will
greatly enhance our consideration of this issue.
Many post-conflict reconstruction efforts tend to
follow a common path, establishing a semblance of a
functioning administration, providing security and
economic recovery in order to create prosperity, and
empowering citizens to take ownership in democratic
governance. However, despite these similarities, we
should remember that each situation is unique to its
own specific historical context. Allow me therefore to
make the following points in contribution to this
debate.
To realize effective peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries, emphasis should be placed on national
ownership. Post-conflict needs are evident, and
peacebuilding plays a significant role in mitigating and
addressing those needs. As such, peacebuilding should
be given adequate and appropriate support in the form
of human and financial resources.
The creation of an effective and efficient
peacebuilding architecture is crucial to conducting and
operationalizing peacebuilding mandates. It is equally
important to have a mechanism for mutual
accountability that monitors the commitments of all
actors.
Post-conflict management should avoid leaving a
vacuum that could lead to a recurrence of violence. If
peacebuilding is to fill the gap, there must be effective
coordination among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Peacebuilding should involve the formulation
of an exit strategy and should avoid perpetual
dependency.

10-31773

We are encouraged by the leadership the German
delegation brings to the PBC and, in particular, by the
focused approach on those issues, which we believe
will make the Peacebuilding Commission perform
better.
In conclusion, if there is any lesson to be learned
from Rwanda’s reconstruction experience, it is that
there is a need to understand the root causes of conflict
and to address them, using universal values that
incorporate home-grown solutions.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António (spoke in French): Given the
lateness of the hour, I shall not read out my prepared
text but will instead sum up my ideas. First, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. This morning we carefully listened to the
statements of the Secretary-General, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ministers from Sierra Leone and TimorLeste, and of course, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.
We commend this innovative initiative. This
morning we had an opportunity not only to listen to
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, but we also heard about interesting
efforts, which could serve as lessons, from countries
that are not on the Commission’s agenda. I believe that
we will take those experiences into account when we
undertake the review exercise.
In speaking of the African Union I will limit
myself to reiterating comments made earlier by the
representative of Ghana. As the Council is aware, the
African Union has developed its Policy Framework on
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development aimed
at ensuring that countries do not relapse into conflict.
Above all, we have included the development aspect in
our approach. We have had the opportunity to address
the Council on the value of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations considering the
development aspect when addressing peacebuilding
issues. I believe that is a gap that we should not fear
addressing when reviewing the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The African Union has also incorporated the root
causes into its approach: we believe it is impossible to

27

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

build peace without addressing the root causes of
conflict. I think that too is a contribution that could
also be used in the United Nations approach to
peacebuilding.
The African Union Policy Framework is based on
certain principles such as national ownership, African
leadership, non-discrimination and, in particular,
inclusiveness. We know that partnerships are necessary
to achieve all the aims of peacebuilding. Thus we
propose the creation of an institutionalized partnership
between the multidimensional communities involved in
the African Union Policy Framework on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development on the one hand and
the Peacebuilding Commission on the other.
Steps have already been taken. The African Union
and the Peacebuilding Commission have already met,
and the Chair of the PBC visited Addis Ababa with a
large delegation. We must see how to transform our
discussions into reality. There was also a meeting with
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is an important element of the African Union’s peace
and security structure. Meetings between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council should be more than just pro
forma encounters. We must ensure that these meetings
lead to facts with a genuine impact on the partnership
we are building with the United Nations.
I think there are already lessons to be learned
from work on the ground. As the Council is aware, the
United Nations and the African Union are involved in
Darfur through the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I think there are lessons
being learned there that could also prove useful in the
review of the Peacebuilding Commission and in the
approach being developed by the United Nations.

Security Council have been addressing. We believe that
the expected outcome will not occur until defence and
security sector reform has occurred in that country. We
therefore need to encourage regional efforts — those of
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union — and also to encourage bilateral
cooperation: I think there are countries, even on the
African continent, that are interested in helping
Guinea-Bissau. Thus it is important to encourage such
bilateral cooperation.
There are other salient aspects in countries where
the Peacebuilding Commission is involved. I am
thinking, for example, of youth employment.
Numerous delegations have repeatedly addressed this
issue in the Security Council and in the Peacebuilding
Commission. We cannot build peace unless we build a
future for young people. Young people are the future,
and unless they have support and a future before them,
there is little point in talking about peacebuilding.
Of late, we have come before the Security
Council a number of times to discuss various aspects of
peacebuilding. We have spoken of exit strategies and of
post-conflict peacebuilding, which is what we are
discussing today. Perhaps we should now think about
how we are going to turn the results of all of these
discussions into reality and about how they will have
an impact on the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which we are in the process of reviewing.
We also listened with great interest to the
Secretary-General’s statement this morning, in
particular with regard to the establishment of an
advisory group to be led by Mr. Guéhenno, with whose
experience we are all familiar. It would be desirable for
that advisory group to work in close coordination with
the Peacebuilding Commission and all partners.

The representative of Ghana was very eloquent in
addressing the regional aspect. We need to truly
involve the regions in peacebuilding. Ghana proposed a
far more integrated approach for cooperation among
the United Nations, the African Union and the regional
organizations, and we fully support that approach.

Above all, we would like to emphasize the point
made about the need to listen to those who are
involved in peacebuilding on a daily basis, that is, the
people concerned. In that connection, we welcome the
initiative of the facilitators of the PBC review process
to go to Addis Ababa to speak to the Commission.

In practice, the African Union is currently
involved on the ground through its regional and other
offices and through its special envoys. We have
undertaken efforts in certain countries on the
Peacebuilding Commission agenda. There are
situations that are of concern, such as that in GuineaBissau, which the Peace and Security Council and the

We also know that South Africa — and I stand to
be corrected — is considering organizing a seminar
with non-governmental organizations and populations
on the ground who are suffering every day and who
know what it is to have peace or not. I think these are
the types of forums that we need to encourage in order
to move forward effectively in this effort.

28

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivali (Thailand): Thailand would like to
thank Japan for organizing this timely debate on postconflict peacebuilding and for its excellent and
comprehensive concept paper (S/2010/167). Thailand
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We wish to emphasize three aspects of
peacebuilding that we believe are crucial to its success.
The first is the need to foster national ownership,
which many delegations have mentioned. National
ownership must be accompanied by the strengthening
of national capacity. Indispensable to that idea is the
notion of nation-building — a process whereby all
stakeholders and their interests are integrated into a set
of shared goals, norms and values. In post-conflict
societies, that means that institutions of governance
and operational mechanisms will have to be developed
that not only conform to international standards, but
also reflect local needs and conditions.
Building a sense of national ownership therefore
goes beyond the simple transfer of administrative
power to local authorities. It also requires constant
recalibration and continuous dialogue between the
national Government and local constituents, including
civil society and minorities. It may also require
continued consultation and coordination with the
international community, at least in the initial stages.
The second is the participation of women and
youth. Since it is mostly men who are participants in
conflict, it is important to bring out the role of women
to help stabilize post-conflict environments. At the
same time, the element of unemployed and
undereducated youth is a potential risk factor that must
be addressed in order to prevent a society from
relapsing into conflict. The economic empowerment of
women and youth could help dampen the potential root
causes of conflict and encourage greater ownership in
the peacebuilding process. Programmes in such areas
as general education, literacy and vocational training
should therefore be given high priority in order to
ensure the sustainability of peace.
The third point that my delegation wishes to
emphasize is that the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustainable development should be
seamless. It can be difficult to pinpoint exactly where

10-31773

peacekeeping ends and peacebuilding begins. There
will inevitably be a period of overlap where
coordination among all parties involved is essential to
ensure the coherence of the process. We therefore
encourage close cooperation and consultation between
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and other United
Nations bodies, especially the Economic and Social
Council, as well as other United Nations agencies such
as the United Nations Development Programme and
UNICEF. The PBC should also draw upon experiences
and best practices in the United Nations system to
enhance peacebuilding activities. In addition, close
cooperation with international financial institutions and
private foundations can help to address financing gaps
and urgent needs, improve financing efficiency, avoid
the duplication of work and ensure coherence in
peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding is an enormously complex and
multifaceted task. As a member of the PBC
Organizational Committee, Thailand is committed to
continuing to work closely with our partners to further
improve and strengthen the Commission. We hope that
the 2010 PBC review will result in a more efficient,
flexible and adaptive approach to peacebuilding
challenges in post-conflict situations around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana is pleased
to see you, Sir, personally presiding over the business
of the Council today. We have no doubt that, under
your presidency, the Council will surpass all
expectations in the conduct of its work.
My delegation wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
promotion of post-conflict peacebuilding. In that
connection, we welcome your initiative, Mr. President,
to hold this Security Council open debate on the
subject. Let me also commend you for inviting the
eminent persons who were with us for the major part of
the morning and who are with us today, all of whom
have unrivalled knowledge and experience in the
subject matter of today’s debate.
We were also pleased and satisfied to take note of
the presence of the Secretary-General here this
morning, as well as the Ministers from Afghanistan,

29

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste. Their presence here
demonstrated the great importance of the subject
matter under discussions, as well as that of the issue of
comprehensive peacebuilding to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. Let me also recognize the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Germany, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, whom I wish to commend
for his effective stewardship of that body.
Botswana maintains that it is important to ensure
collaboration and synergy in the programmes and
activities of the various United Nations entities — such
as the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council — in the broad area of
peacebuilding and the management of conflict. This
open debate is a perfect example of such coordination
and collaboration.
We all agree that peace, safety and stability are
prerequisites for the achievement of sustainable
development. The causes of conflict, particularly in
Africa, include the absence of political tolerance,
democracy, good governance and the rule of law, as
well as the inequitable distribution of revenue earned
from natural resources within States. Botswana
therefore wishes to emphasize the significance of
supporting
the
democratization
process
and
institutional development as crucial measures for the
prevention of conflict and the laying of the foundation
for sustainable socio-economic development.
In order to leave a positive mark where
peacebuilding interventions are made, we must ensure
effective coordination between the United Nations,
host Governments, bilateral donors and civil society so
that the delivery of all well-intended international
assistance encourages national ownership and observes
strict procedures to minimize the unintended
sponsorship of conflict. Botswana also believes that
investing in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
physical infrastructure, as well as in social and
economic programmes, is a vital part of post-conflict
reconstruction.
Addressing the needs and challenges of such
vulnerable groups as youth, children, women, the
disabled and the injured should be an integral part of
effective peacebuilding. That is all the more significant
because those groups of victims usually play little or
no role at all in the incitement, planning and execution
of violent conflict, but suffer the most from its effects.
Peacebuilding initiatives should therefore be

30

accompanied by relief efforts and the provision of
infrastructure such as schools, water reticulation
systems, primary health care and related services, and
the revitalization of key economic sectors.
Botswana
believes
that
post-conflict
peacebuilding can succeed if we place a high premium
on the national ownership of not only actual
reconstruction activities, but also in determining the
development priorities for which international
assistance is being provided.
We are pleased, Mr. President, that you have
convened this open debate at a time when we are
preparing for the mandated review of the
Peacebuilding Commission this year. It is very
important that the ideas generated during this debate be
allowed to feed into the review process. In that regard,
Botswana supports the adoption of the draft
presidential statement at the end of this open debate.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana’s commitment to the realization of global
peace and security as a prerequisite to development,
dignified human existence, effective governance and
the pursuit of prosperity. We cannot overemphasize the
need for cooperation at the regional, bilateral and
international levels, as well as cooperation among the
various United Nations entities, in order to attain longterm peace, stability and development through
processes accepted by all at the strategic, operational
and institutional levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to commend the delegation of Japan for
having convened this open debate, whose intrinsic
importance was underscored by the presence this
morning of important officials. Who better than the
representatives of the countries that have experienced
such a crucial transitional phase and achieved positive
results to illustrate for us — through their experiences,
mistakes and successes – that each case is different and
to remind us that we cannot effectively apply a single
approach to differing situations?
Peacebuilding is a complex long- and mediumterm process that encompasses a broad range of tasks
and stakeholders that require coordination and
coherence. The United Nations is certainly just one of
the actors involved. In many cases, it is not the most

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

relevant one — at least when it comes to financial
contributions, which are a crucial element in such a
critical phase. Nevertheless, due to the unique
legitimacy derived from its universally representative
character, it is of course the United Nations that is
expected to play a central role in mobilizing and
coordinating support to countries emerging from
conflict.
Nevertheless,
given
that
peacebuilding
encompasses a considerable range of thematic issues
and owing to the very structure of the Organization,
when it comes to making that concept a reality,
significant challenges arise within the United Nations
system in the areas of leadership, coordination and the
definition of responsibilities, which we need to
address. The establishment of a body specifically
mandated to take up this issue should have helped, in
large measure, to resolve this problem. However, in
spite of the substantial contribution made by the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) since its inception,
in particular in countries on its agenda, its place within
the Organization and the support resources at its
disposal are insufficient to maximize its potential.
In that regard, although there seems to be a
certain degree of consensus as to the need to strengthen
the PBC, we also have the impression that, in the
context of the difficult review process currently under
way, substantive differences exist as to its role and
structure. To that end, we could focus on making
timely and viable changes that strengthen the PBC and,
above all, try to increase its added value on the ground.
We have trust in the leadership of the Chair of the
Organizational Committee, as well as in the work of
the facilitators, to achieve a positive outcome to the
current review process.
Along with its legitimacy, the United Nations has
a comparative advantage in helping affected countries
to define comprehensive and integrated peacebuilding
strategies, which are crucial to ensuring sustainable
peace and development. In that regard, as we have said
on other occasions, there can hardly be sustainable
peace in countries emerging from armed conflict if the
causes of those conflicts are not addressed.
Security sector reform is another extremely
important thematic area in which the United Nations
can bring relevant added value. In this as in other
areas, it is essential to enjoy abundant and flexible
financial and human resources. In that connection, we

10-31773

should keep especially in mind the comparative
advantage of civilian experts from developing
countries. That will require the expanded use of SouthSouth and triangular cooperation mechanisms. We
should also make maximal use of the presence of Blue
Helmets in carrying out peacebuilding tasks.
It is indisputable that there can be no
development without security. However, security alone
is not enough to sustainably consolidate stability and
peace. Any peacebuilding strategy should therefore
include elements that serve to promote social and
economic development.
Although when we talk about strategies we tend
to think about the medium and long terms, it is
essential that we keep in mind the immediate and
short-term dimensions in the aftermath of a conflict so
as to produce tangible results – such as the restoration
of basic services – at the onset of peace processes. In
doing so, in addition to appreciating the inherent
benefits of peace, the parties would see the desirability
of having launched such a process. That would also
serve to generate trust among the parties involved.
In conclusion, with regard to the guiding
principles of peacebuilding efforts, allow me to point
out that it can indeed seem nearly impossible to find
broad consensus in the formulation of an agreed
national strategy in politically and ethnically divided
societies that have just torn themselves apart. The
principle of national ownership can also appear to be
an empty concept in devastated countries with limited
institutional capacity. Nevertheless, it is the best way
to proceed not just because it is the most correct
politically, but because it avoids sowing the seeds of
discord and resurgent conflict. It is the way to promote
sustainable peace.
Therefore, above and beyond the existing
differences in each situation, when the international
community finds in a given country emerging from
conflict leadership that is clear, conciliatory and able to
achieve political stability and national reconciliation, it
should not squander the opportunity to decisively and
sustainably promote its efforts to consolidate peace and
to promote economic and social development. The
examples we have heard today speak to that. The
counter-weight would be a transparent and reciprocal
mechanism of accountability among all stakeholders
involved.

31

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momem (Bangladesh): My delegation
commends the Japanese presidency for having
organized this timely debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. I thank the Secretary-General for his
comments earlier in the day. I also thank the Ministers
of Japan, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who participated in the
debate today.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
The General Assembly is the main deliberative
body of the United Nations, composed of
representatives of all Member States, and is entrusted
with the responsibility of addressing important
questions relating to peace and security, among other
significant matters. The Non-Aligned Movement
hereby reiterates the crucial relevance of the General
Assembly, while having regard for the powers and
responsibilities of other organs in the fulfilment of
their respective obligations.
This debate takes place against the backdrop of a
major review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which is being conducted under the
auspices of the General Assembly, as stipulated in
resolution 60/180. The Movement seeks to reassure
itself that the discussion in this Council is aimed at
augmenting the efforts for a successful completion of
that process.
It is the view of NAM that the potential inherent
in the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as an advisory
body is far from being fully utilized. We should engage
ourselves in defining how the PBC can capitalize on its
current composition, in accordance with operative
paragraph 4 of resolution 60/180, so as to draw on the
competitive advantages and expertise of the diverse
representation of the general membership in the
Organizational
Committee,
in
particular
the
representation of the United Nations Charter bodies.
The Non-Aligned Movement places significant
value on the PBC, particularly its role in support of the
national ownership — I repeat, national ownership —
of post-conflict peacebuilding priority planning and
initiatives. There is concurrence and broad consensus
within the Commission that economic reconstruction
and rehabilitation and job creation should be at the

32

forefront of all efforts aimed at sustaining peace,
initiating development and promoting post-conflict
recovery.
Like any new and fledgling apparatus, the PBC
has experienced difficulties in accomplishing its given
mandate. Despite many challenges, the PBC has made
good progress in addressing the challenges of the four
countries on its agenda. I would like to highlight the
following important issues that my group believes need
to be addressed to strengthen the ability of the PBC to
contribute actively to the efforts for post-conflict
peacebuilding.
First, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council should fully
utilize the ongoing 2010 review to realize the potential
inherent in the PBC as an advisory body to achieve its
ultimate goal of preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict.
Secondly, NAM highlights the need to clearly
define how the PBC can ensure a successful
peacebuilding strategy through a better coordination
among all actors — including the international
financial institutions, the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, the private sector and civil
society organizations that are operating on the
ground — in order to maximize synergies in the
peacebuilding process. In this regard, NAM stresses
that, in crafting peacekeeping mandates, the Council
should clearly define the role of peacekeeping
operations in the peacebuilding process.
Thirdly, NAM strongly emphasizes the
importance of partnerships and early investments to
economic recovery and development in the
peacebuilding process and in the sustenance of peace.
The international community must ensure from the
very beginning a coherent and predictable deployment
of resources in countries emerging from conflict. NAM
stresses that that there can be no lasting peace without
development, and no sustainable development without
stability.
Fourthly, NAM reiterates that it is of the utmost
importance that the gender perspective be reflected as
an essential element in the peacebuilding process.
Fifthly, the PBC should continue to work in
cooperation with national or transitional authorities in
full conformity with the principle of national
ownership.

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

Finally, the PBC needs to develop a more
dynamic relationship with the Secretary-General with a
view to providing effective guidance to the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations. In this
respect, it is imperative to strengthen the capacity of
the Peacebuilding Support Office with a view to
promoting more integrated and strategic United
Nations responses in post-conflict countries, keeping in
mind the need for better support to peacebuilding
activities on the ground.
Looking ahead, the Non-Aligned Movement is
convinced that the upcoming debate in the review
process will undoubtedly contribute to strengthening
the PBC in addressing critical peacebuilding needs.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the debate in
this Council will, of course, add value in gaining
further momentum for the subsequent discussions on
the 2010 review of the PBC now taking place in the
General Assembly.
In closing, we should not lose sight of the urgent
need to provide necessary support to the PBC with a
view to fulfilling its mandate. A failure to do so will
cast shadows in the minds of those who need our
attention the most — the people who are suffering from
the curse of conflict. We cannot and should not bypass,
in the name of the scale and complexity of
peacebuilding needs, the critical role that the PBC can
play in bringing lasting peace and sustainable
development to post-conflict countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I commend you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Japan for
convening this important meeting of the Security
Council. I would also commend the statement just
delivered by our colleague, the Ambassador of
Bangladesh.
This statement is in large part a reflection of our
recent tragic experiences in the Bougainville conflict.
But more importantly, in the context of this debate, the
resolution of the Bougainville conflict under the
auspices of the United Nations, this Council and our
regional partners stands as a testament to a number of
the core issues that this debate is centred upon.
We fully agree that we have to consider — as
you, Sir, have rightly noted in your concept paper — “a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy to prevent the

10-31773

recurrence of conflict” (S/2010/167, annex) and that
the Security Council should “conduct a comprehensive
policy review on an effective peacebuilding strategy”
(ibid., para. 1).
On 16 June 2005, this Council wound up its
seven-year mandate to oversee the resolution of the
10-year bloody civil conflict that had raged on the
island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Sadly
and, indeed horribly, it is estimated that between
10,000 and 15,000 people — and maybe more —
including women and children and touching all Papua
New Guineans, lost their lives in what could have been
an avoidable national tragedy.
A few months prior to the end of the mandate,
between 20 May and 9 June 2005, the first general
elections for President and members of the House of
Representatives were successfully completed, resulting
in the establishment of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government. That historic election was made possible
under the agreed constitutional arrangements between
the Government of Papua New Guinea and the leaders
of Bougainville — a process that was critical to
securing the lasting peace that continues to prevail
today.
Contextually, the amending of our national
Constitution was a testament to the notion that,
ultimately, any peace process has to be nationally
owned and driven. That a nation saw fit to amend its
supreme law to facilitate a peace process remains a key
factor in how the Bougainville peace process has been
sustained. I am also pleased to report that the second
general elections are currently under way, with the
results to be finalized in June.
The United Nations, through the Security Council
and its agencies, especially the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNICEF, played pivotal roles in ensuring the
continuing success of the peacebuilding process. Our
neighbouring countries in the Pacific region — namely,
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga and your own
country, Mr. President, Japan — along with our
regional agencies also participated in that process, at
different levels and in different ways, thereby
contributing to the continuing success of the
peacebuilding process. This strongly underlines the
view — and it is also our view — that any successful
peace process must always have a strong element of
partnership.

33

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

In our view, along with the idea of partnerships,
there is a need for stronger application of the
provisions of Article 52 of the Charter, whose
paragraph 1 provides for
“regional arrangements ... for dealing with such
matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action provided that such
arrangements or agencies and their activities are
consistent with the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations”.
Paragraph 3 of the same Article also states that
the Security Council should “encourage the
development of pacific settlement of ... disputes
through such regional arrangements”. We would make
the observation that, of course, article 52 does not
impair the provisions of Articles 34 and 35 of the
Charter.
Your delegation’s reference in its concept paper,
Mr. President, to the need to ensure social stability
along with political stability is critical, important and
timely. There can be no peace unless there is peace
among the population. The need to reinforce civilian
capacities is therefore critical. Added to that is the need
to empower women and, especially, youth. In the case
of the latter, reintegration issues are critical if longterm peace is to be sustained. A peace dividend can
only be realized if there is a concerted effort on the
part of all parties concerned.
In conclusion, the Bougainville conflict, its
resolution and the current peacebuilding process do not
loom large in the global context. However, we believe
that the United Nations and the Security Council
should, in their attempt to review their comprehensive
policy on an effective peacebuilding strategy, look to
the Bougainville peace process in order to understand
some of the dynamics that continue to contribute to the
continuing success of that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr.
Nazarian
(Armenia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate on
peacebuilding-related issues. We also wish join
previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, in your capacity
as former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for your active involvement in addressing this
important subject. We greatly value the presence of the

34

Foreign Minister of Japan and other Ministers here
today. We strongly support their statements.
Armenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union. However, we
would like to make some remarks in our national
capacity.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding signifies the
importance that the international community attaches
to that issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict through the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development. It is also an
acknowledgement of the Council’s responsibility to
fulfil the commitments undertaken to support countries
that have emerged from conflict.
We share the views expressed by Council
members and other speakers calling for more
systematic attention to post-conflict peacebuilding,
which we believe should be frequently reflected in the
deliberations of the Security Council. We also believe
that increased cooperation and the distribution of roles
among the United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions and regional organizations are essential.
Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Security Council
should further strengthen the rule of law and advance
development initiatives by supporting peacebuilding
mechanisms, such as the PBC, that help countries
emerging from conflict in their recovery, reintegration
and reconstruction efforts aimed at creating the
foundations for sustainable peace and development. In
that respect, it is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and targetoriented to ensure continued support from the people
affected and to safeguard their success.
It is noteworthy that the PBC has shouldered for
United Nations peacekeeping the important task of
defining post-conflict strategies. We are encouraged
that previous reports indicate that it has achieved
certain satisfactory results in some countries.
Conflicts in the South Caucasus have defied
peaceful accommodation, let alone resolution, for more
than two decades. Wars have been fought, people
displaced, law and order disrupted and economies
shattered and paralysed. Yet, we have not fully
employed an essential resource that could bring us

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

closer to peace: sustainable economic development.
That could create regional opportunities for trade,
investment and jobs and lead to engagement and
solutions on the political front.
One might question the value of embarking on
such an effort in post-conflict situations where
negotiations among the parties are ongoing. However,
international experience shows that economic
cooperation and interaction can be a valuable
confidence-building measure that often leads to
political cohesion. Examples can be found in Western
and Eastern Europe and, increasingly, in Asia.
With a view to achieving greater coherence in the
region and expanding the geographical area for
cooperation, the South Caucasus needs various
regional initiatives and programmes sponsored by
donor countries and organizations to be implemented.
In addition, international financial institutions and
private-sector contributions should play a decisive role
in moving towards that end.
The region desperately awaits leadership from the
global investment community. The ultimate task here is
to translate that vision into working realities that
emphasize the future instead of focusing on the painful
past. The post-conflict period in the region provides a
window of opportunity for providing basic security,
delivering peace dividends, building confidence in the
political process and strengthening core national
ownership to lead peacebuilding efforts and lay the
foundations for sustainable development.
The successful implementation of that agenda
requires a basic level of political will and
determination on the part of national and regional
actors as preconditions for peacebuilding. With those
political conditions in place, the ability of the United
Nations or any other organization or intergovernmental
or regional actor will be enhanced and supported.
Armenia therefore welcomes the Japanese initiative to
hold this open debate. This is an opportunity to recap
and reflect on our past experiences in dealing with the
issue of post-conflict peacebuilding and to highlight
priority aspects for united practical actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I wish to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open

10-31773

debate on the
peacebuilding.

important

issue

of

post-conflict

My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made by the representative of Bangladesh on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and their
architecture are works in progress at the United
Nations. Peacebuilding is a multidimensional approach
to preventing war-torn countries from relapsing into a
cycle of conflict. It has the important role of
interposing itself amid security and normal
development activities by nurturing an environment
conducive to moving them onto the path of sustainable
security, peace and socio-economic transformation. It
therefore naturally encompasses diplomatic, security
and economic efforts. We must not lose sight of that
fundamental reality.
There is no doubt that security and development
reinforce each other. There has to be a delicate balance
between the two, so as to effectively lead a country
towards the post-conflict phase. To achieve and sustain
that, we should promote a coherent approach right
from the beginning, with a view to ensuring national
ownership of the whole process, by building capacity,
dealing with immediate security challenges and
promoting stabilizing activities through quick delivery
of services and substantially ramped up development
efforts.
We are all aware of the fragility of the
transitional situation. Hence, the restoration of a
modicum of security should immediately be followed
by the simultaneous promotion of the political process,
the consolidation of security and the effective
promotion of employment-generating economic
activities in order to instil hope in the minds of people.
No other measure can surpass the positive effect of the
early distribution of a peace dividend to the general
public in generating hope and confidence for
reconstruction and recovery. Very often, the cause of
conflict has to do with deprivation. Therefore, ensuring
effective and quick development works even in a
minimum environment of security would be a great
positive multiplier. This is where the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should create a strong niche for
itself.
The PBC has been envisaged as a specialized and
nodal intergovernmental advisory body focusing on
marshalling resources, raising the international profiles

35

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

of the countries on its agenda and coordinating
peacebuilding activities there. It has now has been
accepted as an important instrument in promoting
peace and stability in some of countries emerging from
conflict. However, it has yet to fully consolidate its
work in the field or to make a strong mark on the
ground. Better and robust coordination, coherence and
collaboration on the field and at the regional and
international levels would greatly enhance its
effectiveness.
As peacebuilding is not a linear process,
incorporating and coordinating peacebuilding activities
from the early phase of peacekeeping greatly enhances
its work. Similarly, the availability of substantial
resources for peacebuilding, the effective and quick
delivery of resources on the ground, and the further
strengthening of the Peacebuilding Support Office
would help better to consolidate peacebuilding efforts.
In this context, my delegation is confident that the
2010 PBC review process will come up with concrete
suggestions to make the PBC more effective and
efficient in the days ahead. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the PBC, Nepal will
make efforts towards that end.
Even though the peacebuilding environment
varies from country to country, we see many
commonalities in the approaches to and building
blocks of peacebuilding. The accumulation of key
components of effective peacebuilding would help to
concentrate our focus on critical components of the
peace process.
The time has come to consolidate our collective
efforts and institutional settings to deal with the
challenges of peacebuilding by promoting security,
rehabilitation and recovery simultaneously with the
substantial utilization of resources and our political
capital. The United Nations has to nurture the hope and
dreams of peace and economic prosperity of the
millions of war-torn society. As has been stated often,
if the international community, led by the United
Nations system, responds rapidly, coherently and
effectively, there is a greater chance of sustaining
peace and laying the foundations for sustainable
development. This could not be more true in the case
of peacebuilding than in any other endeavour.
The President: Following consultations among
the members of the Security Council, I have been

36

authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statements
of
its
President
(S/PRST/2010/2,
S/PRST/2009/23,
S/PRST/2008/16)
and
emphasizes the critical importance of postconflict peacebuilding as the foundation for
building sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict. The Council highlights
the need for effective peacebuilding strategies to
ensure durable peace and development.
“The Security Council recognizes that
sustainable peacebuilding requires an integrated
approach, which strengthens coherence between
political, security, development, human rights and
rule of law activities. The Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations can play in
supporting national authorities to develop
peacebuilding strategies that incrementally and
comprehensively address priority needs. The
Council encourages international partners to align
their support behind these strategies at the
international, regional, national and local levels.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of national ownership and the
development
of
national
capacity,
and
underscores that peacebuilding strategies should
be considered in a country-specific context. In
this regard, the Council recognizes the need for
national authorities to take responsibility as soon
as possible for reconstituting the institutions and
functions of Government, with a view to
addressing all key peacebuilding needs. The
Council emphasizes that support for democratic,
transparent and accountable governance is
essential in order to achieve durable peace.
“The Security Council highlights the
importance of the peaceful settlement of political
disputes in a post-conflict State and addressing
the sources of violent conflict as essential
elements for achieving sustainable peace. The
Council recognizes the importance of advancing
the peace process and peaceful coexistence
through inclusive dialogue, reconciliation and
reintegration. The Council reaffirms that ending
impunity is essential if a society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed

10-31773

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

conflict and to prevent such future abuses. The
Council underlines the importance of holding
free, fair and transparent elections for sustainable
peace.
“The Security Council recognizes security
sector reform as essential to the peacebuilding
process and affirms that security sector reform
should be nationally owned. Effective security
sector reform requires developing a professional,
effective and accountable security sector, in
particular national police and military capacities
under the civilian oversight of a democratic
Government. The Council highlights the
importance of a sector-wide approach for security
sector reform, which enhances the rule of law,
including through the establishment of an
independent justice and correction systems. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to
include, where appropriate and mandated, in his
reports on specific missions an indication of their
progress in supporting national authorities
towards
achieving
coordinated
and
comprehensive international support to nationally
owned security sector reform programmes.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of pursuing political stability and
security, alongside socio-economic development,
for the consolidation of peace. The Council
stresses the importance of delivering early peace
dividends, including the provision of basic
services, in order to help instil confidence and
commitment to the peace process. The Council
recognizes that the reintegration of refugees,
internally displaced persons and former
combatants, in coordination with security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, should not be seen in isolation, but
should be carried out in the context of a broader
search for peace, stability and development, with
special emphasis on the revival of economic
activities. The Council notes, in this regard, that
high levels of youth unemployment can be a
major challenge to sustainable peacebuilding.
“While recognizing the importance of
developing State capacity, the Security Council
also emphasizes the importance of increased
attention and coherent policies to the
reconstruction of conflict-affected communities
and empowerment of affected people, in

10-31773

particular vulnerable civilians, such as children,
the elderly, refugees and internally displaced
persons. The Council takes note of the need for
assistance for victims. The Council, in
accordance with its resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), underlines the key role women and
young persons can play in re-establishing the
fabric of society, and stresses the need for their
involvement
in
the
development
and
implementation of post-conflict strategies in
order to take account of their perspectives and
needs.
“The Security Council notes that drugtrafficking, organized crime, terrorism, illegal
trafficking in arms and trafficking in people could
constitute transnational threats with an impact on
the consolidation of peace in countries emerging
from conflict, and underlines the importance of
increasing international and regional cooperation
on the basis of common and shared responsibility
to address them effectively.
“The Security Council reiterates the
importance of launching peacebuilding assistance
at the earliest possible stage. The Security
Council recognizes the critical role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in addressing
peacebuilding priorities, particularly through
marshalling support and resources and improving
planning and coordination for peacebuilding
efforts. The Council further recognizes the need
for greater coordination with the Commission and
looks forward to the 2010 review of the PBC and
the recommendations on how its role can be
enhanced.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of enhancing coordination among
relevant bilateral and multilateral donors to
ensure predictable, coherent and timely financial
support for post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Council underscores that funding mechanisms for
addressing immediate post-conflict needs, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), should
play a catalytic role, which should be followed by
more substantial, longer-term finance as soon as
possible for the recovery and reconstruction
efforts. The Council encourages greater synergy
between the PBF and the PBC.

37

S/PV.6299 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council recognizes the need
to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts, in particular from developing countries
and women, to help develop national capacity,
and encourages Member States, the United
Nations and other relevant partners to strengthen
cooperation and coordination in building such
capacities. The Council looks forward to the
recommendations of the United Nations civilian
capacity review in the Secretary-General’s
follow-up report of his report (S/2009/304).
“The Security Council emphasizes the need
for the United Nations system to strengthen
strategic partnerships with other international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
financial institutions, in particular by promoting
coherence and coordination among their plans

38

and programmes. In this connection, the Council
looks forward to further strengthening of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
World Bank at both the Headquarters and field
levels, and for the Secretary-General to include in
the same follow-up report details of what steps
have been made in generating more timely,
predictable and accountable responses for the key
peacebuilding sectors as requested.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/7.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

10-31773
