TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 17 JUNE 1968

NEW

YORK
:

CONTENTS
Pi@

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l430)

..., ,,.,,,,....,...........,,.

b1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , . . . , . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

.......

1

Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representatives of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northerv
Ireland and the United States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council .(S/8630) , , . . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

, . ,, . . . , . ,. , . . . , . . . . . . . .1. .:...

NOTE
Symbols of Wted Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of tie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 17 June 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Arthur 5. GOLDBERG
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 430)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8630).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to the business
for which we have convened and since the opportunity did
not arise at the last meeting because of the circumstances
under which that meeting took place, I would take a brief
moment to do what in reality cannot adequately be done
briefly: to pay personal and official tribute and respect to
the outgoing President of the Council, our distinguished
colleague Lord Caradon of the United Kingdom.

4. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. Fresident, I
wish to thank you for those over-generous comments. I
would merely say in reply that all of us are happy to have
this further opportunity of serving under your Presidency,
and to add that there is no President for whom we could
have a greater admiration and affection.
5. The PRESIDENT: I thank you, Lord Caradon.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8630)
6. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the matter placed before it in the letter
addressed to the President on 12 June 1968 by the
representatives of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, circulated in document
S/8630. On the same date, a draft resolution was submitted
by the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America, and it is now before the Council in
document S/8631. Since all members of the Council have
this document before them, I shall forgo reading the draft
resolution and shall proceed to call on the first speaker
inscribed on my list for the discussion of the question
before the Council, namely, the First Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union.

2. It is difficult to find the right words to use on such an
occasion, for there is much that could and should be said.
But, clearly, it would be wrong if I did not e:press, on
behalf of my own delegation, and, I believe, of all members
of the Council, deep admiration and gratitude for the
vigour, impartiality, good humour, sense of fair play and
dedication to the principles which characterized the leadership given to this Council last month by Lord Caradon. It
was not that we did not expect these qualities to come to
the fore; on the contrary, on the basis of our past
experience we did. We are very grateful to Lord Caradon
for the manner in which he presided over the Council.

7. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The recently adjourned twentysecond resumed session of the United Nations General
Assembly adopted a resolution [2373 (XX111 commending
the draft Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. The fact that it was supported by an overwhelming majority of the Member States of the United Nations
reflects the deep concern of all nations at the threat of a
devastating nuclear war and their desire to strcn&hell
international peace and security.

3. I would conclude, as I have been doing in the past
several days, on another personal note. When I seek to
count the things I shall be deprived of when I leave my
present position, which I now reassure the Council will be
the day following our disposition of the business at present
at hand, I always end up by putting high on the list‘ the
. company, the example and the inspiration of my friend and
colleague Lord Caradon.

8. The time has now come when the preparatory work for
the conclusion of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons must be completed in the United Nations.
This important and final step by the United Nations should
be the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution on
the question of safeguards for non-nuclear-weapon States.
The three nuclear-weapon States which are permanent
members of the Security Council-the Soviet Union, the

14. In our opinion, this new reaffirmation of these Charter
provisions in the Security Council resolution dealing with
safeguards for non-nuclear States under the conditions of
their participation in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Wcjapons, is of great importance, in that it would
be a timely removal of the threat of the use of nuclear
weapons against such non-nuclear States,

United States and the United Kingdom-have, as the
President of the Security Council has already announced,
submitted for the Council’s consideration a draft resolution
aimed at the solution of this problem.
9. The question of the Security Council’s adopting, in
connexion with the forthcoming Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, a special decision on the
measures to strengthen the security of non-nuclear-weapon
countries did not, of course, arise because participation in
the Non-Proliferation Treaty raises any new problems for
the non-nuclear-weapon States from the point of view of
their security, On the contrary, the conclusion of a
non-proliferation treaty, by removing the threat of the
spread of nuclear weapons over our planet, will in itself
constitute a step forward towards greater world .security.
There can be no difference of opinion on that score.

15. The draft resolution aims at expressing a positive
attitude towards the intention expressed by certain States
that they will provide or support immediate assistance, ln
accordance with the United Nations Charter, to any
non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that is a victim of an
act or an object of a threat of aggression in which nuclear
weapons are used. The Soviet Union is among those States
which intend to provide or support, if necessary, such
immediate assistance to the countries concerned.

10. But if this is true, it is also true that many nonnuclear-weapon States expressing their readiness to adhere
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and therefore to assume the
obligation not to produce or acquire nuclear weapons, do
feel in this connexion a desire to receive certain additional
guarantees of their safety against nuclear aggression. The
fact Is, the nuclear weapons will still not disappear with the
conclusion of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation; the possibility of an outbreak of nuclear war in the world will
remain even against non-nuclear-weapon States.

16. In this connexion, the Soviet Government makes the
following declaration:
“The Government of the Soviet Union notes with
appreciation the desire expressed by a large number of
States to subscribe to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
“We welcome the willingness of these States to undertake not to receive the transfer from any transferor
whatsoever of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices or of control over such weapons or explosive
devices directly, or indirectly; not to manufacture or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices; and not to seek or receive any
assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices.

11. The draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union,
the United States and the United Kingdom meets this desire
of the non-nuclear-weapon countries which are prepared to
become parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. It is based
on the generally accepted premise that any aggression
accompanied by the use of nuclear weapons would endanger the peace and security of all States. In this
connexion, the draft provides that aggression with nuclear
weapons or the threat of such aggression against a nonnuclear-weapon State would create a situation in which the
Security Council, and above all its nuclear-weapon State
permanent members, would have to act immediately in
accordance with their obligations under the United Nations
Charter.

“The Soviet Union also notes the concern ofcertain Of
these States that, in conjunction with their adherence to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
appropriate measures be undertaken to safeguard their
security. Any aggression accompanied by the use of
nuclear weapons would endanger the peace and security
of all States.
“Bearing these considerations in mind, the Soviet Union
declares the following:

12. This is the key provision of the draft. It provides the
solution to the question of strengthening the security of the
non-nuclear countries within the framework of utilizing the
mechanism of the Security Council which, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter, bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Such an approach is, in our opinion, logical
and natural. At the same time it meets the interests of
increasing the role of the United Nations in strengthening
peace.

“ ‘Aggression with nuclear weapons or the threat of
such aggression against a non-nuclear-weapon State would
qualitatively create a qualitatively new situation in which
the nuclear-weapon States which are permanent members
of the United Nations Security Council would have to act
immediately through the Security Council to take the
measures necessary to counter such aggression or remove
the threat of aggression in accordance with the United
Nations Charter, which calls for taking “effective col.
lective measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace” ‘, Therefore, any State
which commits aggression accompanied by the use of
nuclear weapons or threatens such aggression must be
aware that its actions will be countered effectively by
measures to be taken in accordance with the United
Nations Charter to suppress the aggression or remove the
threat of aggression.

13. The draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union,
the United Kingdom and the United States for consideration by the Security Council also provides that the Security
Council would reaffirm the inherent right, recognized under
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, of individual and
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council
has taken measures necessary to maintain international
peace and security.
2

“The Soviet Union reaffirms its intention, as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council,
to seek immediate Security Council action to provide
assistance, in accordance with the Charter, to any
non-nuclear-weapon State, party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, that is a victim of
an act of aggression or an object of a threat of aggression
in which nuclear weapons are used.
“The Soviet Union reaffirms in particular the inherent
right, recognized under Article 51 of the Charter, of
individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack,
including a nuclear attack, occurs against a Member of the
United Nations, until ‘the Security Council has taken the
measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security.
“The Soviet Union’s vote for the resolution before us
and this statement of the way in which the Soviet Union
intends to act in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations are based upon the fact that the resolution is supported by other permanent members of the
Security Council who are nuclear-weapon States and are
also proposing to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, and that these States have made
similar statements as to the ways in which they intend to
act in accordance with the Charter.”
17. This declaration by (the Soviet Government, which
speaks for itself, will come into force at the same time as
the entry into force of the Security Council resolution
dealing with the safeguards for non-nuclear States.
18. We feel sure that this statement by the Soviet
Government, in conjunction with similar steps taken by the
other permanent members of the Security Council who
intend to subscribe to the Treaty and with the Security
Council resolution on safeguards for non-nuclear countries,
will be welcomed by the non-nuclear States which, in the
General Assembly a few days ago,1 supported the draft
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
will shortly become Parties to that Treaty.
19. It should be added to what we have said that, after the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
signed and enters into force, further efforts must naturally
be made to increase the safeguards for the non-nuclear
countries and international security as a whole. The Soviet
Union, for its part, will continue resolutely to strive for the
successful solution of the problem of banning the use of
. nuclear weapons, of eliminating stockpiles, of the complete
banning of nuclear weapons and of general and complete
disarmament. Each additional stop in the field of limiting
the nuclear arms race and in the field of disarmament will
do even more to strengthen the security of the non-nuclear
States and of all the States of the world.
20. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Mr. Kuznetsov for
his contribution to our debate.
2 1. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Before I formally give an assurance on behalf of my Government I wish
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1612nd
meeting,

to state four propositionswhich seemto me of first
importance.
22. First, these assurancesare made as a result of
representationssubmitted by non-nuclear-weapon
States.
My Governmentandothersreadily responded.
23. It was the initiative of non-nuclear-weaponStates
which hasled to the assurances
we glvetoday.
24. Secondly, the assurances
have beendeliberately made
without any limitation in time and to meet world-wide
diversity of security interests.
25. It is for that reasonthat they are and must be in
generalterms.
26. Thirdly, we have had no doubt that it wasright that
the assurances
shouldbe given herein the Security Council
and within the frameworkof the Charter,To do otherwise
would surely have beento derogate,from the authority of
the United Nationsandfrom the obligationswhich we have
all solemnly undertaken as Membersof the Organization
and supportersof the Charter.
27. There can be no questionthat it is right in a matter of
international peaceand security to act in and through the
Security Council.
28. Fourtbly, it seemsclear to my Government, and I
trust to everyone, that any country contemplatingnuclear
aggressionor the threat of such aggressionagainst a
non-nuclear signatoryof the Treaty would be deterredby
theseassurances-assurances
given in commonby the most
powerful nuclear Statesin the world, including the United
States and the Soviet Union. Their interests coincide in
preventing any suchaggression
or threat. Surely no one can
doubt that the commondeterminationof EastandWestin
this issueof supremeinternational concern is a develop
ment of the utmost signficanceand importance in world
affairs.
29. It is the action already taken in the GeneralAssembly
and now the common purpose of the three Powersas
manifestedhere in the Council today which givesus all
solid ground for confidence, It is in the belief that these
assurances
together with the Treaty make a positive and
valuable advance in pursuit of international peace and
security that I now formally give the following declaration
on behalf of my Government:
“The Government of the United Kingdom noteswith
appreciation the desireexpressedby a large number of
Statesto subscribeto the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
“We welcomethe willingnessof theseStatesto undertake not to receive the transfer from any transferor
whatsoeverof nuclearweaponsor other nuclearexplosive
devices or of control over such weaponsor explosive
devices directly, or indirectly; not to manufacture or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices; and not to seek or receive any
assistance
in the manufactureof nuclearweaponsor other
nuclearexplosivedevices.

“The United Kingdom also notes the concern of certain
of these States that, in conjunction with their adherence
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, appropriate measures be undertaken to safeguard their security, Any aggression accompanied by the
use of nuclear weapons would endanger the peace and
security of all States,
“Bearing these considerations in mind,
Kingdom declares the following:

33. During more than four years of negotiation on the
non-proliferation treaty in the Eighteen-Nation Committee
on Disarmament in Geneva, one of the major problems
considered was how to provide assurance to non-nuclear.
weapon States that their security would be enhanced,
rather than impaired, by their renouncing nuclear weapons
in accordance with the treaty. .This question was a subject
of extensive public debate as well as of lengthy private
negotiations. The conclusion reached by the sponsors of the
present draft resolution was that, in addition to the security
benefits provided by the treaty itself, further assurance of
security could most appropriately be afforded in the
context of the United Nations Charter under which every
Member of our Organization has assumed a solemn obliga.
tion to co-operate in the maintenance of peace.

the United

“Aggression with nuclear weapons, or the threat of such
aggression, against a non-nuclear-weapon State would
create a qualitatively new situation in which the nuclearweapon States which are permanent .members of the
United Nations Security Council would have to act
immediately through the Security Council to take the
measures necessary to counter such aggression or to
remove the threat of aggression in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, which calls for taking ‘effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace’. Therefore, any
State which commits aggression accompanied by the use
of nuclear weapons or which threatens such aggression
must be aware that its actions are to be countered
effectively by measures to be taken in accordance with
the United Nations Charter to suppress the aggression or
remove the threat of aggression.

34. The United States, the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom-as the other sponsors of the draft resolution have
informed the Council-therefore
agreed to sponsor a draft
resolution on security assurances here in the Security
Council, the organ of the United Nations which bears the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of internatioual
peace and security. The text of this draft resolution now
before the Council was first made public in the Eighteen.
Nation Disarmament Committee by the representatives of
those three Governments on 7 March of this year. A key
paragraphof the resolution envisagesdeclarationsof inten.
tion by the United States,the Soviet Union andthe United
Kingdom in support of the provision of assurances
to
parties to the treaty. The substanceof theseproposed
declarationsof intention was likewise describedto the
Eighteen-NationDisarmamentCommitteeand madepublic
on 7 March.

“The United Kingdom affirms its intention, as a
permanent member of the United Nations Security
Council, to seek immediate Security Council action to
provide assistance, in accordance with the Charter, to any
non-nuclear-weapon State, party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, that is a victim of
an act of aggression or an object of a threat of aggression
in which nuclear weapons are used.

35. The text of the draft resolution was alsoofficially
circulatedto eachMember of the United NationsasantieS
II of the report of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament
Committee, dated 19 March 1968. This document was
circulated by the Secretariat as General Assemblydocu.
ment A/7072.2 This is the identical resolutionwhich now
lies before us in Security Council document S/8631,
sponsoredby the Soviet Union, the United Kingdomand
the United States.

“The United Kingdom reaffirms in particular the
inherent right, recognized under Article 51 of the
Charter, of individual and collective self-defence if an
armed attack, including a nuclear attack, occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council
has taken measures necessary to maintain international
peace and security.

36. Thus the text of the draft resolutionnow beforethe
Council, as well as the substanceof the accompanying
declarationsof intention, have l~cn public knowledgesince
7 March last, andhavebeen officially before allMembersof
the United Nations, including the Security Council, since
19March.

“The United Kingdom vote for the resolution before us
and this statement of the way in which the United
Kingdom intends to act in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations are based upon the fact that the
resolution is supported by other permanent members of
the Security Council who are nuclear-weapbn States and
are also proposing to sign the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and that these States
have made similar statements as to the way in which they
intend to act in accordance with the Charter.”

37. During the debate on the non-proliferation treaty
which began in the First Committee of the General
Assemblyon 26 April, the security assurances
questionwas
discussed
in statementsby many delegations,includingmy
own. In my statement on 15 May,3 I reaffirmed the
intention of the United Statesto make,in conjunctionwith
the Security Council’s consideration of the proposed
resolution, the formal declaration describedin Genevaby
the United States representativeon 7 March. In the same
statement I repeated the full substanceof this intended

30. That is the formal assurance which I now give on
behalf of my Government.
3 1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Lord Caradon for
his contribution to our debate.

2 See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, SUP@+
ment for 1967and 1968, document
DC/23andAdd.1.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, First Committee, 1568thmeeting.

32. I should like to make a statement as the representative
of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
4

I

declaration. During the same debate the representatives of
the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom likewise reaffumed the intention of their Governments to make similar
declarations at the same time.
38. In the course of the First Committee’s consideration
of this matter, several delegations informally indicated to us
a strong desire that the Security Council should convene
promptly to consider security assurances. To this end, on
12 June, immediately after the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 2373 (XXII), commending the nonproliferation treaty and requesting that it be opened for
signature at the earliest possible date, the representatives of
the United States, the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom called for a meeting of the Security Council. At
the same time they circulated to all the text of the draft
resolution which now lies before the Council. On 14 June
the United States also informally distributed to all members
of the Council the text of the declaration which my
Government proposes to make here today, and on the same
date the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom delegations
likewise informally circulated the texts of their declarations .
39. After appropriate consultation with the members of
the Council, it was decided to convene the Council this
afternoon to begin consideration of this important matter.
40. On behalf of my Government, I shall now read to the
Council the formal declaration of the United States of
America:
“The Government of the United States notes with
appreciation the desire expressed by a large number of
States to subscribe to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
“We welcome the willingness of these States to undertake not to receive the transfer from any transferor
whatsoever of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices or of control over such weapons or explosive
devices directly, or indirectly; not to manufacture or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices; and not to seek or receive any
assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons orother
nuclear explosive devices.
“The United States also notes the concern of certain of
these States that, in conjunction with their adherence to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
appropriate measures be undertaken to safeguard their
security. Any aggression accompanied by the use of
nuclear weapons would endanger the peace and security
of all States.,
“Bearing these considerations in mind, the United
States declares the following:
“Aggression with nuclear weapons, or the threat of such
aggression, against a non-nuclear-weapon State would
create a qualitatively new situation in which the nuclearweapon States which are permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council would have to act
immediately through the Security Council to take the
measures necessary to counter such aggression or to

remove the threat of aggression in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, which calls for taking ‘effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace’. Therefore, any
State which commits aggression accompanied by the use
of nuclear weapons or which threatens such aggression
must be aware that its actions are to be countered
effectively by measures to be taken in accordance with
the United Nations Charter to suppress the aggression or
remove the threat of aggression,
“The United States affirms its intention, as a permanent
member of the United Nations Security Council, to seek
immediate Security Council action to provide assistance,
in accordance with the Charter, to any non-nuclearweapon State party to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons that is a victim of an act
of aggression or an object of a threat of aggression in
which nuclear weaponsare used.
“The United States reaffirms in particular the inherent
right, recognized under Article 51 of the Charter, of
individual and collective self-defence if an armed attack,
including a nuclear attack, occurs against a Member of the
United Nations, until the Security Council has taken
measures necessaryto maintain international peace and
security.
“The United States vote for the resolution before us
and this statement of the way in which the United States
intends to act in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations are based upon the fact that the resolution is supported by other permanent members of the
Security Council who are nuclear-weapon States and are
also proposing to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, and that these States have made
similar statements as to the way in which they intend to
act in accordance with the Charter.”
41, Having made that declaration, I wish,now to comment
on the historic significance of the initiative being taken here
today.
42. That the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the
United States, whatever their respective views on other
matters, have now united in sponsoring this draft resolution, and in making solemn declarations in support of it, is
a political fact of the first order, This concerted action by
these major nuclear-weapon States introduces a powerful
element of deterrence against aggression with nuclear
weapons or the threat of such aggression.
43. The United States believes that this Security Council
resolution, and the declarations made in conjunction with
it, will lay a firm political, moral and legal basis for ensuring
the security of non-nuclear-weapon parties to the nonproliferation treaty.
44. I know that all members of the Security Council will
consider the value to their national security, and to that of
all non-nuclear-weapon States which may become parties to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, of the security assurances
made and sponsored by the principal nuclear-weapon
Powers. In so considering them, each State should ask itself

I

speak for two hours and I think I shall speak for only two
minutes.

not “will these assurances, combined with the treaty, give
this country perfect security? “-because there is, of course,
no perfect security in this world-but, rather, “will these
security assurances, combined with the non-proliferation
treaty, give this country more security than it would
otherwise enjoy? ” The United States is confident that a
careful appraisal in the light of this pertinent question will
result in an affirmative answer by the Council, and that the
adoption of this resolution will be a major contribution to
international peace and security,

48. Having met to discuss a draft resolution concerning
the security of non-nuclear-weapon States, the Security
Council has before it a text which is in fact closely linked
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

49. That is why, when we spoke in the General
Assembly,4 the French delegation thought it necessary to
J state forthwith its position on the text which has been
submitted to us today. Having said that we would abstain in
45. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated fvom French): May
the vote on a draft resolution which recommended the
I be allowed, with all due respect to your position,
signing of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, we, announced that
Mr. President, to point out how unwise it was of you to tell
we would also abstain in the vote in the Security Council,
us that you are going to withdraw from the Security
Council as soon as our debate on non-proliferation comes
to an end. I intended to speak for two minutes on the
50. In so doing, the French delegation does not mean to
subject of non-proliferation. I shall now be tempted to
stand in the way of the adoption of a draft resolution that
speak for two hours, and many of my friends and i in no way changes the provisions of Chapter VII of the
colleagues will be tempted to do the same in the hope of
Charter. That is clear from the very contents of the draft,
keeping you longer in the Security Council, where we have
from the declared intention of its sponsors and from the
all been able to appreciate your exceptional qualities of
fact that there has been no recourse to the procedure laid
intelligence, eloquence, precision and logic. You have an
down in Article 108 for any amendment of the Charter,
unshakable faith in the force of justice and in the value of
Nevertheless, the French delegation cannot associate itself
legal reasoning and its power of conviction. All your
with the draft resolution, for reasons which I should like to
statements have been striking in the exactness of their
recall.
presentation, development and conclusions. May I say that,
you think to a great extent like a Frenchman, so excellent
51. The French Government is as aware as any other
is your Cartesian logic,
government of the terrible danger that nuclear weapons
represent for all of us, but it maintains that the only way of
overcomingthat threat is to ceasethe manufactureof such
46. These qualities, which have made you in turn a
brilliant student, a celebrated lawyer, a negotiator corn,
weaponsand to destroy the stockpiles. My Government
reiteratesthat the real problemis that of the eliminationof
rnanding particular respect in labour circles, Secretary of
atomic weapons;the nations of the world will not receive
Labor, a member of the Supreme Court-one of the highest
offices that can be conferred on a United States citizen-;
the guaranteesof security to which they are entitled until
you place at the service of the principles which constitute
the nuclearPowersagreeto embarkupon the road towards
the greatners of American civilization: the passion for
nucleardisarmamentanduntil they reachthat goal.
freedom, the search for equality among men, races and
religions, and, finally, the last of the three principles which
52. France, which has acquired nuclear weapons for
my country was the first to proclaim and to which the
strictly defensivepurposesonly, is ready to take any action
United States attaches equal importance, the principle of
in this matter to which the other Powersmight be willing to
fraternity. To all of this you add that remarkable trait
agree.
inherent in the American character, the untiring pursuit of
rapid progress in civilization, ln relations among men, in
53. The PRESIDENT: I wishto thank Ambassador
Berard
happiness and well-being for all. It is true that, as
for his contribution to our debateand for his very generous
representatives, we have not always agreed with you in our
andkind remarksabout me, For a representativeof France
debates. That was inevitable and was even a good thing,
to say that someonehas the mind of a Frenchmanis the
since the very purpose of the United Nations is to enable
highestcompliment that can be paid, I appreciateall he has
the different ideas to be brought together, confronted and
saidabout me, both personally and asrepresentativeof his
discussed in the hope-or even the certainty-that
such a
great country. His country hasbeen allied with mine from
confrontation of ideas will necessarily produce some light,
the very beginningsof our Republic. The ties of friendship
some reconciliation, a little more harmony and a greater
and allianceare very preciousto the United Statesand its
chance for peace.
people,who sharewith France a commondedicationto the
greatprinciples of liberty, equality and fraternity. The ties
of personalfriendship that bind me to AmbassadorBerard
47. We knew that we could not expect to keep forever a
man who has such a long and brilliant future before him as arevery preciousto me and I shallalwaystreasurethem.
our colleague. But, having returned to the United Nations
only nine months ago, I am sorry that I have not had
54. There are no other nameson the list of speakersfor
longer, like other colleagues, in which to have had the
this afternoon. However,severalrepresentativeshaveindica.
benefit of your experience, your exceptional mind and
ted that they wish to make statementstomorrow morning.
your sensitivity. In the important duties you will no doubt
Accordingly, after having consulted the membersof the
be fulfilling in the near future, we ask you to retain your
friendship for and your kind interest in your United
4 Ibid, Plenary Meetings, 1672nd meeting.
Nations colleagues. Now I shall resist the temptation to
6

Council, I should like to suggest that the next meeting be
scheduled for tomorrow morning at 10.30 a.m. to continue
the consideration of the matter at present on the agenda. In
addition, I should like to indicate that consultations among
the members of the Council have shown general agreement
that a meeting should be scheduled for tomorrow afternoon

at 3.30 p.m. to take up the Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in Cyprus.
55. Since I hear no objection, I take it that the Council
agrees to the schedule I have just outlined.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLtCATlONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributorr
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en ventc
dons
ICI librafries
et ler ogences
d&poritoires
du monde entier.
Infarmewous
aupr6r
de votre libroirie
ou odrssser-voys
b:
Notions
Unies, Section
des ventcs, New York ou Genbvc.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de 10s ‘Noeioner
Unidat
en todos .partes del mundo. Conrulte
o’ru
Ventor, Nucvo
York o Gincbro.

I.&ho

in United

Nations,

New York

estdn
librero

UNIDAS

cn venta en librarias
o dirfiase
08 N&ones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

y cosos distribuidoros
Unidos,
Sacci6n

de

357014eptember

1972--2,loo
