United Nations

A/RES/67/145

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 28 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/450 and Corr.1)]

67/145. Trafficking in women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, which constitutes a serious threat to human dignity, human
rights and development,
Recalling all international conventions that deal specifically with and address
issues relevant to the problem of trafficking in women and girls, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocols
thereto, in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Optional
Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7
and the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the
Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 8 as well as relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions
and the Human Rights Council on the issue,
Recognizing the crucial importance of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which entered into
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 96, No. 1342.
2

12-48730

*1248730*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/145

Trafficking in women and girls

force on 25 December 2003 and provided for the first time an internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons, aimed at the prevention of trafficking
in persons, the protection of its victims and the prosecution of its perpetrators,
Reaffirming the provisions pertaining to trafficking in women and girls
contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and
summits, in particular the strategic objective on the issue of trafficking contained in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 9
Reaffirming also the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium
Summit, the 2005 World Summit and the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to devise, enforce and strengthen
effective measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons to
counter the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
Welcoming in particular the efforts of States, United Nations bodies and
agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to address the
problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, including the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010,
Welcoming the interactive dialogue of the General Assembly, held on 3 April
2012, on the theme “Fighting human trafficking: partnership and innovation to end
violence against women and girls”, which united in a common endeavour Member
States, the United Nations system, international organizations, civil society, the
private sector and the media to emphasize the value of a comprehensive approach and
inclusive international partnerships in effectively fighting global trafficking,
Taking note with appreciation of the resolutions on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, adopted by the Human Rights Council, including
resolution 20/1 of 5 July 2012, entitled “Trafficking in persons, especially women
and children: access to effective remedies for trafficked persons and their right to an
effective remedy for human rights violations”, 10
Noting with appreciation the steps taken, including the reports of human rights
treaty bodies and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, the Special Rapporteur of the
Council on violence against women, its causes and consequences, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Special
Rapporteur of the Council on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography and the Special Rapporteur of the Council on contemporary forms of
slavery, including its causes and consequences, and United Nations agencies and
other concerned intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within their
existing mandates, as well as civil society, to address the serious crime of trafficking
in persons, and encourages them to continue doing so and to share their knowledge
and best practices as widely as possible,
Noting the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, and the fact that part of her task is to integrate a

_______________
9

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.

2/10

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/67/145

gender- and age-specific perspective throughout the work of her mandate, inter alia,
through the identification of gender- and age-specific vulnerabilities in relation to
the issue of trafficking in persons,
Acknowledging the inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 11 which entered into force on 1 July 2002,
Bearing in mind that all States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to
prevent, investigate and punish perpetrators of trafficking in persons, and to rescue
victims as well as provide for their protection, and that not doing so violates and
impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
the victims,
Seriously concerned that an increasing number of women and girls are being
trafficked, including to developed countries, as well as within and between regions
and States, and that men and boys are also victims of trafficking, including for
sexual exploitation,
Recognizing that certain efforts against trafficking in persons lack the gender
and age sensitivity needed to address effectively the situation of women and girls,
who are particularly vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation,
forced labour, services and other forms of exploitation, thus highlighting the need to
incorporate a gender- and age-sensitive approach into all anti-trafficking efforts,
Recognizing also the need to address the impact of globalization on the
particular problem of trafficking in women and children, in particular girls,
Recognizing further that poverty, unemployment, lack of socioeconomic
opportunities, gender-based violence, discrimination and marginalization are some
of the contributing factors that make persons vulnerable to trafficking,
Recognizing the need to reinforce efforts regarding the provision of relevant
documents, such as birth registration documents, in order to lower the risk of being
trafficked and to help to identify victims of trafficking in persons,
Recognizing also that, despite the progress made, challenges to preventing and
combating trafficking in women and girls remain and that further efforts should be
made to adopt adequate legislation and programmes to implement it and to continue
improving the collection of reliable sex- and age-disaggregated data and statistics
that would allow proper analysis of the nature, extent and risk factors of trafficking
in women and girls,
Recognizing further the importance of exploring the link between migration
and trafficking in persons in order to further efforts to protect women migrant
workers from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
Concerned about the use of new information technologies, including the
Internet, for purposes of exploitation of the prostitution of others, for trafficking in
women as brides, for exploiting women and children and for child pornography,
paedophilia and any other forms of sexual exploitation of children,
Concerned also about the increasing activities of transnational criminal
organizations and others that profit from international trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, without regard to dangerous and inhuman
conditions and in flagrant violation of national laws and international standards,
_______________
11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.

3/10

A/RES/67/145

Trafficking in women and girls

Recognizing that victims of trafficking are particularly exposed to racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and that women and girl
victims are often subject to multiple forms of discrimination and violence, including
on the grounds of their gender, age, ethnicity, disability, culture and religion, as well
as their origin, and that those forms of discrimination themselves may fuel
trafficking in persons,
Noting that some of the demand for prostitution and forced labour is met by
trafficking in persons in some parts of the world,
Acknowledging that women and girl victims of trafficking, on account of their
gender, are further disadvantaged and marginalized by a general lack of information
on or awareness and recognition of their human rights and by the stigmatization
often associated with trafficking, as well as by the obstacles they meet in gaining
access to accurate information and recourse mechanisms in cases of violation of
their rights, and that special measures are required for their protection and to
increase their awareness,
Encouraging the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-seventh
session to consider the issue of trafficking in women and girls within the framework
of the priority theme for 2013, “Elimination and prevention of all forms of violence
against women and girls”,
Reaffirming the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information exchanges on best
practices, of Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Reaffirming also that global efforts, including international cooperation and
technical assistance programmes, to eradicate trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, demand the strong political commitment, coordinated and
coherent efforts and active cooperation of all Governments of countries of origin,
transit and destination,
Recognizing that policies and programmes for prevention, protection,
rehabilitation, repatriation and reintegration should be developed through a
gender- and age-sensitive, comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach, with
concern for the security of the victims and respect for the full enjoyment of their
human rights and with the involvement of all actors in countries of origin, transit
and destination,
Convinced of the need to protect and assist all victims of trafficking, with full
respect for the human rights of the victims,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, 12
1.
which provides information on measures by States and activities within the United
Nations system to tackle trafficking in women and girls;
Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur
2.
of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, 13 which examines the existing international legal framework and standards
applicable to States and businesses, in addition to non-binding codes of conduct and
principles adopted by businesses, as part of efforts to prevent and combat human
trafficking;
_______________
12
13

4/10

A/67/170.
A/67/261.

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/67/145

3.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,2 taking into
consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking in
persons, and urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and
effectively;
Urges Member States to consider signing and ratifying and States parties
4.
to implement the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women4 and the Optional Protocol thereto,5 the Convention on the Rights of
the Child6 and the Optional Protocols thereto, 14 and the Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 15
as well as the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), 16 the Labour Inspection
Convention, 1947 (No. 81), 17 the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised),
1949 (No. 97), 18 the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention,
1958 (No. 111), 19 the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), 20 the Migrant
Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143), 21 the Private
Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181), 22 the Worst Forms of Child
Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), 23 and the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011
(No. 189), of the International Labour Organization;
Urges Member States, the United Nations and other international,
5.
regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully and
effectively implement the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 24 and the activities outlined therein;
6.
Welcomes the efforts of Governments, United Nations bodies and
agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to address the
particular problem of trafficking in women and girls, and encourages them to further
enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by sharing their knowledge,
technical expertise and best practices as widely as possible;
Encourages the United Nations system to mainstream, as appropriate, the
7.
issue of trafficking in persons, especially women and girls, into its broader policies
and programmes aimed at addressing economic and social development, human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, education, health and natural disaster and
post-conflict reconstruction;

_______________
14

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
16
Ibid., vol. 39, No. 612.
17
Ibid., vol. 54, No. 792.
18
Ibid., vol. 120, No. 1616.
19
Ibid., vol. 362, No. 5181.
20
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
21
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
22
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
23
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
24
Resolution 64/293.
15

5/10

A/RES/67/145

Trafficking in women and girls

8.
Welcomes the focus given by the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to ending violence against
women and to increasing women’s access to economic opportunities, as well as its
work on building effective partnerships for the empowerment of women, which will
contribute to the efforts to combat trafficking in persons;
Calls upon Governments to address, with a view to eliminating, the
9.
demand that fosters the trafficking of women and girls for all forms of exploitation
and in this regard to enhance preventive measures, including legislative measures, to
deter exploiters of trafficked persons, as well as ensure their accountability;
10. Also calls upon Governments to strengthen measures aimed at
empowering women and girls by, inter alia, enhancing their participation in society,
including through education and skills training, and to take further appropriate
measures to address the increasing rate of homelessness of and inadequate housing
for women in order to reduce their vulnerability to being trafficked;
11. Further calls upon Governments to take appropriate measures to address
the factors that increase vulnerability to being trafficked, including poverty and
gender inequality, as well as other factors that encourage the particular problem of
trafficking in women and girls for prostitution and other forms of commercialized
sex, forced marriage, forced labour and organ removal, in order to prevent and
eliminate such trafficking, including by strengthening existing legislation with a
view to providing better protection of the rights of women and girls and to
punishing perpetrators, including public officials engaging in or facilitating human
trafficking, through, as appropriate, criminal and/or civil measures;
12. Calls upon Governments, the international community and all other
organizations and entities that deal with conflict, post-conflict, disaster and other
emergency situations to address the heightened vulnerability of women and girls to
trafficking and exploitation and associated gender-based violence;
13. Urges Governments to devise, enforce and strengthen effective
gender- and age-sensitive measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking
in women and girls, including for sexual and economic exploitation, as part of a
comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy that integrates a human rights perspective,
and to draw up, as appropriate, national action plans in this regard;
14. Also urges Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to support and allocate resources to strengthen
preventive action, in particular education for women and men, as well as for girls
and boys, on gender equality, self-respect and mutual respect, and campaigns,
carried out in collaboration with civil society, to increase public awareness of the
issue at the national and grass-roots levels;
15. Reiterates the importance of continued coordination among, inter alia,
the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, the Special Rapporteur of the Council on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography and the Special Rapporteur of the
Council on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences,
in order to avoid unnecessary duplication in their activities in fulfilment of their
mandates;
16. Encourages Governments to take appropriate measures to eliminate sex
tourism demand, especially for children, through all possible preventive actions;

6/10

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/67/145

17. Urges Governments to develop educational and training programmes and
policies and to consider, as appropriate, enacting legislation aimed at preventing sex
tourism and trafficking, giving special emphasis to the protection of young women
and children;
18. Encourages Member States to strengthen national programmes and to
engage in bilateral, subregional, regional and international cooperation, including by
forging regional initiatives or plans of action, 25 to address the problem of trafficking
in persons through, inter alia, the enhancement of information-sharing, sex- and
age-disaggregated data, specific data collection and other technical capacities, and
mutual legal assistance, as well as the combating of corruption and laundering of
proceeds derived from trafficking, including for purposes of commercial sexual
exploitation, and to ensure, as appropriate, that such agreements and initiatives are
particularly responsive to the problem of trafficking as it affects women and girls;
19. Calls upon all Governments to criminalize all forms of trafficking in
persons, recognizing its increasing occurrence for purposes of sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation and abuse, sex tourism and forced labour, and to
bring to justice and punish the offenders and intermediaries involved, including
public officials involved with trafficking in persons, whether local or foreign,
through the competent national authorities, either in the country of origin of the
offender or in the country in which the abuse occurs, in accordance with due process
of law, as well as to penalize persons in authority found guilty of sexually assaulting
victims of trafficking in their custody;
20. Urges Governments to take all appropriate measures to ensure that
victims of trafficking are not penalized or prosecuted for acts committed as a direct
result of being trafficked and that they do not suffer from revictimization as a result
of actions taken by Government authorities, and encourages Governments to prevent,
within their legal framework and in accordance with national policies, victims of
trafficking in persons from being prosecuted for their illegal entry or residence;
21. Invites Governments to consider setting up or strengthening a national
coordinating mechanism, for example, a national rapporteur or an inter-agency body,
with the participation of civil society, as appropriate, including non-governmental
organizations, to encourage the exchange of information and to report on data, root
causes, factors and trends in trafficking in persons, especially women and girls, and
to include data on victims of trafficking disaggregated by sex and age;
22. Encourages Governments and relevant United Nations bodies, from
within existing resources, to take appropriate measures to raise public awareness of
the issue of trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, including the
factors that make women and girls vulnerable to trafficking; to discourage, with a
view to eliminating, the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation, including

_______________
25
Such as the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime,
the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking, the Action Plan for the Asia-Pacific
region of the Asian Regional Initiative against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
(see A/C.3/55/3, annex), the initiatives of the European Union on a comprehensive European policy and
programmes on trafficking in human beings, as expressed most recently in the European Union plan on
best practices, standards and procedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings,
adopted in December 2005, the activities of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing
and Combating Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution, the Organization of American States
Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, and the activities of the International Labour
Organization and the International Organization for Migration in this field.

7/10

A/RES/67/145

Trafficking in women and girls

sexual exploitation and forced labour; to publicize the laws, regulations and
penalties relating to this issue; and to emphasize that trafficking is a serious crime;
23. Calls upon concerned Governments to allocate resources, as appropriate,
to provide access to appropriate programmes for the physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims of trafficking, including through job training, legal
assistance in a language that they can understand and health care, including for
HIV/AIDS, and by taking measures to cooperate with intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to provide for the social, medical and psychological
care of the victims;
24. Encourages Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental and
civil society organizations, to undertake or strengthen campaigns aimed at clarifying
opportunities, limitations, rights and responsibilities with respect to migration, as
well as information on the risks of irregular migration and the ways and means used
by traffickers, so as to enable women to make informed decisions and to prevent
them from becoming victims of trafficking;
25. Also encourages Governments to review and strengthen, as appropriate,
the enforcement of relevant labour and other laws within their territories or
jurisdictions that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring business enterprises,
including recruitment agencies, to prevent and combat human trafficking in supply
chains, and to periodically assess the adequacy of such laws and address any gaps;
26. Invites the business sector to consider the adoption of ethical codes of
conduct to ensure decent work and to prevent any form of exploitative practices that
foster trafficking;
27. Encourages Governments to intensify collaboration with non-governmental
organizations to develop and implement gender- and age-sensitive programmes for
effective counselling, training and reintegration into society of victims of trafficking
and programmes that provide shelter and helplines to victims or potential victims;
28. Urges Governments to provide or strengthen training for, and to raise
awareness among, law enforcement, judicial, immigration and other relevant
officials on the prevention and combating of trafficking in persons, including the
sexual exploitation of women and girls, and in this regard calls upon Governments
to ensure that the treatment of victims of trafficking, especially by law enforcement
officials, immigration officers, consular officials, social workers and other first
response officials, is conducted with full respect for the human rights of those
victims and with gender and age sensitivity and observes the principles of
non-discrimination, including the prohibition of racial discrimination;
29. Invites Governments to take steps to ensure that criminal justice
procedures and witness protection programmes are sensitive to the particular
situation of trafficked women and girls and that they are supported and assisted, as
appropriate, in making complaints to the police or other authorities without fear and
being available when required by the criminal justice system, and to ensure that
during this time they have access to gender- and age-sensitive protection and, as
appropriate, social, medical, financial and legal assistance, including the possibility
of obtaining compensation for damages suffered;
30. Also invites Governments to intensify efforts aimed at the speedy
disposition of cases of trafficking in persons and, in cooperation with, inter alia,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to devise, enforce and
strengthen systems and mechanisms for combating trafficking in persons;

8/10

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/67/145

31. Further invites Governments to encourage media providers, including
Internet service providers, to adopt or strengthen self-regulatory measures to
promote the responsible use of media, particularly the Internet, with a view to
eliminating the exploitation of women and children, in particular girls, which could
foster trafficking;
32. Invites the business sector, in particular the tourism, travel and
telecommunications industries, relevant recruitment agencies and mass media
organizations, to cooperate with Governments in eliminating trafficking in women
and children, in particular girls, including through the dissemination by the media of
information regarding the dangers of trafficking, the means used by traffickers, the
rights of trafficked persons and the services available to victims of trafficking;
33. Stresses the need for the systematic collection of sex- and
age-disaggregated data and comprehensive studies at both the national and the
international levels and the development of common methodologies and
internationally defined indicators to make it possible to develop relevant and
comparable figures, and encourages Governments to enhance information-sharing
and data-collection capacity as a way of promoting cooperation to combat the
trafficking problem;
34. Invites Governments, United Nations bodies, agencies and special
mechanisms, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the private
sector to undertake collaborative and joint research and studies on trafficking in
women and girls that can serve as a basis for policy formulation or change;
35. Invites Governments, with the support of the United Nations, when
necessary, and other intergovernmental organizations, taking into account best
practices, to formulate training manuals and other informational materials and
provide training for law enforcement, judicial and other relevant officers, and
medical and support personnel, with a view to sensitizing them to the special needs
of women and girl victims;
36. Encourages Governments and relevant intergovernmental bodies and
international organizations to ensure that military, peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel deployed in conflict, post-conflict and other emergency situations are
provided with training on conduct that does not promote, facilitate or exploit
trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual exploitation, and to raise the
awareness of such personnel of the potential risks to victims of conflict and other
emergency situations, including natural disasters, of being trafficked;
37. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
International Covenants on Human Rights 26 to include information and statistics on
trafficking in women and girls as part of their national reports to their respective
committees and to work towards developing a common methodology and statistics
to obtain comparable data;
38. Invites States to continue to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children;

_______________
26

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

9/10

A/RES/67/145

Trafficking in women and girls

39. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session a report that compiles information on successful interventions
and strategies, as well as the gaps, in addressing the gender dimensions of the
problem of trafficking in persons and provides recommendations on the strengthening
of human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approaches within comprehensive
and balanced efforts to address trafficking in persons.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

10/10
