S/2003/899

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 September 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 16 September 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
You will recall that, following the withdrawal of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia, the Security Council endorsed my intention to establish the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Liberia (UNOL). That first United
Nations post-conflict peace-building support office was established on 1 November
1997. It was tasked primarily with assisting the Government in consolidating peace
following the election of President Charles Taylor in the July 1997 multiparty
elections.
With the full support of the Security Council, UNOL facilitated the promotion
of national reconciliation and good governance and helped mobilize international
support for the implementation of reconstruction and development programmes. In
the most recent period, UNOL worked to fulfil the terms of a revised mandate,
approved by the Security Council on 23 April 2003 (see S/2003/469), which had
been previously agreed with the Government of Liberia. Under the terms of that
revised mandate, and in addition to its initial tasks, UNOL was to focus on assisting
the Government of Liberia in addressing its expressed capacity needs in the areas of
human rights and the conduct of elections, as well as on developing a peace-building
strategy integrating political objectives, programme assistance and human rights
considerations.
However, as the Security Council is aware, the peace-building efforts of
UNOL were seriously hindered by the inability of the Government and opposition
party leaders to resolve their differences over key issues of governance. Meanwhile,
the promotion of national reconciliation was undermined by systematic abuses of
human rights, the exclusion and harassment of political opponents and the absence
of security sector reform. These elements contributed to the resumption of civil war
in Liberia, prompting the international community to call on the warring parties to
seek a negotiated settlement of the conflict.
On 8 July 2003, as fighting between Government forces and various warring
factions intensified and humanitarian tragedy threatened, I informed the Security
Council that I had decided to appoint Jacques Paul Klein my Special Representative
for Liberia (see S/2003/695). He was entrusted with the task of coordinating the
activities of the United Nations agencies in Liberia and supporting the emerging
transitional arrangements. In a further letter to your predecessor, of 29 July 2003, I
outlined a three-phased deployment of international troops to Liberia, leading to a
multidimensional United Nations peacekeeping operation (see S/2003/769). I also

03-52256 (E)

170903

*
0
3
5
2
2
5
6
*

S/2003/899

indicated that, in view of the appointment of Mr. Klein, and the envisaged
establishment of a United Nations operation in Liberia, the mandate of UNOL would
naturally have to be terminated.
Since that time the situation in Liberia has developed rapidly. On 1 August
2003 the Security Council adopted resolution 1497 (2003), authorizing the
establishment of a multinational force in Liberia and declaring its readiness to
establish a follow-on United Nations stabilization force to be deployed no later than
1 October 2003. Moreover, as the Council is aware, on 18 August 2003 the Liberian
parties signed a Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Accra. By that Agreement, the
parties requested the United Nations to deploy a force to Liberia under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations to support the National Transitional
Government of Liberia and assist in the implementation of the Agreement. With the
subsequent deployment of the Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Liberia, the security situation in the country has improved.
In the light of these developments, and as we prepare for the establishment of a
United Nations mission in Liberia, as envisaged under resolution 1497 (2003), I
have decided to terminate the mandate of UNOL. It is my intention to bring to a
close the operations of the Peace-building Office as soon as the Security Council
authorizes the deployment of the proposed peacekeeping mission. As indicated in
my current report on Liberia before the Council (S/2003/875 of 11 September 2003),
the major functions performed by UNOL will be transferred to the new United
Nations operation in Liberia, together with staff of the Office, as appropriate.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
