At ih 2722nd meetmg, on 26 November 1986. the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled
"The situation in the Middle East: report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/18453)''_2 1

At the same meeting, after consultations with the members of the Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 22
"The members of the Security Council have noted
with appreciation the report submitted hy the Secretary-Genera123 in conformity with Security Council
resolution 587 ( 1986) requesting him to take any further measures needed to enhance the security of the
men of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
and to make the necessary arrangements for a deployment of the Force to the southern horder of Lebanon.

Resolution 590 (1986)
of 2t, "liovemher 1986

"They express their gravest concern that the basic objectives of Council resolution 425 ( 1978) have not yet
been achieved.

I h,· Security ( ·ou11cil.
lluv111g considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Forcc,2.i
Decide\:

"The members of the Council take note of the consultations initiated by the Secretary-General with the parties concerned and others with a view to the implementation of the mandate of the Force. While they regret
that the consultations aimed at implementing resolution
425 (I 978) have thus far failed to yield practical results,
the members of the Council request the SecretaryGeneral actively to pursue his contacts.

(u) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 ( I LJ73):

(h) To renew the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force for another period of six
months, that is, until 31 May 1987:

(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit, at the
end of this period, a report on the developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution
338 (197:\).

"They note the new security measures decided upon
since the adoption of the resolution. They request the
Secretary-General to suggest any other steps he may
deem necessary for increased security in connection
with the movements of the Force indispensable for the
fulfilment of its mandate. They approve the proposals
submitted by the Secretary-General in his report and his
intention to seek the approval of the General Assembly
for necessary budgetary appropriation. In that connection, they call on all countries to assume their financial
responsibilities towards the Force and on the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts to expedite the reimbursement of the advances of funds made by the contributing countries.

1doptcd 111ia11i111011.sly
1722nd nu:l'li11,1..;

al

lh<'

Decisions
At the same meeting. following the adoption of resolution 5()0 (1986), the President made the following statement:2~
.. In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on behalf of the Security Council:
·· ·As is known, the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force 24 states, in paragraph 24: "Despite the present
quiet in the Israel-Syria sector, the situation in the
Middle East as a whole continues to be potentially
dangerous and is likely to remain so, unless and until
a comprehensive 'iettlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached." That statement of the Secretary-General reflects the view of the
Security Council.· "

"They note with interest the instructions given by the
Secretary-General to the Commander of the Force to
keep under continuous review all the possibilities of
varying the size and deployment of contingents if that
would strengthen their security without jeopardizing
the effectiveness of the Force. They request the Secretary-General to study these possibilities in consultation
with the contributing countries and to put appropriate
measures into effect.
"In that regard, they have noted with satisfaction the
intention expressed by the Lebanese authorities to deploy a regular unit of their army in the zone of the Force
to work in close liaison with it in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 425 ( 1978)
"Once again, the members of the Security Council
urge all the parties concerned to give full support to the
Force in the fulfilment of its mandate and also call for
an end to any military presence in southern Lebanon
which is not accepted by the Lebanese authorities. They
call on the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to
secure the full and effective implementation of resolution 425 (1978)."

On 2 December I 986, following consultations, the
President issued the following statement on behalf of the
members of the CounL·il: 26
'"The member-; of the Security Council, mindful of
the -;overeignt). in(kpendence and territorial integrity

22 S/l 84J9.

24 /hid .. doc,1111c111 '- I~~'\

D Ojjicial Record, of/he Securily Cou11nl. 1-'orty-Jint Year. Supplcmc111

2

' "· 1x.ix7

2t) "-;/1 ~4q~

ji,r October. November and O,·u•mher /9/-i6, documcnl S/18."\91,

5
