S/2021/282

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 March 2021
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 20 November 2020 to
20 February 2021, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350
(1974) and extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2555
(2020).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, despite several violations of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of 1974. The overall security
situation in the UNDOF area of operations was volatile, with continued military
activity in the areas of separation and limitation, in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2555 (2020).
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and ensure that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing across the ceasefire line as well as the crossing of the ceasefire line by
individuals, aircraft and drones constitute violations of the Agreement. In its regular
interactions with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon the
parties to exercise restraint and avoid any activities that might lead to an escalation
of the situation between the parties.
4.
Late on 24 November, personnel at United Nations position 68 observed an
explosion in the vicinity of the village of Ruhinah, approximately 1, 000 metres northwest of the position, causing the United Nations personnel to take shelter in the
bunker for approximately 90 minutes. The explosion was also heard by personnel at
United Nations positions 27, 32, 60 and observation posts 51 and 72. The Is rael
Defense Forces subsequently informed UNDOF that “the activities of Iran and its
proxies in the area of south-west Syria and specifically in the area of separation are
violations … and pose a threat to the State of Israel. In light of this, Israel has acted
accurately in a precision strike against infrastructures that are used by them”. The

21-03511 (E)

240321

*2103511*

S/2021/282

Israel Defense Forces also stated “we demand that Syria takes responsibilities for the
activities that occur in its territory, to prevent violations of agreements an d to take
action in removing all of Iran and its proxies’ forces and weaponry from the area” .
UNDOF deployed patrols in efforts to ascertain the location of the strike, but the
patrols were unable to identify the point of impact.
5.
In the early hours of 25 November, personnel at observation post 51 and the
United Nations Charlie gate reported observing six explosions on the eastern horizon.
Open sources reported airstrikes were carried out on the same day in southern
Damascus and in the vicinity of Kiswah.
6.
Late on 6 January, United Nations personnel at observation post 73 observed
five tracer rounds of unknown calibre being fired from a location in the area of
limitation north-east of their position, across the area of separation in a south-easterly
direction, with two of them exploding mid-air. The Israel Defense Forces
subsequently informed UNDOF that “the activities of Iran and its proxies in the area
southwest of the Syrian Arab Republic and specifically within the AOS [area of
separation] are violations of the Disengagement Agreement”. Open sources reported
on 6 January Israel Defense Forces airstrikes targeting locations in Kiswah, Sahnaya
and Dimas.
7.
Late on 3 February, United Nations personnel at positions 10A, 27, 60, 68 and
observation post 51 and Camp Faouar observed flares, anti-aircraft fire and two
explosions in the area of limitation. Early on 4 February, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNDOF that “Israel has carried out a precision strike against infrastructure
that are being utilized by proxies for transfers of weaponry and mobilization against
the state of Israel in Damascus International Airport … Israel is interested in quiet
and regional stability and warns that it will respond severely against all action fro m
Syrian territory against Israel”.
8.
In letters addressed to the President of the Security Council and myself, the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic conveyed information from
his Government according to which Israel had launched attacks on locations in the
Syrian Arab Republic in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In a
letter dated 7 January (S/2021/23), the Permanent Representative relayed the
information that Israel had launched, on that same day, successive rocket bursts at the
southern part of the Israeli-occupied Golan. On 13 January, the Permanent
Representative conveyed his Government’s understanding that, early on that day,
Israel had carried out airstrikes on the cities of Dayr al-Zawr and Albu Kamal in the
Syrian Arab Republic (see S/2021/46). On 22 January, the Permanent Representative
reported that on that same day, an attack by Israel in the vicinity of Hama had r esulted
in eight civilian casualties, including the death of four members of one family (see
S/2021/73). In addition, in a letter dated 4 February (S/2021/111), the Permanent
Representative conveyed his Government’s position that Israel had launched, on
3 February, successive rocket bursts from the Israeli-occupied Golan towards the
southern zone of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic.
9.
On 15 December, United Nations personnel at observation post 73 observed two
individuals, one in a vehicle and the other armed with an assault rifle outside the
vehicle, in the area of separation. Around the same time, an Israel Defense Forces
patrol was observed on the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) approximately
800 metres from the armed individual. UNDOF engaged the Syrian authorities and
the Israel Defense Forces during this observation owing to the potential confrontation
that could have resulted from the presence of the armed individual in the vicinity of
the Israel Defense Forces patrol. Both the individuals and the Israel Defense Forces
subsequently departed the area.

2/8

21-03511

S/2021/282

10. Military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems, artillery systems and a multi-launch rocket system within the area of
limitation, which are considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of
limitation, pursuant to the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On
31 December, United Nations personnel at Camp Ziouani heard 49 heavy explosions
within a two-hour period, which UNDOF assessed as having been part of training
exercises conducted by the Israel Defense Forces on the Alpha side.
11. UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock and hunters
carrying hunting weapons. The Israel Defense Forces continued to express deep
concern about these crossings, which they stated were a threat to the safety and
security of Israel Defense Forces personnel operating in proximity of the ceasefire
line. The Israel Defense Forces personnel increased their op erations in response to
these crossings, including by firing warning shots on 11 occasions to discourage
individuals from the Bravo side from approaching the Israeli technical fence.
12. On 2 February, the Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that a Syrian n ational
had been apprehended by the Israel Defense Forces, who later informed UNDOF that
the individual was detained and apprehended after crossing the ceasefire line south of
Burayqah. On 3 February, UNDOF, in consultation with the parties, assisted the
International Committee of the Red Cross in facilitating the return of the Syrian
national to the Bravo side through the Qunaytirah crossing. On 7 February, the Syrian
authorities informed UNDOF that the Israel Defense Forces had apprehended and
detained another Syrian civilian. The Israel Defense Forces subsequently confirmed
to UNDOF that they had apprehended a “suspicious” Syrian national who had crossed
the ceasefire line and had taken him into custody for questioning. On 18 February,
UNDOF, in consultation with the parties and in coordination with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, facilitated the return of two civilians, including the
individual apprehended and detained by the Israel Defense Forces on 7 February, from
the Alpha side to the Bravo side through the Qunaytirah crossing. The other individual
had reportedly been apprehended and detained by the Israel Defense Forces on
13 February for also allegedly crossing the ceasefire line.
13. Sporadic heavy explosions, bursts of heavy machine g un and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the areas of separation and limitation on
the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed this military activity as related to the controlled
detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of clearance and tra ining by the Syrian
armed forces. UNDOF observed an increase in the presence of Syrian armed forces
personnel, some of whom were armed, staffing a number of checkpoints within the
area of separation in violation of the Agreement on Disengagement. UNDOF als o
observed, on several occasions, the presence of Syrian anti -aircraft guns within the
area of limitation.
14. On 12 occasions during the reporting period, UNDOF observed drones flying in
the area of separation. UNDOF was not in a position to determine the points of origin
of the drones or to attribute responsibility for them to either party.
15. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the firing into and across the area of
separation as well as across the ceasefire line, the presence of unauthorized equipment
and personnel in the areas of separation and limitation and the crossings of the
ceasefire line by civilians from the Bravo side. UNDOF closely liaised with the
parties, including during periods of heightened tension, to de-escalate the situation.
16. During the reporting period, the security situation on the Bravo side
deteriorated, with open sources reporting increased attacks by unknown armed
21-03511

3/8

S/2021/282

elements involving the use of improvised explosive devices or small arms fire
targeting Syrian security forces on or close to UNDOF patrol routes in the area of
operations. In the southern part of the area of operations, the security situation
continued to be volatile, with open sources reporting several attacks, including
improvised explosive devices and assassinations targeting Syrian security forces
checkpoints and convoys, other government authorities and former members of armed
opposition groups. Such security incidents continued to reportedly occur closer to the
UNDOF area of operations, namely in Jasim, Nawa, Saham al -Jawlan, Tasil and
Tafas, including in the vicinity of UNDOF patrol routes.
17. Recent activity linked to ongoing tensions in Tafas has led to an increased risk
of collateral damage to UNDOF in the short term. On 24 January, open sources
reported Syrian armed forces launching a large-scale operation in the vicinity of
Tafas, resulting in the deterioration for a short period in the security situation in the
area of limitation on the Bravo side. This operation was reportedly followed by at
least eight coordinated armed attacks on Syrian security forces checkpoints by
unknown armed elements, which intensified on 28 January, including close to an
UNDOF patrol route in the vicinity of Mughr al-Mir. An improvised explosive device
attack in Sayda was reported on 29 January, as were separate armed attacks on Syrian
security forces checkpoints in Jaba and Qahtaniyah, close to UNDOF patrol routes,
in the area of separation on 30 January. In response to the deterioration in the security
situation, Syrian armed forces reportedly deployed reinforcements to areas around
Tafas, Muzayrib and Yadudah. In addition, low-intensity violence in Dar‘a
Governorate, which periodically escalated into larger armed clashes, continued to be
reported. Although UNDOF personnel were not directly threatened, the risk of
collateral damage cannot be ruled out.
18. UNDOF continues to implement its mandate in the context of the measures
adopted by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel to control the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. These measures include limitations on the
movement of United Nations personnel and their mandatory testing and quarantine
after any cross-border movement. Since early March 2020, the Alpha side has
continued to restrict the movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel
through the Qunaytirah crossing, which it opens only on a case -by-case basis,
affecting the operational and administrative activities of UNDOF. UNDOF has
continued to liaise with the Israel Defense Forces with regard to their facilitation of
the crossing of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel at the Qunaytirah
crossing, in particular the need for United Nations personnel to cross u sing only
documents issued by UNDOF at the Alpha gate and to return to the established
crossing procedures.
19. On 8 January, four UNDOF personnel tested positive for COVID -19. Contact
tracing was conducted, resulting in a number of personnel being placed in quarantine
and movement out of the two affected United Nations positions being restricted.
Between 9 and 23 January, 28 UNDOF military personnel and five civilian staff (one
national and four international) tested positive for COVID-19. As at 20 February, all
UNDOF personnel who had tested positive for COVID-19 had recovered.
20. UNDOF continued to implement the necessary measures aimed at maintaining
operational capability and limiting the potential spread of COVID -19 in the Force.
These measures included telecommuting arrangements for national and international
civilian personnel as well as the disinfection of offices and common spaces and
vehicles entering the camps.
21. Both parties continued to suspend inspections conducted by Observer Group
Golan in the areas of limitation, citing COVID-19 as the reason for the suspension.

4/8

21-03511

S/2021/282

Neither party agreed to the inspection mechanisms, including social distancing, that
UNDOF recommended to them, in order to resume inspections.
22. As part of the return to full mandate implementation, UNDOF had resumed the
restoration, including repainting and refurbishment, of the barrels marking the
ceasefire line, which had ceased for security reasons and continues to be temporarily
suspended owing to COVID-19 restrictions.
23. Progress in the incremental return of UNDOF to the Bravo side continued
despite being slowed by the restrictions on construction due to COVID -19 control
measures. Additional work to extend position 60 continued. The reconstruction of
observation post 71 continued, albeit at a slower pace owing to inclement weather
conditions, and is estimated to be completed in June 2021.
24. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Ob server Group Golan, who are
under the operational control of UNDOF and maintain seven fixed observation posts
and one temporary observation post along the ceasefire line. The focus of Observer
Group Golan remains on continuous static observation and situational awareness.
25. UNDOF monthly operational patrols continued on routes in the areas of
separation and limitation, with 1,317 operational activities carried out in November
2020, 1,559 completed in December 2020 and 1,166 completed in January 2021.
UNDOF patrol routes covered approximately 97 per cent of the area of separation and
some 55 per cent of the area of limitation.
26. The movement of UNDOF personnel through Lebanon continued to be
restricted owing to measures related to COVID-19 and Lebanese administrative
requirements. The route between Beirut and Damascus, via the Judaydah and Masna‘
border crossing, which is a primary resupply route for UNDOF, remained open for
the commercial movement of goods.
27. The UNDOF assessment was that there continued to be a significant threat to
United Nations personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants
of war, including unexploded ordnance and mines, as well as a probable threat from
the possible presence of sleeper cells of armed groups. In a ddition, the deterioration
in the security situation in the central part of the area of operations and the continued
volatile security situation in the southern part have slowed the progress in the opening
of new patrol routes.
28. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of positions and observation posts on both the Alpha
and Bravo sides, in addition to regular rehearsals, exercises and training for identified
contingencies. Risk mitigation measures, including force protection measures,
continued to be developed at positions and observation posts and at the operational
base at Camp Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
29. As at 20 February, UNDOF comprised 1,091 troops, including 60 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Bhutan (2), Czechia (4), Fiji (135), Ghana (3),
India (198), Ireland (132), Nepal (403) and Uruguay (214). In addition, 75 military
observers from Observer Group Golan, including 13 women military observers,
assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
30. In its resolution 2555 (2020), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 30 June 2021, and requested
21-03511

5/8

S/2021/282

the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and
the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/75/297), submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
74/14, entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
31. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict further reduces the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
32. I am concerned about the continued violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement during the reporting period, in a particularly volatile time for the region,
including the breach of the ceasefire that occurred on 24 November and 3 February,
which also posed a significant risk to UNDOF personnel. The Israel Defense Forces
should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line. I remain concerned by the
continued presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of separation. There should
be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. The
continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation
on both the Alpha and the Bravo sides are also of concern. These developments are
in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. I urge the parties to the
Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and comply with the Agreement. I continue to
encourage members of the Security Council to support efforts to sensitize both parties
to the risk of escalation and the need to preserve the ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
33. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UN DOF. All
violations of the ceasefire line increase tensions between the signatories to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and contribute to undermining stability in the
area. The continued liaison by UNDOF with the parties has contributed to
de-escalation during times of heightened tension.
34. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remain
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a priority
for the Force. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Force’s plans for an incremental return to operations and positions
in the area of separation and to ensure that the Force can implement its mandate fully,
including inspections on both sides. At the same time, the parties must continue to
support the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
35. Given the worrying trend of continued violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the safety and security of military and civilian personnel in
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan are of particular concern. It is therefore of
particular importance that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to bear
on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate in a
safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in accordance with the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. It remains important that the parties also
continue to facilitate the deployment of all personnel to UNDOF for effective mandate
implementation.
6/8

21-03511

S/2021/282

36. The continued support of Member States, and in particular the confidence and
commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF, remain key factors in the
Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan,
Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland, Nepal and Uruguay for their contributions and
the commitment, resolve and consummate professionalism of their military personnel
in UNDOF. I am also thankful to the Member States that have contributed military
observers to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
37. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Ishwar Hamal, and to the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership in UNDOF and the military observers in
Observer Group Golan, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned to them
by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment, under ext remely
challenging circumstances.

21-03511

7/8

S/2021/282

8/8

21-03511
