,

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

C,OUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2227”.

MEETING:

6 JUNE 1980

NEWYORK

CONTENTS
Page

Proxkional

agenda (SIAgenda12227)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.....................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..s......

1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2227th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 6 June 1980, at 11 a.m.
President:

the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Legwaila
(Botswana), Mr. Oramas (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim
(Ethiopia),
Mr. Bonnelame
(Seychelles) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2227)

1. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/13986,
which contains the text of a letter dated 5 June from
the representative of South Africa to the President
of the Council.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/13969)
The meeting

4. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretation
from
French): It is several years now since it was recognized that the United Nations and the international
community have a special responsibility concerning
the South African people and its liberation movements
in their daily struggle against apartheid and the
persistent and growing repression that prevails in South
Africa in the form of imprisonment, torture, summary
execution and the assassination of opponents of upartheid. Similarly, it is several years since the Organization, justly and because of the concern it felt,
recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for freedom and
equality. A long time ago an international consensus
was secured and recorded that the adoption of economic and other sanctions against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
was indispensable, provided those sanctions were
universally implemented, to remedy the serious situation that had been created in that country, and thus
avoid an international conflict with unforeseeable
consequences.

was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Chargk d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2225th meeting, I invite the representative of Nigeria to take a place at the Council
table and I invite the representative of Mozambique
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clark (Nigeria), Chairman
of the Special Committee
against
Apartheid, took a place at the Council table; and
Mr. Lobo (Mozambique)
took the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.

5. Unfortunately, with every passing year South
Africa becomes more insolent and arrogant; the upartheid regime becomes more active and more heavily
armed; it defies the world because the international
community is bogged down in contradictions, tom
between defence of its principles and inordinate
consumption of South African resources; it checks
and re-checks its accounts and is clearly embarrassed
by the relevant resolutions which it adopts and then
consigns to oblivion. The result is that the situation
in South Africa in this month of June 1980 is as

2. The PRESIDENT: 1. should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Seychelles and Yugoslavia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
1

explosive as that which preceded the events in Soweto
in June 1976 and which marked a low point in the
inhuman and barbarous history of South African

merit and hard work will count. That sun will shine
brightly one day on the entire southern part of our
continent; the palm of the hand of injustice, arbitrariness and assassination will certainly not be able to
hide it. The Security Council will deserve particular
praise if, fully assuming its responsibilities, it works
today to hasten the bursting of this new dawn.

apartheid.

6. Today, in Pretoria, Cape Town and elsewhere
on South African territory, there is not a moment
when patriots-and they now include churchmen-are
not dying or being thrown into horrible prisons merely
because they want a little more freedom and dignity;
there is not a moment when the racist South African
regime is not assaulting our Platonic concepts, if not
our silence-with mutilated corpses and torture of all
kinds, cynically presented to our indignant and disgusted eyes, to our revolted consciences. There is not
a moment when one or another of the front-line
States is not the victim of South African incursions on
its territory, or when peaceful inhabitants of its villages are not assassinated. There is not a moment
when this “glass house”, the living sanctuary of the
most noble ideals, is not vibrating with diatribes from
Pretoria against human rights, international morality
and peace.

11. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): The Zambian delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Council for this
month. My delegation is confident that the Council is
in good hands because of your well-known, characteristic precision and long diplomatic experience. It
is our hope that Norway’s opposition to racism will
constitute a positive contribution to our struggle to
remove the last vestiges of racist oppression and
domination, which is the issue before the Council.
12. I should also like to pay a well-des&ved tribute
to my good friend Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger,
who presided over the Council last month with distinction.

7. Yet here we are again, almost overcome by
embarrassment and impotence, discussing yet another
time the question of what sanctions to take against
this Africa which has noisily disowned the true Africa,
this Africa whose deeds and gestures are all in flagrant
and constant contradiction with the Charter that we
defend.

13. The Council is meeting at a critical time in the
long and cruel history of South Africa. It is significant
that the events in that country are taking place at the
opening of a new decade which we hope will usher in
a new era for the people of South Africa. Indeed,
this is the time for serious reflection on the part of all,
as the oppressed people of South Africa continue to
demonstrate their resolve to free themselves at all
costs.

8. In the Niger’s opinion, South Africa has by now
profited long enough from the Council’s indulgence. It
fully deserves the admonitory sanctions for which
Africa has been waiting for a long time and which the
exasperated international community has repeatedly
prescribed and announced.
9. Thus, on that basis, we must demand the immediate cessation of all the arbitrary police measures
that the South African rigime has been using to put
down the rebellion which that rkgime itself has caused
in the ranks of the nationalists, schoolchildren,
disillusioned churchmen and all the other opponents
of apartheid. These sordid measures in fact contribute
only to maintaining, justifying and developing the
guerrilla action, the desperate acts of economic
sabotage and the terror which today have become
the replies of the harried and harassed patriots, exercising their right of self-defence.

14. What is equally significant, and indeed unique in
the history of the liberation of South Africa, is the
fact that even children are an active part of the struggle
against apartheid-that
is, in addition to men and
women. They have joined their fathers and mothers in
the just struggle for national liberation, independence
and genuine democracy. Since early April 1980,
schoolchildren who are racially classified in South
Africa as “Coloureds” have risen against the apartheid system of education, following in the footsteps
of their brothers and sisters in Soweto. As I speak
today, the mass student boycotts have the active
participation of black, Coloured and Indian children.
The protest against inferior racist education has continued to spread like a bush fire, despite the increasingly repressive and inhuman reaction of the Pretoria
rigime .

10. We have a saying in the Niger that once the sun
has risen it is impossible to hide it with the palm of
one’s hand. The South African sun is freedom; it is
the restoration of human dignity; it is the equitable
participation of all citizens in the management of
local affairs; it is the death of apartheid; it is the
rehabilitation of the victims of racism-and at the forefront of those victims is the glorious figure of the
political prisoner Nelson Mandela; in a word,
it is the dawning of a democratic society where only

15. That is only logical, and it should not come as
a surprise to those who are familiar with the South
African scene. Apartheid, which is the highest and
worst form of institutionalized racism, adversely
affects the lives of the oppressed people from birth
to death. Apartheid cuts across all age groups, making
no distinction between male and female, father and
son, mother and daughter. The oppressed men and
women, together with their children, daily feel the lash
of national oppression.
2

16. The education system, as just one of the facets
of exploitation and oppression in South Africa, is one
that is intended to instil slavery and submission on
the part of the oppressed.
17. In 1976, the children of Soweto were protesting
against the imposition on them of Afrikaans, which is
the language of the oppressor. They rejected this
outright because they recognized it as part of their
oppressor’s machinations to keep them for ever
exploited and subjugated. We are all familiar with the
tragic results of the Soweto uprising. The lesson of
Soweto is that the South African regime is sitting
on an active volcano, which is bound to explode-an
explosion that can come from any angle.
18. In 1980 the protests started with so-called
Coloured schoolchildren rejecting the inferior racist
education. From a few hundred schoolchildren in a few
schools, the conflagration spread to
“Coloured”
schools in all racial areas all over South Africa and
the numbers of schoolchildren involved swelled by
the thousands daily.
19. The reaction of the South African regime to this
challenge to its oft-repeated empty claims that only a
few disgruntled people are causing trouble is typical
and not surprising. As it did in Soweto, and has done
throughout its shameful history, it has sought to stop
the tide by even more repressive force.
regime has intensified its ruthless
system of oppression by utilizing all its military and
police might. We count the very young among those
who have perished from bullets of the apartheid
regime. Schoolchildren have been killed in cold blood
by the regime. Thousands of men, women and children
who have peacefully protested against the various
manifestations of apartheid have been arbitrarily
arrested, detained or imprisoned. The prisons are
almost bursting at the seams with people who have not
committed any crime. All they have done is dare to
say no to apartheid.
20.

The apartheid

21. On 20 April 1980, the Sunday Times of Johannesburg reported that
“South Africa has more prisoners for its population than any country in the Western or third
worlds. Every day some 100,000 people pack its
gaols.”

22. The mass education boycott that is going on right
now should not be looked at in isolation. It is part and
parcel of the explosive situation that the Council is
supposed to be examining. The fact that, even after
the massacre of many schoolchildren in Soweto, those
young children are willing to risk all is tremendous
testimony to the fact that, unless the rulers of South
Africa heed the voices of the representatives of the
people, there can be no peace in South Africa.
23. The intensity of the opposition to apartheid in
South Africa should not be minimized. The oppressed
people as a whole have lost patience with the system,
and the unrest in all spheres of life has been escalating.
In addition to the student boycotts, black workers in
various industries have gone on strike. The general
unrest in the country has been accompanied by other
serious incidents occurring inside South Africa itself.
24. The recent events in South Africa, like those at
Sharpeville and Soweto, are steps on the inevitable
road to the eradication of apartheid.
25. The apartheid regime has from the start been
maintained by a series of repressive laws designed to
maintain white plunder and exploitation of the natural
and human resources while relegating the owners of
the country-that is, the African people-to the status
of poverty-stricken aliens with neither birthright nor
basic human rights and freedom.

26. Since the Natives Land Act of 1913, the regime
in South Africa has passed and enforced a series of
increasingly stringent security laws to suppress black
opposition and consolidate apartheid. Through the
years we have seen the so-called Suppression of
Communism Act of 1950, the so-called Public Safety
Act and the so-called Criminal Law Amendment Act
of 1953. We go on to the Unlawful Organizations
Act of 1960, under which the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania (PAC) were banned. Throughout
the 1960s a series of far-reaching security laws was
enacted. A series of General Laws Amendment Acts
was passed, which, among other things, created the
offence of sabotage, which caused the death penalty
and allowed house arrest, arrest without warrant and
detention without trial.

“During the past 10years, the daily prison population in South Africa has increased by 12 per cent
a year, while its population has grown by an annual
7 per cent.”

27. Those were not the actions of a Government
concerned with the maintenance of law and order for
all its people but the desperate responses of a regime
determined to perpetuate the most inhuman form of
racism in the face of continued resistance by the
people it oppressed and exploited. What the South
African regime never learned while it was busy passing
,that barrage of repressive laws is that no amount of
brutality, repression, torture or death will defeat a
people’s genuine desire for human dignity and democracy.

In recent years the prison population figures have been
swelled by children as well as adults.

28. A long history of anti-colonial and anti-apartheid
struggles.by the black people of South Africa exists.

The newspaper went on to say:

3 ,

Each display of resistance has been met with more
severe laws. In 1967, for example, the Terrorism
Act was passed by an overwhelming majority. It was
described as the most stringent security law. That
Act created a new offence of terrorism, which is so
widely defined as to be a catch-all measure allowing
the detention of anyone, without charge, for an indefinite period. That Act, like others, carries a mandatory
maximum sentence of death.

direct involvement in plans for South Africa’s new
constitution because “they have slower thoughtprocesses*‘. Such statements, which can only be
utterances of people with sick minds, must be treated
with the contempt they deserve. But the seriousness
of such utterances must not be minimized. They are an
additional reason why the international community and
the Security Council in particular should be concerned
about the situation in South Africa, for such insults
against the oppressed majority will obviously leave no
room for resolving the problems of South Africa
peacefully. They are in themselves a recipe for a
racial conflagration in South Africa. They are an
invitation to the black majority to abandon all hope for
peaceful change and to meet head on the challenge of
the white minority through resort to violent means to
bring about change. With race relations poisoned, the
white minority will certainly have more to lose in the
end.

29. Under that Act, and the many previous ones,
thousands have been arrested, detained, tortured and
imprisoned and many others have even been killed.
Many have been imprisoned for life at Robben Island,
and many have been in prison for almost two decades,
merely for seeking a more socially and politically
just society.
30. The international community has condemned
as inhuman and abominable. I have not
heard anyone outside the apartheid clique say anything
to the contrary. The General Assembly has condemned
apartheid as a crime against humanity. The Security
Council has adopted numerous resolutions aimed at
changing the situation in South Africa. Despite all
that, the apartheid regime is intensifying its ruthless
system of oppression. Of course, the oppressed continue to oppose apartheid.
apartheid

34. The ultimately legitimate rationale for the
struggle in South Africa is not only to eradicate upartheid but also to institute a genuinely democratic State
in South Africa based on universal adult suffrage. It
is ironic that, even in this twentieth century, Africans,
who constitute the overwhelming majority of the
population of South Africa, are denied even the basic
political right to vote. Zambia supports the legitimate
struggle of the people of South Africa for freedom and
justice for all.

31. As if the repressive laws already on its books
were not enough, the South African regime has continued to pass even more stringent ones. In 1976 it
replaced the Suppression of Communism Act by the
Internal Security Act. This wider and stricter version
allows the regime to detain potential State witnesses in
political trials for an indefinite period. Of course,
these potential witnesses are held incommunicado.
The Internal Security Act also allows the regime to
detain anyone it regards as a threat to State security
without trial for an indefinite period. In the first year
of that Act’s ope’ration, at least 135 people were
detained under its provisions. That figure has risen to
thousands, as it is reported that the daily prison
population in South Africa is 100,000.

35. The South African regime must be made to
realize that there can be no peace in South Africa as
long as the vast majority of that country are denied
their inalienable political rights. No amount of oppression and repression will reverse the tide of freedom and
justice in South Africa.
36. Sduth Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia and its repeated acts of aggression against
independent African States, particularly Angola and
Zambia, cannot and will not divert attention from the
problem of apartheid in South Africa itself. The
illegal occupation of Namibia and the repeated acts of
aggression against the front-line States moreover
highlight the threat to international peace and security
that the situation in South Africa poses.

32. South Africa continues to outlaw all forms of
peaceful protest even by the clergy. We are all familiar
with what has happened to Bishops Tutu and Bavin,
Reverend Thome and several of their fellow clergymen.

37. Zambia and Africa as a whole want justice and
peace in southern Africa. The Security Council has a
vital role to play in this regard in view of its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is our hope that
the Council and the international community as a whole
will fully contribute to the endeavour of bringing about
freedom and justice to all the people of southern
Africa. That is our plea.

Apartheid
in South Africa is as dangerous a
doctrine for the white South Africans as it is for the
black majority. It is evident that this notion of continued white dominance and supremacy has dangerously intoxicated them to the extent that their minds
and general outlook have been poisoned. Thus, only
yesterday, there were reports about the Minister of
Posts and Telecommunications of South Africa, a man
by the name of Hennie Smit, having made an outrageous statement before the so-called South African
Parliament to the effect that blacks were excluded from

33.

38. We look to the Council to take effective measures which can force the Botha clique to. abandon
apartheid,
leading to the establishment of a democratic State based on universal adult suffrage. In the
4

claimed by the ruling circles in South Africa and by
the imperialist monopolies are aimed at keeping in
working order the system of repression and exploitation. It is not the putting on of more attractive fetters
but rather the removal of the very chains of the apartheid regime that will lead to the full realization of the
right to self-determination of the people of South
Africa and to the elimination of racist and colonialist
repression.

specific context of this debate, the Council should as
a matter of urgency condemn the South African
apartheid regime for its massive violence and murder
of the oppressed people, including young schoolchildren. The Council should compel the South
African regime to terminate urgently all oppression,
repression, torture and harassment-of the indigenous
people. South Africa must end the wave of massive
arrests and detentions. As one of the moves towards
creatinga democratic State in South Africa, all political
prisoners, especially leaders like Nelson Mandela,
must be reIeased immediately. The Council should add
its:prestigious voice to the campaign for the release of
Mandela and other political prisoners going on both
inside and outside South Africa.

42. The Council should long ago, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter, have taken far-reaching
steps against the racist regime in South Africa. We
know who is blocking these decisions. It is not surprising that, as a result of an absence of any enforcement measures against the Fascist regime, the freedom
fighters are directing their attacks precisely against
those strategic focal points that have been set up
with the direct support of the imperialist monopolies
that serve to expand the military potential of the rulers
in Pretoria.

39. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
The Council has once
again met to discuss the agenda item dealing with
the criminal policy of the apartheid regime in South
Africa; which represents a growing threat to intemational peace and security. Despite the protests that’
have been voiced by international public opinion and
the condemnation expressed by the overwhelming
majority of Member States, despite the repeated
demands of the Council that South Africa put an end
to its inhuman policy of enslaving the peoples of
South Africa and Namibia, the Fascist regime in
Pretoria is further intensifying its policy of apartheid.
Daily, news reaches us about new crimes. A new wave
of Fascist terror and violence has engulfed the entire
country. Aggressive acts against peaceful neighbouring
African States have caused alarm among all nations.
The barbaric Pretoria regime has not even flinched
at using military violence against schoolchildren.
But, just as it is impossible to prevent the eruption
of a volcano, no one can constantly hold down the
will of peoples for freedom.

(interpretation

from Russian):

43. We can learn a lesson from history. It would be
impossible by simple appeals to compel Pretoria to
end its policy of apartheid. Fascist regimes to this day
have never voluntarily given up their racist and military
policies. They always had to be forced to do so. The
furtherance of such an enforcement would be in
harmony with our responsibility to the peoples of
South Africa and consonant with the mandate vested
in us by the peoples of the world.
44. I should like to remind members of the Council
of the following fact: as early as 4 February 1972,
the Council-which
at that time was meeting on
African soil-stated in resolution 311 (1972) that “the
situation in South Africa seriously disturbs intemational peace and security in southern Africa”. The
Government of South Africa was condemned because
it continued to practise its policies of uparrheid
and an appeal was thereafter made to it to release all
persons imprisoned as a result of the policies of apnrfheid. All States were called upon strictly to observe
the arms embargo against South Africa, and a fundamental view was expressed in the resolution that

40. There is growing resistance on the part of the
people of South Africa against the Fascist terror,
and it is headed by the liberation movement ANC.
There is also active growth in international solidarity
with the long-suffering people of that country. The
apartheid regime has been condemned throughout the
world. Its days would have been numbered long ago
had it not been able to rely on the political, military,
economic and even nuclear co-operation offered by
imperialist circles, which by that token are also responsible for the crimes-committed by the apartheid
regime. It is typical of the policies of those circles
that, on the one hand, they impose sanctions against
Iran, which is resisting foreign tutelage, and, on the
other hand, they have prevented sanctions being
imposed against Fascist South Africa. What price
words of condemnation for violence if at the same
time the racist regime is virtually being encouraged to
continue its policy of violence?

“urgent measures must be taken by the Security
Council to secure implementation of its resolutions
and thereby promote a solution to the grave situation in South Africa and southern Africa”.
Eight years have since passed. The demands contained
in that resolution speak for themselves even today.
45. The German Democratic Republic wholeheartedly supports the request that enforcement
measures be introduced with the aim of completely
isolating the apartheid regime and favours the convening as soon as possible of the international conference on sanctions for that purpose in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 34/93 C.

41. The present situation in South Africa gives the
lie to the, assertion that apartheid is gradually being
eliminated. The so-called reforms that have been pro5

46. The Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, Ambassador Clark of Nigeria, in his remarkable statement [222&h meeting] has acquainted
the Council with a number of proposals that are supported by the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic.

by extension to all southern Africa. Its existence is
a permanent threat to international peace and security.
53. Institutionalized racism and years and years of
oppression and merciless exploitation have engendered a backlash of bitterness and confrontation. The
persistent arrogance of the white minority in power
in its flagrant refusal to bow to decisions of the
international community and to hand over to the
African majority the means of exercising its fundamental right to self-determination has led to revolt and
resistance. By refusing to comply with the requirements of an evolution by which it is condemned,
South Africa is compromising any possibility of a
peaceful settlement and forcing South Africans to
resort to armed struggle in order to ensure the triumph
of their legitimate cause.

47. The people and Government of the German
Democratic Republic demand that Nelson Mandela
be immediately released, together with all other
political prisoners being held by the Fascist regime in
South Africa.
48. Recognition of the right of peoples to selfdetermination necessarily entails the duty of constant
support for efforts for its implementation. We stand
fully behind the struggle being waged by the people
of South Africa under the leadership of its liberation movement, ANC, and also that of the people of
Namibia under the guidance of the South West Africa
People’s Organization.

54. Undoubtedly, 1960 and 1976 will for ever be
linked in South African history with the memory of
the innocent victims of Sharpeville and Soweto whose
sacrifices demonstrated the permanent willingness
of the South African people to struggle against and
resist .the system of domination, oppression and
segregation. Indulging in reprisals and brutal aggression is simply the last-ditch refuge of the South African
regime.

49. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretarion
from
French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to
convey to you the warm congratulations of my delegation on your accession to the presidency of the Council. Since we became a member of the Council, we
‘have been able to appreciate your outstanding personal
and professional qualities, your tact and your diplomacy, and no one can doubt that we will draw fully
on your skill and wisdom during this month, which
looks as if it is going to be a busy one. The Council
has to consider some of the most disquieting items on
its agenda.

55. The infernal machine of racial discrimination
which was set in motion at the very creation of South
Africa in 1909 has undoubtedly continued to turn in
the opposite direction from that of history, but has
nevertheless turned inexorably, violating the most
elementary human rights and attempting to stifle
resistance, crushing minds and spuming the condemnations of the international community. Whenever voices
are raised; here or elsewhere, denouncing its demented
policy, South Africa plunges ever deeper into its folly
and its alienation.

50. I should also like to express our very warm
appreciation to your predecessor, our brother Ambassador Ide Oumarou of the Niger, for the skill, competence, devotion and spirit of co-operation with
which he conducted the work of the Council during
the month of May.

56. Today, once again, we can witness that Pretoria
is in disarray. It is striking out blindly, tracking down
innocent people, carrying out collective punishment
and executing South.Africans whose sole crime is that
they are fighting for a more just social and political
order.

51. The urgent nature of this meeting of the Council
in itself emphasizes the seriousness of the situation
at present obtaining in South Africa. The alarming
news that has reached us from South Africa seems to
indicate that the recent events there reveal the true
underlying intentions of racist leaders of South Africa.
These events are a cogent reconfirmation of their
determination to pursue their policy ofapartheid. They
remind those of us who had ventured to hope against
all hope that some change would take place in Pretoria’s
behaviour that it is vain to continue to harbour such
an illusion. Finally, they are part and parcel of the
implacable logic underlying the very system of apartheid, which is unable to survive without repression.

57. The savage brutality of the South African forces
has been very clearly illustrated by the representatives of the liberation movements, and we should
like to reiterate to them here and now that Tunisia,
fully aware of the rightness of their cause, will always
stand at their side to help the people of South Africa
recover their freedom and dignity.
58. The arbitrary and repressive measures that- have
been. taken against the opponents of aparrheid are
becoming .ever more frequent: bannings, house arrest,
exile, illegal imprisonment, torture and murder continue to be the daily lot of those who dare to speak
out in favour of freedom and justice. Political, trade
union and religious leaders are the main targets of those

52. The stubborn attempts of the racist regime of
Pretoria to maintain the odious system of apartheid
are unquestionably at the origin of the present tragic
situation. The apartheid regime is the very root of
the ills that have been visited upon South Africa and
6
i

measures. Hundreds of schoolchildren have been
arrested . because
.
_they . were protesting against
- - racial
segregation in education. A number of churchmen
have been persecuted, including the Anglican Bishop,
Desmond Tutu, the Bishop of Johannesburg, Timothy
Bavin, and the Reverend Thome.

64. The future of the South African people having
thus been defined, there is only one way open to the
Pretoria regime: to free all the political prisoners,
and specifically Nelson Mandela, and to embark upon
direct dialogue with the liberation movements with a
view to eliminating apartheid and ushering in a democratic regime in South Africa.

59. The Minister of Police, Louis Le Grange, stated
that his Government was resolved to maintain law and
order at whatever price. In other words, Pretoria is
determined to strengthen its racist laws and to pursue
inexorably its strategy of oppression which has
kindled emotion and called forth the condemnation of
the international community, even amongst those
countries which still maintain relations with the
Government of South Africa.

65. The participation of the liberation movements in
any settlement efforts should be regarded as fundamental. Any attempt to reach a settlement without
them must be unsuccessful. But the Pretoria racists
are stubborn enough to envisage such a possible
alternative. They continue, with the customary arrogance, to refuse to abide by the decisions of the
United Nations.

60. Pretoria is bordering on childishness if it believes
that it can contain, by its repressive policies, the
liberation struggle being waged by the people of South
Africa. The vicious circle of repression and ensuing
resistance demonstrates the bankruptcy of those who
today are the stronger. The cycle which it continues to
engender will, little by little, finally destroy them.

66. It is high time for the international community
to react effectively to impose peace on that part of
Africa-a lasting peace that would make it possible
for the people of South Africa to regain their dignity
and to build a multiracial State based on freedom,
justice and equality.

61. No one can be misled about the underlying
significance of what is occurring in South Africa at
present. But what we should be mindful of above all
is the purport and the real impact of those events
which are only a single episode, just one part of the
long struggle which has been waged by the people of
South Africa in the face of State terrorism which has
been cynically institutionalized and glorified by a
specialized repressive machine.

67. The times are sufliciently serious, and the flood
of violence which at present permeates South
Africa seriously threatens international peace and
security. The situation is threatening to lead to a confrontation fraught with unforeseeable consequences.
The Security Council is in duty bound to put an end
to this before it is too late.
68. In the face of the obstinacy of South Africa, it
-is up to the Council to take every appropriate step
envisaged in the Charter to force the racist regime of
South Africa to put an end to its policy of apartheid.
Chapter VII of the Charter in particular contains provisions which are designed to enforce strict respect
for decisions taken by the United Nations.

62. Today we are witnessing the extraordinary reawakening of a national awareness which is resolved
to maintain international opinion constantly alert until
apartheid has been totally uprooted--apartheid,
which
‘is an insult to our most sacred values. A people of
more than 19 million men, women and children who
have been enslaved and humiliated are now rebelling
and dying in defence of their dignity. They are resolved
to regain their inalienable rights, and to do that they
will balk at no sacrifice. The merciless repression and
mass arrests of recent weeks have only reinforced
their firm determination to struggle and to win. That
determination has been proved by Sharpeville,
Soweto and those who have died there, and recent
events have demonstrated that, henceforth, no force,
however powerful, can stem the irreversible march
of the people of South Africa towards freedom, nor
stifle their legitimate quest for the re-establishment of
justice and equality.

69. Any measure which the Council takes must have
the support of all Member States. It is up to us to
organize a common front in order to undertake actions
which will permit the replacement of oppression and
the law of force by brotherhood and the force of law
so as to introduce a new era based on equality, justice,
freedom and respect for human rights.
70. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Mr. President, my
delegation is pleased to see you occupying the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June.
You are an old hand in the United Nations and we in
my delegation have come to know you as a skilful
diplomat, objective in your consideration of the issues
before the United Nations. That knowledge gives us
trust and confidence that during this month you will
bring to the Council leadership and wisdom to help
us to resolve the many problems and difficulties that
will confront us in the days ahead. I assure you of the
full co-operation of my delegation in your worthy
endeavours.

63. Surely the time has now come for Pretoria to
face up to the facts, to understand that it is now more
than ever vain to seek to impose its policy of apartheid through collective repression and generalized
terrorism. Pretoria is fighting against the ineluctable.
No force can break the resistance of the South African
people, and that is particularly true since the international community is solidly behind it.
7

71. I wish also to avail myself of this opportunity
to place on record our admiration and respect for your
predecessor, Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger,
President of the Council for the month of May. My
delegation had no opportunity of addressing the Council during his term of office, but the manner in which
he conducted the business of the Council revealed
his background and experience in managing the affairs
of the Organization. The consultations he conducted with the members of the Council were characterized by dispatch and directness with regard to the
points at issue, which was helpful to all of us. We congratulate him on work well done.
72. Today we are once again confronted with the
question of South Africa. This question has had a long
and unsavoury history in the Security Council. Now
recent events in South ‘Africa have elicited grave
concern and fear for the maintenance of international
peace and security, concern and fear that are indeed
well founded given the past history of social unrest
and uprisings in South Africa that is directly traceable
to the abhorrent policies of uparrheid in that country,
the principal objective of which is racist separation
-an odious policy which postulates the superiority
of one race over another and is thus an affront to
human dignity.
73. The black majority in South Africa has been in a
state of ferment and turmoil ever since the Sharpeville massacre of 1960. We know that the massacre
was followed by even more repressive and oppressive
treatment of the black peoples in South Africa by the
white racist minority regime. The tragic incident in
Sharpeville has become a rallying point against the
evil apartheid policies of South Africa and has evoked
strong feelings of anger and resentment among members of the international community. Nelson Mandela
and Steve Biko are names that will always be recalled
in the continuing and .intensifying struggle of an
oppressed people against uparrheid. Soweto also takes
its place as a milestone in the struggle, along with
Sharpeville, for the demonstrations of Soweto spilled
the blood of countless schoolchildren protesting
against the imposition of a language with racist connotations as a medium of instruction.
74. During the past weeks there has been a renewed
wave of protests and demonstrations, also by schoolchildren fighting against the inequality and inferiority
of the education that they are receiving under the
apartheid system. Recently too, high-ranking religious
personalities have been arrested for expressing their
views against a. repressive regime. Urban guerrillas
have begun to act and have destroyed by violent
means important and vital oil plants. All these are
ominous signs that could very well lead to more serious
events and trigger an ever-escalating cycle of violence
,between the black and white peoples of South Africa.
75. We have listened closely [2225th meeting] to the
Chairman of the African Group, to the Chairman

ofthe Special Committee against Apartheid and to the
representative of PAC. Their words have clearly
depicted the recent turn of events in South Africaand
its implications for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We agree with,them that the Council must act now and act resolutely, and strike against
the root cause of the problem. My country, as a
founding member of the Special Committee against
Aparfheid, is deeply disturbed at the explosive situation developing in South Africa and wishes to reaffirm
its unswerving commitment to the elimination of
apartheid and all forms of racism. As in the past, we
shall continue to support the necessary initiatives
towards that end.
76. The widespread repression and oppression in
South Africa must end. The oppressed people should
be enabled to participate in the establishment of a
democratic government based on majority rule. Those
are the basic measures to be considered and undertaken immediately.
77. In the context of the recent developments in
the African continent and with the attainment of
majority rule in Zimbabwe, South Africa, despite its
almost total isolation in the United Nations, continues
to remain impervious to what is. obvious: that its
apartheid policies are doomed. If it persists in its
intransigence, it will bear the brunt of the world’s
condemnation.
78. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
79. Mr. ORAMAS (Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to
congratulate you on yourassumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of June and, at the same
time, to pay a tribute to the representative of the
Niger for his accomplishments during his presidency
last month.
80. It has been more than 25 years since the General
Assembly first placed on its agenda the item of upurtheid, and year after year nearly the entire intemational community has systematic.ally expressed its
condemnation and repudiation of that odious regime
spawned by a group of twisted minds which have
always had a kind of umbilical link with the Western
Powers.
81. Todav, as in the past, I take the floor to,denounce
the new wave of bestial repression to which the South
African black. majority has. been subjected, their
only crime being that of fighting for their freedom an-d
for, racial equaIity. The international press has, over
the past few days, been reporting the savage cruelty
of the violence.unleashed by the South African Fascist
hordes. How right, indeed, was the Sixth Conference
‘of I-Ieads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, when it pointed out “the; urgency of

eliminating colonialism, racism, racial discrimination
and aparrheid from the continent, especially from
southern Africa”.’

criminals with sophisticated weapons and cooperating in the nuclear field. What kind of security
do the peoples of southern Africa have when it is
known that the South African racists possess nuclear
weapons? And let us make no bones about it: responsibility for this situation, which poses a serious threat
to the peace and security of the region, rests with the
Western Powers and Israel, which, disregarding
United Nations agreements, have provided the technology and other necessities to South Africa.

82. When human dignity has been wounded as deeply
as it has in South Africa, the solution cannot be based
on mere cosmetic reforms, such as Herr Botha has
tried, or on reforms which do not involve the abolition
of racial discrimination. The crisis is deeper, and is
rooted in the rotten system which created it.
83. The waves of protests and strikes, characterized
by the press in the United States as the most powerful
anti-racial acts an-d movements ever to have occurred
in South Africa, are a sign that the South African
masses-havereached the point where they now have the
last word in determining the future of that country.
The explosion began because, in a secondary school
-the Crystal High School, attended by blacks and
whites-the regime had been spending four times -more
on the white students than on the blacks. The desks
of the blacks are in poor condition, there are no
lights and the teachers beat the students to silence
protests. That was the spark that ignited the student
boycott against apartheid on that occasion. But there
can be a similar outbreak in any city, because this is a
reaction to the discriminatory r&me. To fail to weigh
theseriousness of these facts would be to deny history
itself. When black students in Cape Town, Durban and
other cities go out on strike and mount protests, it
is because they are being discriminated against. When
black textile workers go out on strike, it is because of
the system that stifles them. And when black parents
take to the streets, it is because their chiIdren are
being killed. But white teachers and white students
also are protesting, and the Church has joined the
movement. For that reason, some Church leaders
,have been arrested, accused of collaborating with
ANC. What does all this mean? It means that the
eradication of the unnatural system of apartheid is
today a need that is now felt by all decent men living
in South Africa. But Herr Botha’s regime responds by
attacking demonstrators with dogs-as can be seen
from the photographs published in Newsweek-and by
striking those arrested, throwing them into prison,
torturing them and killing them.

85. The entire international community must rise
up as a single man and stay the murderous hand of
Herr Botha and his gang. It is high time that we
demanded the release of all prisoners-not only those
detained as a result of these recent events, but also
those who, throughout the decades, have constantly,
in very adverse circumstances, fought for freedom and
racial equality. Let us wage a world-wide campaign
for the release of that distinguished fighter, Nelson
Mandela, who for a number of years has been languishing in the inhuman dungeons of Robben Island.
Let us mobilize all our energies to prevent further
crimes from being committed in South Africa.
86. The flames of the coal refinery which we saw on
television highlight the frustration of the oppressed
masses. Those flames light the path that the South
African patriots have resolutely decided to follow, for
they know from their own experience that other ways
have been closed to them. To fail to realize in time
what these events mean is to be an accomplice of
Fascist barbarism and to condone a regime which
numerous resolutions of the United Nations and other
international organizations have vigorously condemned.
87. The Non-Aligned Movement, at its various
summit conferences, has repeatedly stressed the need
to call on all countries collaborating with the Pretoria
regime to refrain from continuing to support it, and
has demanded the implementation of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations to force the
South African clique to heed the voice of reason and
justice. After scrupulous consideration of the situation, the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries stated:

84. The South African Fascists may imprison and
kill patriots-men, women and children-but the ideas
of freedom, justice and racial equality are today
mightier than ever, and sooner or later will hold sway;
although the price exacted by the racist minority may
be very high. Those ideas, which are instrinsic to man
himself, can never be incarcerated or destroyed. To
ignore the heartfelt clamour of the people-of those
who have-been courageous enough to take to the streets
in defiance of the powerful repressive apparatus of the’
Fascists-is to remain blind to the yearning for freedom of an entire people. Let those who speak of human
rights speak out now; let them at least blush; let them
at least stop arming the criminals who have committed
those acts of genocide; let them stop providing those

“The Conference declared that southern Africa
as a whole constituted one single theatre of operations, in which apartheid South Africa was the
central strategic issue. Freedom, peace, security
and progress cannot be achieved in southern Africa
unless the apartheid system of institutionalized
racial discrimination, exploitation and oppression is
crushed and is replaced by a democratic State
whose policy will conform to the principles of the
Organization of African Unity, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the United Nations.“2
88. We are solidly behind the struggle of the heroic
‘South African people, led by its vanguard, ANC, and
9

.

we would draw attention to the threats already being
made against other countries when the South African
leaders say that the South African patriots have been
operating from “enemy territory”. This reflects a
cowardly, ostrich-like policy; it is an attempt to divert
attention from the roots and causes of the crisis in
South Africa and to focus attention on neighbouring
countries.

of separate development of the races. Inasmuch as
actually meant prosperity and privilege for
the few whites, based on the oppression and degradation as well as the impoverishment of the black
majority, Pretoria could not but fail to build a stable
foundation for its racist fortress. This, however, has
not inhibited the racists of Pretoria from erecting the
walls of the fortress with the wilful and active participation of economic, military and political interests
from numerous Western countries.
apartheid

89. We are at a dramatic crossroads. Peace and
security are once again being tested by the South
African racists. The Council must adopt effective
measures to force Pretoria and its imperialist protectors
to cease their acts of genocide against the majority
black masses, and to cease brandishing their sword
against the independent peoples and States of southern
Africa. If we fail to do that, we shall only be condoning the philosophy of war and plunder.

96. A fortress without foundation as wellas a system
without popular support, however strongly it is reinforced by military might, cannot last. The fate of
apartheid
is therefore sealed. That conclusion on
our part is not the result of wishful thinking, but is
based on the lessons of history. We in Ethiopia
sincerely hope that the whites of South Africa and
their supporters in the West will come to this conclusion sooner rather than later.

90. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

97. The tides of freedom are already washing out,
with ever-increasing force, the walls of the racist
fortress on almost all sides. It is high time, therefore,
for white South Africans to realize that the African
majority will accept neither second-rate citizenship
nor pseudo-citizenship of impoverished and dependent
bantustans. Now is the time for white South Africans
to reverse the course of the impending racial conflagration in South Africa. And we submit that this can
be achieved only through the total dismantling of the
evil system of apartheid.
Cosmetic embellishments
to improve the ugly face of apartheid will only be
futile. Nothing short of a determined move towards
the establishment of a democratic society, based on
racial equality and majority rule, could constitute a
basis for an acceptable and lasting solution.

91. Mr. IBRAHIM (Ethiopia): Mr. President, first
of all, I should like to thank you and the other members of the Council for acceding to my delegation’s
request to address the Council on the explosive
situation obtaining in South Africa.
,
92. The Ethiopian delegation is particularly gratified
to see the current debate presided over by you,
Mr. President, a distinguished representative of
Norway, a country which has shown sympathetic
understanding for the aspirations of the black masses
of South Africa. We have no doubt but that the Council’s deliberations on this and other questions before it
during the current busy month will be crowned with
success under your able and wise guidance.

98. One must admit that the realization of the goals
of freedom and equality in South Africa have hitherto
proved to be both elusive and difficult. This undoubtedly has been the result of the support, both political
and material, given to the racist regime by certain
Governments and the multinational corporations.
Much can be said about this aspect of the South
African problem. But the more we comment on the
collusion of certain Western Governments and their
corporations with Pretoria, the more we seem to
strengthen their propensity to get closer together.

93. It has been quite some time since the Council
considered the anachronistic system of apartheid,
a system which should have had no place in this
enlightened age of ours. The Ethiopian delegation
believes that it is incumbent upon the Council to give
more frequent attention henceforth to the plight of the
oppressed masses of South Africa, with a view to
hastening the day of their eventual liberation.
94. The liberation of the subjugated and exploited
people of South Africa is not only inevitable but,
indeed, imminent. The current manifestations of
popular resistance are sufficient indications of the
ever-increasing determination of the African people to
make the necessary sacrifice, to dismantle apartheid
and reassert the dignity and freedom of the African
personality.

99, We believe that such a total disregard,of world
public opinion poses a serious threat to international
co-operation and understanding. A still greater threat
is the perception in some Western circles of the human
tragedy in South Africa as being exclusively within
the context of cold-war politics. In this regard, it is
distressing to note a former President of a leading
Western country presenting the South African problem
‘in his newly published book in the following manner:

95. The racist regime of Pretoria, motivated by the
immoral and misguided notion of racial superiority,
has endeavoured to build a fortress of white privilege
in South Africa, the foundation of which was to be
apartheid, an inherently unjust and explosive system

“We must not, out of a misplaced idealism, allow
our policies toward southern Africa to become
10

hostage of the parochial passions of African leaders
who have no appreciation of or concern for the
issues at stake there between East and West.”

tacit complicity of our “famous defenders’* of human
rights.
106. However, one thing appears certain to us, and
history has shown this: as was once true of colonialism,
apartheid is a greater long-term threat to those who
practise it than to those who are subjected to it. All
that the whites of South Africa have today to ensure
their future are their police, their dogs and their
weapons. They are using them. But other countries
have done the same thing, and the people have survived. Zimbabwe is a shining example. People are the
sole decisive force of history.

100. While the import of such a perception is at once
revealing and frightening, it also goes a long way
towards explaining why apartheid, as abhorrent and
unjust as it is, is being sustained and supported.
Clearly, such was- the policy pursued by the author
while he was in office. Now that he is no longer in
office, the propagation of this distorted and dangerous view through his book can only be taken as an
attempt to influence his successors and ensure the
preservation of apartheid. We can only hope that
such a misconception of the problem of South Africa
is not shared by those currently holding office.

107. The people of South Africa bear within themselves their own liberating force: the youth of Soweto,
the workers in the factories, Nelson Mandela and all
the other militants that have been imprisoned, exiled
and murdered. They represent the people of South
Africa in all its strength. They represent the strength
not only of South Africa but also of all mankind, for
they are stmggling for more justice, more humaneness
and more dignity in the world, while their executioners
grow ever weaker.

101. Finally, the Ethiopian delegation would like to
appeal to everyone to respond positively and not react
negatively to the plight of the African masses and to
the incessant call by the international community for
more effective measures. My delegation also hopes
that the resolution which the Council will adopt at the
end of its current debate will measure up to the expectations of the South African people and will adequately
meet the exigencies of the times: Ethiopia, for its part
and within its means, will spare no effort to render all
moral and material assistance towards the total
emancipation of the black masses in South Africa.

108. The people of South Africa, who are now
shaping their history, are today appealing to us, through
ANC, to cement our solidarity in the building of a
new future. Seychelles considers it its duty to respond,
for it too depends on the solidarity of brotherly
peoples. Thus it joins with all other delegations to
appeal to the Council once more to condemn the
South African regime.

102. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Seychelles. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

109. South Africa must stop killing children, young
people, workers and clergymen. Nelson Mandela and
his comrades must be released. The political organizations of the people of South Africa must enjoy freedom
of action and movement. The militants and their exiled
leaders must be able to return to their country.

103. Mr. BONNELAME (Seychelles) (interpretation
from French): My delegation wishes to express its
deep gratitude for having been allowed to speak at
this meeting on the question of South Africa. This is
for us an event of special importance for two reasons.
First of all, today is the first time that Seychelles is
privileged to speak in the Security Council-a body
which is constantly playing a decisive role in the
history of the peoples of the world. But, above all,
it is important because the situation of our brothers
and sisters in South Africa affects us directly, as that
of Zimbabwe did at one time and that of Namibia in
southern Africa still does today.

110. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr.
Johnstone Makatini, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure at the 2225th meeting. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
111. Mr. MAKATINI: Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to see you presiding over this important
series of Council meetings. The oppressed people of
South Africa, whose struggle has now entered a decisive stage, expect unequivocal support from this body.
The well-known position of your Government and your
personal commitment to the struggle against apartheid
inspire us with optimism that these meetings will
represent an important milestone towards the just and
lasting resolution of the conflict raging in South
Africa, one which seriously threatens international
peace and security. The African National Congress is
highly indebted to you for giving us the opportunity
to share with the honourable members of the Council
the view of our organization on the highly explosive
situation prevailing in South Africa today.

104. We are all familiar with the facts in South
Africa: a people deprived of its most elementary rights
and suffering the most despicable exploitation which
the whites, by striving to justify it in their own eyes
by the theory of apartheid, have made even more
disgraceful.
105. Apartheid is an evil, but, in our eyes, it conceals
a much more pernicious evil which is the exploitation
of an entire people by a minority both within and
outside the country, the Western capitalists and their
allies, such as Israel. It is this presence of foreign
interests which in part accounts for the survival of
apartheid, for the white minority is thus enjoying the
11

112. All&w me, through you, to thank Ambassador
IdC Oumarou of the Niger, who greatly facilitated the
preliminary steps towards the convening of these
meetings by the African Group.
113. In June 1976, soon after the victory of
FRELIMO in Mozambique, hundreds of thousands of
schoolchildren and students took to the streets
protesting the slave education imposed on them and
designed to prepare them “to minister to the needs of
the whites”. Thousands were killed, maimed, crippled,
detained, tortured and imprisoned. Today, in the wake
of the Zimbabwean victory and on the eve of the
fourth anniversary of that savage massacre, the Pretoria tigime has once again resorted to escalating
repression. That is an attempt to muzzle the legitimate
protest by patriotic forces in our country.
114. Again the schoolchildren and students have
played a pivotal role in what is now a general ferment
which reflects a rapidly unfolding revolutionary situation obtaining in the country. For seven weeks now
the entire country has been caught up in an unprecedented upsurge in which the so-called Coloured
youths have fearlessly challenged the racist ideology
of the rkgime as manifested in the educational system.
Hundreds of thousands in cities and rural areas have
boycotted schools, demanding equal remuneration
for their teachers, objecting to the practice of interrogation on school grounds by secret police and indicting
the racist character of the educational system. They
are in fact rejecting the blatant racist formulation
that “there is no place for the blacks in the white
community above the levels of certain forms of
labour*‘. The traditional educational budget of South
Africa clearly demonstrates that for the ruling clique
the education of our people is intended to ensure the
master-servant relationship. The Pretoria regime
spends 654 rand on each white child, while the breakdown for the Asian, the so-called Coloured and the
African children was, according to the 1979 statistics,
220, 158 and 48 rand respectively.
115. These figures show that, in pursuit of the divideand-rule policy, the lion’s share is spent on the white
child. The discrimination between Coloured, Asian
and African children is clearly intended to polarize the
beleaguered majority population and also falls into
line with the artificial racial hierarchy instituted
by apartheid. The rkgime proffers a larger share of the
crumbs to the so-called Coloured child and the Indian
child, yet they too have unequivocally rejected this
racist imperative by aligning themselves with the cause
of the majority. This valiant act is a barometer of the
militancy of the people and a vindication of the ANC
policy of forging a broad patriotic front comprising the
democratic whites as well as the oppressed blacks and
thus effectively isolating the real enemy-namely the
white supremacist apartheid regime. It is in keeping
with the policy of ANC and its allied organizations
as reflected in the Freedom Charter,’ whose twentyfifth anniversary we hope will be commemorated by
committed Member States on 26 June.

116. Despite the victimization of hundreds of
thousands of youths in mass arrests, in brutal dispersal with baton charges and police dogs, with largescale use of tear-gas and sneeze cannons, the youths,
backed by their parents and teachers, have persisted
in their protest. They have been characterized by
eyewitnesses as highly organized, disciplined and
determined to continue the struggle. Those children,
some of them a mere 8 or IO years old, are undaunted
by the array of modem weapons at the disposal of the
racist police. The stand of the heroes of Soweto and
other African townships is an inspiration to them.
They were inspired by the words OFthe great hero
Solomon Nahlangu, who was hanged on 6 April 1979,
despite the stand taken by the Council [214&h meeting,
paru. 241: “My blood will nourish the free that will
bear the fruit of freedom”. The people of South Africa
are now demonstrating a heightened militancy that
cannot be deterred by sophisticated weaponry or
sugar-coated declarations intended to placate them.
117. P. W. Botha’s call for a conference of all races
to deliberate on matters affecting South Africa was an
example of such manceuvres. Citing as the reason for
this decision -the fact that the Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe victory had changed the strategic situation
of South Africa, he went on to pledge the maintenance
of white domination, declaring “The Nationalist Party
will defend the white man, his political rights and
culture, and his right to self-determination”. He went
further and rearmed that there would be “no one
man, one vote” in South Africa.
118. While the racist rkgime obstinately persists in
embracing retrogressive racial ideologies, the masses
of black oppressed people, who constitute the principal, central instrument of change, every day show
their, determination to carry through the task of the
struggle until victory is achieved. The militancy of
our people is heightened’to an unprecedented degree
by the extension of freedom frontiers to the very
doorstep of the last bastion, the collapse of the last
buffer, and the completion of the encirclement of the
Pretoria tigime. The fact is that in South Africa today
there is, first, a steady enlargement of the so-called
operational areas within the country, resulting, among
other things, in the enforced removal of 9O;OOO
of the
Batlokwa people in the northern Transvaal; secondly,
a spateof political trials characterized by the singularly
high political awareness qf the accused, who defigntly
raise the ANC clenched-fist. salute and sing freedom
songs, while contesting the authority of the racist
courts; thirdly, desertion by large numbers of white
draftees who refuse to take up arms in defence of
apartheid;
fourthly, failure by the rigime to till
IO per cent of the vacancies in the police force, which
analysts within the country attribute to systematic
ANC attacks on police stations and other facilities
plus the liquidation of informers-and, in view of the
all-time- high unemployment figure, 25 per cent of the
labour force, this inability to fill police. vacancies
is highly significant; fifthly, the mass removal of blacks
12

from so-called white areas to bantustans and squatter
camps-2 million. since 1948; sixthly, the chain of
major industrial strikes by black workers in various
cities; and, lastly, the growing involvement of clergy,
which culminated in the arrest of Bishop, Desmond
Tutu and 52 prominent churchmen who were peacefully: protesting the incarceration of the Reverend John
Thome, who has been closely associated with the
boycotting students. Those factors represent only a
partial profile of the objective cases,but they illustrate
the burgeoning problems of Botha and his clique.

merous United Nations resolutions. It has been
I7 years during which the South African regime,
working in collusion with certain conservative elements, has developed a sophisticated propaganda
network and planted large sums of money in some
Western capitals to buy opinion, to buy opinionmakers, to promote apartheid and even to influence
political campaigns and have the, agents of BOSS
[Bureau of State Security] infiltrate prestigious international organizations; and during which the erstwhile
disciples of the Hitlerite regime have forged a close
alliance with the Zionist regime.

119. On 12 June 1964, Nelson Mandela, the outstanding ANC Ieader, was sentenced to life imprisonment together with Walter Sisulu, the former secretarygeneral of ANC; Govan Mbeki, a leading economist
and historian; Ahmed Kathrada, a veteran ANC
member of Asian extraction; and others for their
leading collective role in challenging the illegal apartheid regime.

123. But today that power is changing hands in
South Africa, ‘and, in response to Botha’s manceuvres
designed to prepare for a Muzorewa-type so-called
internal settlement, the people have imposed on
South Africa’s political agenda the question of the
unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and his
colleagues. Following an editorial by Percy Qoboza of
the Sunday Post and endorsement by Bishop Desmond
Tutu, Secretary-General of the South African Council
of Churches, as well as support from a cross-section
of the South African population, including a section
of the white student population, the campaign to free
Nelson Mandela and all political prisoners, including
Toivo Ja Toivo of Namibia, has gained tremendous
momentum in South Africa and abroad.

120. In his defence, after eloquently articulating the
ideas enshrined in the Freedom Charter, Nelson
Mandela declared:
“During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to
this struggle of the African people. I have fought
against white domination, and I have: fought against
black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a
democratic and free society in which all persons
live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for
and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for
which I am prepared to die.‘**

124. But the cancerous system of apartheid is still
threatening to embroil the whole world in a conflagration whose repercussions will be far-reaching and
immeasurable. Like the Fascist, militaristic and
expansionist Hitler regime, which plunged Europe
and the world into the Second World War, the upurtheid regime must be stopped and crushed despite its
attitude that everyone else is out of step.

121. Seventeen years have elapsed since Nelson
Mandela made that statement-17 years, during which
there has been enacted a maze of oppressive iegislation designed to perpetuate institutionalized racism,
plunder and exploitation overseen by an army of
Gestapo-type police equipped with the most modem
and lethal weapons advanced Western technology can
provide; 17 years during which over 2 million black
people have been forcibly moved from their homes to
desolate arid bantustans, during which go-day and
180-day renewable detentions have become commonplace, during which over 50freedom fighters have been
killed in the prison cells and torture chambers of the
secret police, during which the Pretoria regime has
earned the record of being responsible for 60 per cent
of the world’s executions.

.125. Who is to blame? Is it those against whom armed
forces have been mobilized in an attempt to cow and
terrorize peaceful protesters, those whose legitimate
demands have been met with ever-increasing violence
at each turn? Nelson Mandela’s prophecy that “by
resorting continually to violence, the South African
regime will breed in this country violence among the
people” has been proved true.
126. The formation of the military wing of ANC,
Umkonto Sizwe-the spear of the nation-marked
the closing of the chapter of non-violence. The people,
under the leadership of ANC, have today taken up
arms and they will not lay them down until final
victory is achieved, that is, the overthrow of the
apartheid regime and the seizure of .power by the
people. Suffice it for me to quote from The Wush-

122. During those 17 years the uparrheid regime has
not only developed a nuclear capability but also
arrogated to itself the right to intervene militarily in
all African countries south of the equator. It has carried
out a full-scale invasion of Angola and on several
occasions threatened and committed aggression
against Zambia, Angola and Mozambique. It frustrated
the efforts of the international community by
bolstering the erstwhile Smith regime. It has continued
its illegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of nu-

ington Post:

“Black nationalist guerrillas have struck a telling
blow at the security, physical and psychological, of
white South Africa. From hit-and-run raids on
random targets, they have moved up to a well
planned and co-ordinated attack on three formidably
13

guarded strategic installations-an oil refinery and
two oil-from-coal plants. These plants are “the
cutting edge of South Africa’s polic of trying to
become self-sufficient in strategir- I mports. The
attack on them represents the African National
Congress’s policy of trying to show that selfsufficiency won’t work. In South Africa the war
is on.”
127. Who is responsible for the Pretoria regime’s
intransigence? It is the transnational corporations that
continue to provide the life-blood to this inhuman
system; it is some Western countries-especially the
United States, France, the United Kingdom, Japan
and Israel-which
continue to pay lip-service to
United Nations resolutions while bolstering the South
African regime through economic, military and even
nuclear collaboration. We can no longer stop at
accusing the apartheid regime of threatening peace
and international security. Those countries which
support South Africa have become active accomplices
in all the crimes committed by that regime against
the South African people and against neighbouring
States.

130. The warning given by Ambassador Clark the
day before yesterday [2225th meeting] must not be
taken lightly. It is in keeping with the general trend in
African and non-aligned countries to move from
rhetorical. condemnation to action against a common
enemy and its accomplices.
131. We will not at this stage dignify R. F. Botha’s
letter of 5 June [S/J39861 by a rebuttal. Suffice it to
say that we do not expect the enemies of progressive
mankind to endorse the enlightened position adopted
in support of the principles and ideals enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and the’ Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
132. We are encouraged by the growing awareness
of some Western countries that the downfall of apartheid is inevitable, We note that a growing number
of the traditional partners of the South African--r&me
are moving towards a realistic position vis-d-vis
the just cause,of our people. We hope that that attitude
will coalesce into a full commitment- to the aspirations of all our people in this matter.
133. We urge the Council to support the campaign
to free Nelson Mandela and all other politicalprisoners
in South Africa. We urge all the members of the Council to ensure that their countries ‘and the international
community strictly observe the arms embargo and
respect the oil embargo imposed by OPEC countries,
and to step up the campaign for the isolation of the
apartheid regime, strengthen the striking. power of
ANC and thereby hasten the downfall of’the apurrheid regime.

128. Mr. President, in paying a special tribute to
the Scandinavian countries, including your country,
for the unstinting role they have played in the struggle
against uparrheid, we regret to say that our attention
has been drawn to incidents involving a Danish
shipping company. According to the newspaper
Politiken,
ships of that company have been collecting
arms and ammunition from various European ports.
The ships’ names have been painted out and all marks
of identity erased. We are pleased that the Danish
Government has instituted an investigation into this
flagrant violation of the international arms embargo.
We regret, however, that our attention has been drawn
to another report alleging that a Norwegian shipping
company is involved in transporting oil from the
Persian Gulf to South Africa. We are highly appreciative of the Norwegian Government’s policy of not
selling South Africa any of its oil, but we deeply
regret to learn that Norwegian ships are undermining
the oil embargo imposed by the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other oilproducing countries.

134. Itis our well-considered opinion that the virulent
system of apartheid can-not be reformed; it must be
destroyed. Our people, young and old, have taken up
arms to break the chains of bondage, not to strengthen
them.
The meeting

129. Notwithstanding what may appear to be a very
gloomy picture, characterized by a surprisingly high
degree of collaboration with the South African regime,
we remain very confdent that the exemplary position
taken by Nigeria against British Petroleum will be
emulated by a growing number of countries in the near
future.

Litho in United Nations. New York

rose at 1.40 p.m.

NOTES
t A!34/542,
annex, sect. I, para. 33.
2 Ibid., para.78.
3 Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Tenfh Session.
Supphment No. 14, para. 29%
‘Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 12. document
A15825lAdd. 1, para. 76.

00300

83-61462-Scptembcr

i9&2,030
