III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

strengthen the security of the States of the region
against nuclear threat or attack,
Noting the affirmation by the States of South Asia
not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons and
to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively to the
economic and social advancement of their peoples,
Recalling that in the above-mentioned resolutions
the General Assembly had called upon the States of the
South Asian region and such other neighbouring nonnuclear-weapon States as might be interested to initiate,
without delay, necessary consultations with a view to
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone and urged
them, in the interim, to refrain from any action contrary
to the achievement of the objectives of such a nuclearweapon-free zone,
Recalling that in resolution 3265 B (XXIX) the
General Assembly had requested the Secretary-General
to convene a meeting for the purpose of the abovementioned consultations to render such assistance as
might be required,
1. Reaffirms its endorsement in principle of the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to continue to make all possible efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South
Asia and to refrain, in the meantime, from any action
contrary to this objective;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the above
efforts for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia and to report on the subject to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/74.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3479 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it requested the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to work out the text of an agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
of such weapons,
Being convinced of the importance of concluding an
agreement to prevent the use of scientific and technological progress for the development of new types and
systems of weapons of mass destruction,
Taking into account the report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament with regard to this
question, 32
Taking note of the discussion at the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament of the question of the
32 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27),
paras. 178-198.

39

prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
of such weapons,
Taking into account the suggestions and relevant
documents submitted to the General Assembly on this
subject at its thirty-first session,
1. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue the negotiations, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, aimed at
working out the text of an agreement on the prohibition
of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons and to submit a report on the results achieved
for consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the discussion of this item by
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Prohibition
of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons: report of the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/75.

Implementation of the conclusions of
the first Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the danger of nuclear warfare remains a grave threat to the survival of mankind,
Convinced that the prevention of any further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices remains a vital element in efforts to avert nuclear warfare,
Convinced that the promotion of this objective will
be furthered by more rapid progress towards the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and the initiation of eff cctive measures of nuclear disarmament,
Further convinced that the discontinuance of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons for all time would constitute an important step in these efforts,
Noting that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, 27 to which about one hundred States
are parties, implies a balance of mutual responsibilities
and obligations of all States parties to the Treaty,
nuclear-weapon as well as non-nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling that the States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons met at Geneva
from 5 to 30 May 1975 to review the operation of the
Treaty with a view to assuring that the purposes of the
preamble and the provisions of the Treaty were being
realized,
Further recalling that the Final Document of the
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 33 includes, inter
alia, a Final Declaration and a number of interpretative
statements in connexion with the Final Declaration,
:13 See

A/C. J /31/ 4.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

40

Noting that the Conference has called for universal
adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,
Recognizing the necessity of effective international
safeguards in order to ensure that the peaceful applications of nuclear energy will not lead to further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices,
Underlining the important role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in implementing international
non-proliferation policies in connexion with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
Concerned that the nuclear-arms race continues unabated,
Recognizing that various appropriate means are neccessary to meet the security concerns of non-nuclearweapon States,
1. Urgently calls for determined efforts by all nuclear-weapon States:
(a) To bring about the cessation of the nucleararms race;
( b) To undertake effective measures in the direction of nuclear disarmament;
(c) To find an early solution to the difficulties in
reaching agreement to discontinue all test explosions
of nuclear weapons for all time as a step towards the
realization of these objectives;
2. Emphasizes the particular responsibility of the
two major nuclear-weapon States in this regard;
3. Stresses the urgency of international co-operative
efforts in appropriate forums to prevent the further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices;
4. Recognizes that States accepting effective nonproliferation restraints have a right to full access to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and underlines the
importance of all efforts to increase the availability of
energy, particularly for the needs of the developing
countries of the world;
5. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to accord high priority to its programme of
work in these areas;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Implementation
of the conclusions of the first Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and establishment of a preparatory
committee for the second Conference".

Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGenera134 submitted to the General Assembly in response to the aforementioned resolution,
Reaffirming its conviction of the urgent necessity
that the States permanent members of the Security
Council, as well as any other State with comparable
military expenditures, carry out reductions in their military budgets,
Reaffirming also its conviction that part of the resources thus released should be utilized for social and
economic development, particularly that of the developing countries,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Group of Experts on the Reduction
of Military Budgets which assisted in the preparation
of the report;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the report to be issued as a
United Nations publication and widely distributed;
3. Invites all States to communicate to the Secretary-General before 30 April 1977 their comments with
regard to matters covered in the report and, in particular:
(a) Their views and suggestions on the proposed
standardized reporting instrument contained in the report;
( b) Any information they may wish to convey on
their military expenditure accounting practices, including a description of methods currently in use;
( c) Suggestions and recommendations concerning
possible practical approaches for the further development and operation of a standardized reporting system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of an intergovernmental group of budgetary experts appointed by him, a report containing
an analysis of the comments provided by States pursuant to paragraph 3 above, in the light of the suggestions contained in the above-mentioned report, 34 as well
as any further conclusions and recommendations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute that
report not later than 31 August 1977;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Reduction
of military budgets".

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
31/88.

96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/87.

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 3463 (XXX) of 11
December 1975 the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of a group of qualified experts, a report containing an analysis and examination in concrete terms
of issues regarding a system of international measurement, reporting and comparison of military expenditures,

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its
resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974 and 3468 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
:1 4 A/31/222/Rev. l

E.77.l.6).

( United Nations publication, Sales No.
