A /69/PV.70

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

70th plenary meeting

Friday, 12 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Moura
(Portugal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/406)
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.33 and A/69/L.37)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/69/96
and A/69/303)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.40)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/84)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Humanitarian crises
devastate the lives of millions around the world. This
year we have seen reported an unprecedented number
of internally displaced persons and refugees. It has
also been the most dangerous year for humanitarian
personnel in more than a decade. The 2014 United
Nations coordinated appeal requested a record total
$16.9 billion, reflecting the vast scale of needs. One

third of that request remains unmet. The growing gap
between needs and available resources means that
strengthened coordination of humanitarian and disaster
relief assistance is integral.
The humanitarian resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly offer us an opportunity to address
the challenges we face and to build on accomplishments
in the provision of humanitarian assistance. The
consensual adoption of such resolutions should denote
a willingness to work together in ensuring that real
results are achieved to reduce the suffering of those
most in need.
In that regard, we are pleased that this year’s
General Assembly draft resolutions on humanitarian
issues underline the importance of promoting the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel, including for
health-care personnel who are providing essential
medical care to affected communities. However, it is
utterly unacceptable to us that with the unprecedented
number of people in need, the States Members of
the United Nations are unable to come together
and recognize the capacity of local communities to
participate in their own recovery. Canada will continue
to support flexible, iterative approaches to programme
delivery based on interaction and feedback with the
beneficiaries themselves. We will also continue to
underline the fundamental importance for humanitarian
organizations to be able to reach people in need and
provide rapid and unimpeded assistance to the most
vulnerable. Being able to provide life-saving assistance
to people affected by armed conflict or natural disasters
is the very basis of any humanitarian response.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-69064 (E)

*1469064*

A/69/PV.70

(spoke in French)
The ongoing humanitarian crises in Syria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Iraq, among many others, continue to affect the lives
of millions of people every day. Moreover, due to the
Ebola epidemic, the region faces an unprecedented
public-health emergency, which the Security Council
has recognized as a threat to international peace
and security. The whole world, including Canada, is
responding, but major challenges remain as we work to
overcome those crises.
As the year comes to an end, we should welcome
the urgency and professionalism with which frontline humanitarian personnel, national authorities and
affected communities are working to turn the tide
in our fight against the Ebola outbreak. We would
like to congratulate and thank the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, and her team for their
determined efforts to that end and for their outstanding
contribution to the international humanitarian
community and to people in need. Canada will
continue to focus on the three transformation pillars
of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee: leadership,
coordination and accountability in the field.
(spoke in English)
To face those growing challenges and the increasing
scale of the needs, we welcome the opportunities
provided by the Secretary-General’s decision to
convene a World Humanitarian Summit in 2016.
Canada is actively engaged in the process, including as
a member of the Western Europe and Others regional
steering group.
Recognizing the critical importance of preventative
action, Canada recently committed $500 million to the
goal of providing vaccines to impoverished children
around the world. The international community can
make a vital difference in the long-term health of
children by ensuring that they are protected from
preventable diseases.
Reconstruction efforts to help affected communities
recover from crises are equally important. One year
after the devastating Typhoon Haiyan struck the
Philippines, Canada is engaged in programming
initiatives to help restore the livelihoods of those who
were affected. We have committed $20.6 million over
a period of four years for reconstruction efforts, in
addition to the more than $85 million provided by the

2/29

12/12/2014

Government of Canada as part of its promise to match
every eligible dollar donated by individual Canadians
to registered Canadian charities.
We express our deepest gratitude and sincere
condolences to the families, friends and organizations
of those who have given their lives in order to save
others. Canada remains committed to playing its role
with key partners to ensure the protection of vulnerable
populations and to help build a world in which
humanitarian values are fully respected.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation has traditionally
supported the humanitarian efforts of the United
Nations and is constantly increasing the scope of
its cooperation with major organizations. We take a
positive view of the progress that has been achieved
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator in the reforms
to enhance the effectiveness of the Organization’s
humanitarian responses, which is especially important
in the context of the growing number of humanitarian
challenges.
We welcome the initiative by the SecretaryGeneral to hold a World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul in 2016. In the light of the discussion on
further transformation in the humanitarian sphere, we
believe it fundamentally important to retain what is set
forth in resolution 46/182, which is the basis for the
international machinery for humanitarian responses.
We believe that the Summit will provide an opportunity
for all stakeholders to exchange experiences and best
practices in terms of humanitarian activities. It is
important that the process of preparing for the Summit
be open-ended, transparent and inclusive. States, which
bear full responsibility for meeting the humanitarian
needs of their populations, must have a decisive voice
in adopting the decisions of the Summit.
In order to enhance the effectiveness of emergency
responses, the humanitarian potential at the national
and local levels must be strengthened. We support the
work of the United Nations system in that area. We
advocate the active use of verifiable regional machinery
for humanitarian response, such as, for example,
participation in humanitarian operations by volunteers,
or White Helmets. As an innovation in international
humanitarian efforts, Russia has undertaken an
initiative to create a multilateral mechanism to deal
with the consequences of natural and man-made
disasters, which would unite all of the centres for crisis

14-69064

12/12/2014

reaction in one global network, with a view to having an
operative exchange of information and a timely reaction
to disasters. That work is actively under way. We hope
that the results will further enhance the effectiveness of
humanitarian responses.
Russia firmly supports the scrupulous observance
by humanitarian actors of the guiding principles set
forth in the resolutions of the General Assembly on
the provision of humanitarian assistance. We would
like to emphasize the growing role of the Governments
of affected countries in the initiation, organization,
coordination and provision of humanitarian assistance
in their national territory. That is not simply a basic
principle, but without a doubt a responsibility borne by
States in overcoming the suffering and satisfying the
needs of their populations.
Unfortunately, we are bound to note that in
some cases that principle is not adhered to. We have
serious concerns regarding the difficult humanitarian
situation in south-east Ukraine. With the approach of
winter, as recognized by those working in international
humanitarian organizations in the region, the situation
is deteriorating. The scope of the destruction in
Donbass is enormous. As a result of the military actions
by the authorities in Kyiv, industry has been destroyed,
as has key infrastructure necessary for sustaining life.
These are elements that the region depends on. The
ban by Kyiv of Government and financial institutions’
activities have left the most vulnerable segments of the
population, including retirees, veterans, the disabled
and children, without basic resources. That is a violation
of international humanitarian law.
In that context, the Russian Federation is increasing
its efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to the
population of Ukraine. A few days ago, we announced
a contribution by the Government of Russia, in the
near future and through the World Food Programme,
of financial support aimed at providing humanitarian
assistance to all regions of Ukraine. Russia has already
sent nine convoys with humanitarian assistance and
necessities such as food, medicines, construction
materials and electric generators — an overall volume
of 13,000 tons — to Donbass, which has suffered most
from the hostilities. The Ukrainian authorities should
now be informed of their contents and their itinerary,
and we believe that international organizations will do
so.

A/69/PV.70

We believe that international organizations, first
and foremost the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, could play a more
significant role in those efforts and actively involve
themselves in the process to alleviate the suffering of
the population.
In spite of the collective measures taken by the
international community to ensure the safety of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations staff,
much remains to be done overall, as their lives and
health continue to be threatened. The international
community was shocked by the bombing of United
Nations schools sheltering peaceful Palestinians.
Officials from the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East also
died in July 2014 in the conflict in Gaza. Dozens of
volunteers from the Red Crescent have died in Syria
while carrying out their humanitarian duty. The
international community was shocked by the death of
a humanitarian assistant in Donetsk. That reaffirms
the need for further mobilization by Member States
and humanitarian organizations to strengthen the
machinery for ensuring the security of humanitarian
workers. It is of course essential that humanitarian
organizations strictly observe the guiding principles
for providing humanitarian assistance, as laid down in
General Assembly resolutions.
In our view, every incidence of violence in
connection with humanitarian workers should be
thoroughly investigated and those responsible made
accountable. In that regard, we would like to again
draw attention to the vital importance of a speedy
investigation into the tragic death in Donetsk of a
worker from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, who died, as the facts show, as a result of
indiscriminate shooting from the Ukrainian forces’
side.
Another important issue that we wish to focus
attention on is the problem of sanctions. We firmly
believe that the regrettably frequent occurrence of
individual States introducing unilateral restrictions
outside the purview of the Security Council exacerbates
the suffering of the civilian population even more
and worsens the humanitarian situation in countries
affected by the sanctions.
Ms. AlGharabally (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to participate in today’s debate

14-690643/29

A/69/PV.70

on strengthening the coordination of the emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations in the
face of the global challenges threatening humankind,
such as poverty, famine, disease and so forth, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which asserts that the Organization
should work to maintain international peace and
security by strengthening international and regional
efforts, outlining policies, launching initiatives and
strengthening its capacity to respond effectively to
crises that result from natural disasters and other
challenges. In that regard, we would like to take this
opportunity to commend Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and her
entire team, who have worked so hard in their efforts
to strengthen United Nations emergency humanitarian
assistance.
We have carefully reviewed the two reports of
the Secretary-General before us today, of which the
first (A/69/96) deals with the humanitarian activities
of the Central Emergency Response Fund in 2013,
and demonstrates the Fund’s effectiveness as a tool
for collective emergency response to the world’s most
urgent crises and for saving many lives. We welcome
the 2013 record number of $482 million allocated
from the Fund to support humanitarian activities in
45 countries and territories, the roughly $107 million
for a rapid response to new or rapidly deteriorating
crises and $175 million for the underfunded emergency
window. According to the report, Africa was one of the
major beneficiaries of the Fund in 2013, receiving 59 per
cent of allocations, owing to its numerous worsening
humanitarian situations. Similarly, allocations for
the Middle East have increased by more than 50 per
cent compared with 2012, the result of the continuing
humanitarian needs precipitated by the crisis in
Syria. We commend the Fund’s role in strengthening
assistance through its provision of prompt financing.
However, it will require increased effort on the part of
the international community, as well as more donors.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s report on
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in
the field of natural disasters, from relief to development
(A/69/303), my country subscribes to the report’s
recommendations, which emphasize the right of States
Members of the United Nations, in cooperation with the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations, to take
a pre-emptive approach to humanitarian crises in order

4/29

12/12/2014

to prevent their occurrence, and to agree on the nature
of possible threats and risks and prepare for them.
What gives us great concern is the statement in
paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General’s report to
the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
(A/69/84) on assistance to the Palestinian people,
which shows that development indicators have fallen
considerably in the Gaza Strip as a result of the closure
of the Strip and tunnels. The Israeli Government, as
the occupying Power, is continuing with its imposition
of an illegal economic blockade on the Gaza Strip,
which is now in its eighth year and has caused serious
human suffering. In that regard, Kuwait reiterates its
call on the international community to put pressure
on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its aggressive
practices and illegal blockade of Gaza, immediately
and unconditionally, and to open all border crossings,
in accordance with its international obligations.
Ever since it became independent and a Member
of the Organization, the State of Kuwait has taken a
principled approach based on the necessity of providing
humanitarian assistance to help to bridge gaps for those
in need and ensure their right to a decent living in
every country, regardless of their geographic, religious
or ethnic origins. International partnerships and united
efforts are essential if we are to be able to alleviate human
suffering. That has become integral to our approach,
such that, in September 2014, His Highness Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State
of Kuwait, was honoured as a humanitarian leader, in
recognition of Kuwait’s respect for humankind and
efforts to promote the principles of peace, stability and
assistance to those in need. We will continue to work
with the United Nations in order to work for universal
prosperity and stability at every level.
Kuwait is aware of the importance of the Central
Emergency Response Fund for providing rapid
emergency assistance to disaster-affected areas. Based
on our desire to solidify our cooperation with the Fund
and to respond at the humanitarian level to such needs,
and on our belief in the important role of the specialized
agencies and funds of the United Nations, we have
doubled our voluntary annual donations to a number
of those funds and agencies. We can only be grateful to
them for their humanitarian assistance and emergency
relief efforts in implementing aid and cooperation
programmes in confronting all the obstacles they face.

14-69064

12/12/2014

We would also like to thank the delegation of
Sweden for introducing draft resolution A/69/L.40 and
all the countries that participated in drafting it.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): Today’s discussion
should reflect the context of the diverse humanitarian
issues and highly challenging and risky operating
environments in which complex emergencies take
place. My delegation calls for the speedy and effective
implementation of the recommendations and action
plan of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, aimed
at achieving its Transformative Agenda, designed
to improve humanitarian leadership, coordination,
accountability and transparency both at Headquarters
and in the field. That is why we need to establish a
rapid-response mechanism to support the deployment
of experienced humanitarian personnel in the wake of
humanitarian crises.
The Common Framework for Capacity-Building
for Emergency Preparedness should be optimized to
ensure synergy between humanitarian and development
organizations’ efforts so as to achieve better country
readiness, feedback and mechanisms for participation.
For instance, legal preparedness is an essential
requirement to avoid delays in entry permits for relief
personnel, goods, equipment and transport, as well as
to bridge gaps in oversight. The need for timely action
also requires widening the partnership within each of
the regions and internationally. Likewise, engagement
in global policy and operational issues undertaken by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will help improve
dialogue on root causes and policy issues.
Humanitarian financing is also the key to effective
aid, and on that count the consolidated appeals process
can be further refined. The Central Emergency
Response Fund and the humanitarian fund need to
be augmented to provide humanitarian assistance to
the most vulnerable, including women, youth and
elderly. Finally, we must also seek solutions to make
humanitarian actions relevant to the challenges of 2015
and beyond.
We are pleased to say that the OCHA Regional
Office for the Caucasus and Central Asia assists the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Kazakhstan National Office of Disaster Management
in information management, disaster preparedness and
response in the region. Kazakhstan calls for maintaining

A/69/PV.70

the civilian character of humanitarian assistance and
supports the activities of the OCHA office in Almaty at
all levels — regional, national and local. We therefore
support the successful operation of OCHA’s Central
Emergency Response Fund as an important tool that
ensures predictable, adequate and timely funding of
international humanitarian operations.
Kazakhstan has transformed itself from a recipient
to a donor country, one that is active in Central Asia.
Since 2010, Kazakhstan has provided humanitarian
assistance totalling $10 million to several countries that
suffered from natural disasters — Afghanistan, Haiti,
Pakistan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Cuba, Japan and others.
Kazakhstan also contributed $500,000 to the Somalia
pooled fund, created at Kazakhstan’s suggestion in the
framework of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
As of December 2011, Kazakhstan has been
officially recognized as a member of the United Nations
International Search and Rescue Advisory Group.
Currently, Kazakhstan is finalizing the establishment of
its own agency, KazAID, for international development
assistance, which will simultaneously also engage in
humanitarian assistance and funding. In that regard,
KazAID marks the entry of Kazakhstan as a new
donor in the humanitarian community. Our financial
assistance for East Africa is also under review.
Last August, the Intergovernmental Agreement
on the Establishment of the Central Asian Centre for
Emergency Response and Disaster Risk Reduction
was signed in Almaty. It will be the focal point for the
United Nations hub in Almaty that Kazakhstan plans to
host in order to secure greater peace, development and
stability for the region.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Consensus has emerged among Member
States that the beginning of the solution to any
humanitarian crisis lies in sincere recognition of its
root causes, without distorting reality in the name of
a political agenda, which puts pressure on countries on
humanitarian grounds. The establishment of common
denominators among Governments, on the one hand,
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), on the other, should take place — in
accordance with resolution 46/182 — in a way that
attenuates humanitarian crises, instead of manipulating
its prolongation to pressure countries politically.
Unfortunately, that is what we are seeing with respect
to the coordination of humanitarian assistance. Those

14-690645/29

A/69/PV.70

are concerns that serve a political agenda rather than
efforts aimed at resolving problems.
At the outset, I would like to stress that, after four
years of gaining expertise in this area, we believe that
the humanitarian situation in my country requires
a solution that involves emergency aid. It is one that
begins by dealing with the causes of and reasons for
the conflict that led to its prolongation. First of all,
with regard to terrorism and the need to combat it,
one cannot deal with humanitarian assistance in Syria
without recognizing the responsibility of the countries
that are abetting terrorists and sending terrorists
from the diaspora — extremist groups handled by the
intelligence services of some well-known countries.
Such elements cross the borders into Syria to spread
terror and violence and to systematically seize
humanitarian aid.
In that way, humanitarian assistance becomes a
means to prolong terrorism in certain parts of Syria.
For several years now, there was avoidance of the
recognition ofthis fact until the Security Council
adopted two resolutions — resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014) — recognizing the existence of terrorist
groups that kill and massacre Syrians, obstruct
humanitarian assistance and even target local or
international humanitarian aid workers.
Nevertheless, the recognition of this fact by the
Secretary-General, OCHA and various international
organizations has reluctant and half-hearted. In that
regard, we are especially surprised and dismayed
because those responsible deem those terrorist groups
to be opposition members. That puts the problem in a
false perspective in Syria, one that internationalizes
the conflict at the organizational level. Today more
than ever, it is incumbent upon Member States and
the United Nations, as represented by the SecretaryGeneral, OCHA and other humanitarian organizations,
to implement the Security Council resolutions on
combating terrorism and to stop their sources of
financing, in accordance with resolutions 2170 (2014)
and 2178 (2014), so as to ensure that humanitarian
assistance does not reach armed terrorist elements in a
way that supports terrorism.
It is also incumbent upon Member States to adopt
resolutions and to undertake a transparent investigation
with respect to the terrorist networks that are working
under the guise of humanitarian assistance — for
example, the French parties responsible for financing

6/29

12/12/2014

terrorism under the Pearl of Hope charity work being
done in Syria since 2012 to fuel terror and terrorism.
That organization is collaborating with many other
terrorist organizations working inside Syria. Everyone
knows that, as long as terrorism is being fuelled and
there is a flow of foreign terrorists into Syria, the
crisis will continue at the humanitarian and political
levels. That will have a spillover effect in the entire
region and throughout the world. At that point we
will be moving in a vicious circle without reaching
any solution with respect to combating terrorism and
providing humanitarian assistance, whether for Syrians
or for other peoples suffering from the artificial socalled Arab Spring, a movement that is the result of
manipulation. Countries that aid terrorism in Syria
are making a mockery of people’s suffering and
are advancing their own political agendas so as to
break the Syrian Government. One example of that
is that when Mr. Bernard Kouchner, France’s former
Foreign Minister and the co-founder of Médecins Sans
Frontières — which is nothing other than the right arm
of the French secret service — recently visited northern
Syria, he entered the country illegally, thumbing his
nose at the country’s sovereignty as did United States
Senator John McCain before him. In spite of all that, the
Syrian Government continues to discharge its duties to
its citizens by combating terrorism inside the country.
In a mere two days, Syria was able to kill more Islamic
State and Al-Nusra Front terrorists than those killed by
1,000 raids by enemy aircraft, the alliance’s air forces.
Secondly, the unilateral sanctions imposed on
Syria have had serious implications by contributing
to increased humanitarian suffering throughout the
country, forcing many to flee to neighbouring countries,
since they are no longer able to live in the interior
owing to the political and moral pressures on the Syrian
Government and its resources. It has been claimed that
the Syrian Government has been preventing its citizen
from obtaining access to humanitarian assistance,
but that raises the question of why those countries
are trying to politicize the humanitarian issue on the
pretext of protecting civilians. The same situation
existed in brotherly Libya after the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2095 (2013), and the result is
what we are seeing there today. Many United Nations
officials have submitted reports on this issue, most
recently the 2013 report of the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia and the statement of
the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Syria at a
briefing held in Geneva on 4 December 2014, which

14-69064

12/12/2014

gave updated information on the implications of the
European Union and United States sanctions on Syria,
which have affected every economic sector and all
services in the country.
Thirdly, we have the problem of the lack of financing
for the humanitarian response plan, which has not
reached 47 per cent of the budget outlined for Syria in
2014. It has therefore fallen to the Syrian Government
alone to cover 75 per cent of humanitarian aid on its
own. In that regard, it should be understood that the
politicization of humanitarian assistance channels and
the insufficient amount of aid are basic reasons for the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Fourthly, concerning cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government, the Government has shown
itself willing to work with the United Nations in order to
elaborate and implement humanitarian response plans.
At the Geneva meeting on the humanitarian response
for 2015, my country discussed the basic elements of
future plans for the response. We are still waiting for
OCHA and other active humanitarian organizations to
show that they are fulfilling their mandates, particularly
those based on compliance with resolution 46/182,
and respecting the Security Council’s resolutions
on implementing humanitarian plans on the ground
rather than circumventing resolution 46/182 or using
Council resolutions to circumvent those humanitarian
plans. Security Council resolution 2165 (2014) allows
humanitarian aid to cross neighbouring countries’
borders into Syria.
In that regard, I would like to explain that despite
that resolution, various reports have emphasized the
errors and waste made in implementing it. For three
months after its adoption, and after losing $1.5 million
in financing for the humanitarian aid crossing the
borders, only 230 truckloads entered Syria from
neighbouring countries, representing only 5 per cent of
the convoys coming from within Syria, without even
mentioning the Turkish Government’s refusal to let
humanitarian aid cross from its side of the border. In its
discussion of humanitarian access, OCHA did not point
out the fact that, when humanitarian aid does cross the
border, the armed groups get their hands on it, and the
United Nations has no idea who they are. For example,
the terrorist group known as Liwa Al-Islam got hold
of a humanitarian convoy coming from Jordan. They
wrote on the convoy’s trucks that they were holding a
gift from Liwa Al-Islam.

A/69/PV.70

This is happening because of lack of coordination
with the Syrian Government. Various officials and
countries have attempted to circumvent resolution
2165 (2014) by trying to flout the authority of the
Government of Syria and to ignore the gentleman’s
agreement that is part of the resolution and that implies
that OCHA must cooperate with the Syrian Government
and inform it about the contents of humanitarian
convoys. That gentleman’s agreement was disregarded
mere hours after the resolution’s adoption, when three
diplomats from States that are permanent members
of the Security Council said proudly that the convoys
had entered Syria without the Government’s approval.
That is clearly a lie, pure and simple. Cooperation with
the Syrian Government cannot be linked to lack of aid
when humanitarian assistance is allowed access so that
it can reach civilians, and not be seized by terrorists.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Governments
that take part in the bloodshed in Syria, some of
which are our neighbours, cannot claim that they are
providing humanitarian assistance when they are
sponsors of terrorism in my country and are imposing
sanctions designed to starve the Syrian people. In
that regard, I would be remiss if I did not recall the
brazen collaboration between the Zionist entity and the
Nusra Front in the occupied Syrian Golan. The Syrian
Government has always condemned that collaboration,
while requesting that United Nations officials shed
light on the situation, up until the publication of the
Secretary-General’s most recent report on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
(S/2014/859), which recognized the existence of
collaboration between Israel and the Al-Nusra Front
terrorists in the Golan, through the supply of arms
to the protection of terrorist camps that claim to be
providing humanitarian assistance. That is happening
openly and publicly in front of the UNDOF forces on
the line of demarcation in the occupied Golan, United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the Secretariat and
the members of the Security Council.
The support voiced for Security Council resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) is not enough, since the
countries backing those resolutions continue to send
foreign terrorists to the countries that continue to train
them openly in camps in countries that include Turkey,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Qatar. They are sending them
to destroy Syria and its institutions while claiming
that they represent moderate opposition. We must ask,
since when do the Charter of the United Nations and

14-690647/29

A/69/PV.70

resolution 46/182 permit Governments to use terrorism
as a “moderate” weapon of aggression against certain
sovereign States of this Organization? Since when
does the Charter authorize destruction by so-called
moderate opposition groups that are no more than
terrorists? Those are the questions that Member States,
the Secretary-General and the Security Council must
answer.
Mr. Golitsyn (Ukraine): Today we are meeting,
after long rounds of negotiations, to reaffirm the
importance of scaling up the humanitarian approach
of the United Nations, with a view to ensuring fuller
coverage of people’s needs in every sector and in every
kind of humanitarian emergency. Together we are
striving to make significant progress in that direction.
There can be no doubt that all actors involved in
providing humanitarian assistance should fully respect
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, as is clearly stated in every relevant
document of the United Nations.
The year coming to an end has been one of
tremendous changes and challenges for my country.
Peaceful life and development in Ukraine were
fundamentally disrupted by the illegal annexation of
Crimea, and damaged by the conflict that was provoked
in two of the country’s eastern areas, both of which
have had devastating consequences for the people and
communities of the entire region. Despite a number of
ceasefire agreements, serious violations are reported
daily. Displacement is on the rise, and civilian lives are
endangered by the irresponsible acts of illegal militants.
My country is facing a situation in which 5.1 million
Ukrainian citizens are living in conflict-affected areas.
Ensuring protection and relief for those especially
vulnerable people is Ukraine’s key priority. We
have been doing our utmost to alleviate the situation
since the first months of the crisis. The Government
immediately established aid and support mechanisms
for the population affected by the conflict, with special
attention to internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
participants in anti-terrorist operations. On 20 October
we passed a law on IDPs. While we are taking action,
we are still relying on our supporters for help in
meeting the basic humanitarian needs of those affected,
particularly considering that winter has now arrived.
With international expert and technical support, we
have established a system for registering IDPs.

8/29

12/12/2014

The Ukrainian authorities are taking comprehensive
steps to rebuild in areas that have been restored to State
control, ensure due payments of social benefits and
provide vital services to residents. The decision has
been taken to continue delivering gas and electricity
to civilians in the areas of eastern Ukraine controlled
by militants, despite significant payment arrears.
Hundreds of tons of humanitarian aid have been sent
to the affected region, although there are obvious
obstacles to its delivery and distribution, owing to
interference from militants. It should be pointed
out that it is the illegal armed groups that are fully
responsible for depriving the local population of social
benefits, since they have seized all the funds allocated
by the Ukrainian Government for social needs in the
region. However, all social allowances will be kept in
escrow for each individual and paid immediately after
we regain control over the area.
Between August and November, Russia sent
eight humanitarian aid convoys that illegally crossed
Ukraine’s border without the consent of the Ukrainian
authorities or any inspection by them, and without
coordinating with the International Committee of the
Red Cross. The contents of the convoys are largely
unknown, as is the impact they may have had on
humanitarian conditions in Donbas.
Ukraine is grateful for the broad humanitarian
response it has received and welcomes the solidarity and
multilateral cooperation demonstrated by international
organizations and their determination to remain
committed. Since the start of this unprecedented crisis,
the Ukrainian authorities have been working in close
cooperation with our supporters from the International
Organization for Migration, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, UNICEF, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United States Agency for International Development,
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Red Cross and many other
bilateral partners. In particular, we call on our partners
to support the launch of our strategic response plan and
implementation of our preliminary response plan, the
joint endeavours of the Government of Ukraine and
the United Nations humanitarian community, which
will enable thousands of Ukrainians who have been

14-69064

12/12/2014

suffering to start rebuilding their lives in a safe and
stable Ukraine.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that, while
humanitarian relief and support should be provided to
every conflict-affected region, we must prevent and
stop fuelling conflicts in the first place.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Over the past year
there has been a stark rise in global humanitarian needs,
much of it due to armed conflicts, many of which are
now protracted emergencies. New Zealand therefore
calls on parties to all armed conflicts to work in good
faith with each other and with the United Nations to end
these conflicts.
New Zealand recognizes that its election to the
Security Council for the 2015-2016 term imposes an
additional responsibility to help with that peacemaking
process. We take that responsibility seriously, and we
will live up to it.
Respect for international humanitarian law is
paramount for protecting civilians from the effects of
armed conflict. We urge all parties to armed conflict
to allow humanitarian aid to get through to those who
need it. New Zealand is heartened that the international
community has taken steps to promote humanitarian
access, including by authorizing cross-border aid
delivery into Syria. We support the extension of such
authorization for humanitarian access beyond January
2015.
New Zealand is committed to the core humanitarian
principles of neutrality, impartiality, humanity and
independence, as outlined yesterday by the Chinese
Ambassador. Those principles are essential to
humanitarian action and for protecting humanitarian
actors. We are pleased that this year’s humanitarian
draft resolution (A/69/L.40) includes specific reference
to the need to protect medical personnel, and to the
Health Care in Danger project of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
The 2016 World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul
will be a key opportunity to ensure that the humanitarian
community can meet increasingly complex challenges.
New Zealand therefore thanks the Secretary-General
for that initiative, and we encourage all stakeholders to
engage positively.
Natural disasters continue to affect millions every
year. At this difficult time, our thoughts are with our
friends in the Philippines. Overall, our region, the

A/69/PV.70

Pacific, is particularly vulnerable to such disasters
and will be at the forefront of adapting to climate
change. More must be done to reduce the risk of natural
disasters. We therefore call on all nations to engage
fully in the Sendai Third World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction.
New Zealand is also deeply concerned at the Ebola
outbreak. While much work remains to be done, we
have been heartened by the international response. New
Zealand is supporting the Ebola response with a package
totalling $5 million in partnership with Australia, as
that country’s representative indicated yesterday.
New Zealand acknowledges with regret the recently
announced resignation of Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos. She has been a strong and inspirational leader.
We thank her for her tireless efforts, which have been
a truly shining example of United Nations humanitarian
policy in action. She has truly been humanitarian policy
in action, in every sense of the term, at its best.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States wishes to reaffirm its strong support for the
international humanitarian system. We remain deeply
committed to working with the United Nations, its
Member States and other humanitarian actors to protect
and assist vulnerable individuals and communities
caught up in conflict or impacted by natural disasters.
With four level-3 crises in the world today, more than
50 million people forcibly displaced, the highest number
since the Second World War, and Ebola in West Africa,
we must continue to improve system-wide coordination
and accountability, including to affected populations,
strengthen leadership and include more humanitarian
actors in the system’s collective responses.
We would like to acknowledge the tremendous
pressure that national and international humanitarian
staff are under and the enormous sacrifices they make in
responding to the multiple simultaneous humanitarian
crises around the world. We continue to be deeply
troubled by the lack of access, risks to the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and attacks against
medical and health-care workers, hospitals and other
medical facilities, which are protected under applicable
international law. Our commitment to working with
the United Nations and other partners to protect and
assist civilians uprooted by conflict and devastated by
natural disasters remains firm. To help mitigate those
risks, humanitarian actors must be able to operate in

14-690649/29

A/69/PV.70

an independent, neutral and impartial manner, and be
perceived by local populations as doing so.
In addition to being fully engaged in responding
to the four level-3 emergencies — in Syria, Iraq, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic — we are
mindful that the ongoing humanitarian situations in
the Sahel, Somalia and Yemen, among others, could
easily slip back into major emergencies if funding is
not sustained and longer-term development efforts not
allowed to succeed.
We acknowledge and appreciate the humanitarian
programme cycle reforms and look forward to working
closely with the United Nations on further refining
and improving needs assessment and analysis,
strategic response planning, resource mobilization,
implementation and monitoring and operational review
and evaluation.
We agree with efforts to better include national
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the people
affected by the crises in planning, assessments and
response. We fully agree that information management
is critical to saving lives, and we support efforts to
better harness information and technology to benefit
people affected by crises.
Almost 100 Member States now contribute to
financing international humanitarian assistance efforts.
We are hearing from many of them today. The growing
number of countries involved in funding international
humanitarian operations is welcome and essential
to meeting the needs of more than 57 million people
identified as vulnerable and requiring assistance.
The United States will participate fully in the 2015
consultations leading up to the 2016 World Humanitarian
Summit. That will include a United States Governmenthosted global thematic consultation on humanitarian
effectiveness, to be held here in New York City in June
2015. We look forward to joining other Governments,
United Nations agency representatives, NGOs and other
actors to openly discuss the humanitarian system and
the needed reforms to make the system more effective
and inclusive.
Finally, the United States would like to reaffirm its
continuing support for the humanitarian principles of
neutrality, impartiality, independence and humanity.
Adherence to those core principles provides a strong
foundation for the rapid and effective delivery of
assistance that saves lives and reduces suffering during

10/29

12/12/2014

times of crisis. We urge the United Nations to continue
its efforts to promote a principled and needs-based
approach to humanitarian assistance for the benefit of
all who find themselves in need of aid during times of
conflict or when natural disasters strike.
Mr. Minami (Japan): The international community
faces an unprecedented series of crises, and the
United Nations humanitarian mechanisms are awfully
overstretched. We face four level-3 crises — in South
Sudan, the Central African Republic, Syria and Iraq.
In addition to those emergencies, the system must
make every effort to confront the continuous disruptive
outbreaks of humanitarian crises, such as the Ebola
epidemic. Japan has resolved to continue to take on
the great responsibility of those issues, alongside the
international community.
In order to prevent extremism from taking root in
the Middle East region, while also responding swiftly to
the region’s humanitarian crises, Japan is implementing
$50 million in emergency assistance for the region,
as promised by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in his
address to the General Assembly in September (see
A/69/PV.9). As a response to the Ebola outbreak, Prime
Minister Abe also announced $40 million in additional
assistance at the General Assembly. Furthermore, on
7 November, we pledged to provide further assistance
totalling $100 million.
Nevertheless, the needs are so immense that
financial contributions from traditional donors alone
are simply not enough. With that reality in mind, some
suggest the possibility of creating a “super” Central
Emergency Response Fund for level-3 emergencies — a
pooled fund based on assessed contributions, which is
similar to that we have for peacekeeping operations.
However, creating new assessed contributions requires
further discussion among humanitarian actors. And it
would not be a tool that could be used immediately for
the crises we face now. It is therefore crucially important
to discuss not only how we finance humanitarian needs,
but also how we can better address such needs.
We strongly feel that close coordination among
various actors, including local Governments,
donor countries, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations, is of essential
importance. In that context, my Government strongly
welcomes the draft resolutions that we will adopt
today. I would also like to stress the importance of
the coordination mechanism of the Office for the

14-69064

12/12/2014

A/69/PV.70

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I would like
to commend Ms. Valerie Amos, the longest-serving
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for her prominent
leadership in coordinating emergency humanitarian
assistance among humanitarian agencies. We regret
her departure from her current post and would like to
extend our sincere gratitude for her dedication.

Ms. Stener (Norway): The humanitarian system
faces enormous challenges in responding to the
increasing humanitarian needs around the world. The
gap between available resources and humanitarian
needs is growing, and will continue to do so. We cannot
afford to let ourselves be overwhelmed by the common
challenges we know will continue to arise. We need a
humanitarian system that is more fit for the future.

The World Humanitarian Summit to be held
in Istanbul in 2016 will be a great opportunity for
humanitarian actors to gather and discuss various
challenges in the field of humanitarian assistance. We
welcome the readiness of Turkey to host the Summit.

Principled and effective humanitarian action must
lie at the very core of the future global humanitarian
system. But we cannot claim to be either effective
or principled if there is no accountability to affected
populations and if those in need have no access to
life-saving assistance.

Japan hosted a regional consultation process for
North and East Asia in July in Tokyo. The participants
in the consultations discussed various issues regarding
the humanitarian system. Based on that discussion, we
will actively participate in the thematic discussion in the
preparation process for the summit. In that regard, we
would like to draw attention to the gender perspective
as a cross-cutting issue.
Next March, we will host the Third United Nations
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, in
Sendai, Japan. Through the Conference, we will be
happy to share best practices and lessons learned
from the Great East Japan earthquake of March 2011,
including the “build back better” concept. We would
like to share the outcome of the Conference with the
World Humanitarian Summit process.
Many high-level United Nations conferences are
scheduled for 2015. They include the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, in July,
the September summit that will adopt the post-2015
development agenda, and, of course, the twenty-first
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of
the Parties, in Paris, on climate change. We have to be
aware of the fact that, although those conferences are
of monumental importance, the process of preparing
for the World Humanitarian Summit should continue
steadily throughout the year 2015, irrespective of those
conferences.
In concluding my statement, I would sincerely like
to commend the work of humanitarian organizations in
helping realize more effective assistance methods, as
well as the tireless effort of aid workers on the ground
despite the world’s numerous humanitarian crises.

International humanitarian law sets clear obligations
for the parties to armed conflict to protect civilian
populations. Still, the vast majority of victims of
armed conflict are civilians. Norway fully agrees
that it is the prerogative of the State to ensure that the
basic humanitarian needs of its affected people are
met. However, if States are unable, or unwilling, to
address humanitarian needs and provide protection,
humanitarian actors must be in a position to do so. That
means that, in order to save lives and reduce human
suffering, States and parties to conflict must grant
rapid and unimpeded access to affected populations;
such access must not be arbitrarily denied.
Civilians continue to pay the price for grave
violations of international humanitarian law. An area
of particular concern is the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, which have had detrimental effects
on civilian populations. Another serious concern is the
high number of attacks on schools and schoolchildren
that we have witnessed over the last year. We must do
more to ensure that education continues for children
in conflict and crises, and we must do more to protect
schools and universities during armed conflict. The lack
of education has both immediate and long-term effects.
Schools provide continuity, safety and protection, and
often food and water, when societies are disintegrating.
Education delivers the knowledge and skills that are
needed to reconcile and to build back better. Education
is a driver for development and for finding a way out
of the unprecedented number of complex humanitarian
crises. We hope that the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict will be an effective tool in the efforts
to prevent the use of schools and higher education
institutions for military purposes during conflict.

14-6906411/29

A/69/PV.70

Sexual and gender-based violence continues to
target civilians, particularly women and girls. It is
too often coupled with impunity and a lack of health
services, including sexual and reproductive health care.
Ensuring the rights of women and girls in humanitarian
crises is key to effective humanitarian action.
Medical facilities and health workers are
increasingly not protected in crises and conflicts;
in fact, they are often under direct attack. We are
concerned about the long-term consequences for the
civilian populations and the resilience of health systems
in countries affected by attacks.
The obligation to protect medical missions in
armed conflict is set out in international humanitarian
law. The gaps are not due to a lack of norms, but a lack
of implementation and respect.
In conclusion, let me underscore Norway’s strong
support for a more inclusive, effective and betterequipped humanitarian system. In that regard, we
would like to commend the efforts and achievements of
outgoing Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos.
We furthermore welcome the Secretary-General’s call
for new candidates and look forward to an open and
competitive process in selecting the right person for
one of the most important and challenging jobs in the
world.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his reports on the
progress of the humanitarian activities of the United
Nations system (A/69/96 and A/69/303). We also would
like to commend outgoing Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos for her efforts to ensure effective
coordination in the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The world continues to face an increasing number of
natural and man-made disasters. Although our collective
capacity to respond to those challenges increases too,
significant loss of life, damage and the long-lasting
impacts caused by various humanitarian crises remain
a cause of grave concern. The effective coordination
of humanitarian assistance and cooperation among
the relevant stakeholders are essential. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs plays a
central role in realizing those goals and enabling the
humanitarian community to better function together.
As the nature of humanitarian crises changes,
the humanitarian system must evolve appropriately
to adapt so as better to respond to those in need. We

12/29

12/12/2014

must all be cognizant of the fact that humanitarian
aid and engagement mean not only reaching those in
need, but also investing in peace and security. There is
a strong link between them. With that understanding,
we commend the Secretary-General for his initiative to
hold the first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul
in 2016.
Turkey continues to support the Summit secretariat
in its efforts to maintain and develop a holistic, inclusive
and comprehensive approach in the preparation process.
We look forward to working together with all Member
States, United Nations agencies and humanitarian
partners, including civil society and non-governmental
organizations. The Summit process, which is well
under way, enables Member States and all the relevant
stakeholders to address the issues of aid effectiveness,
serving the people in need, innovation and risk
management, with the aim of sharing best practices and
broadening partnerships in the humanitarian field.
Adopting a comprehensive approach to humanitarian
efforts, including disaster risk management, building
the resilience of communities and institutions as well as
early response and recovery, is necessary. We believe
that the World Humanitarian Summit, together with
the post-2015 development agenda efforts, including
work on the sustainable development goals, climate
change and the post-Hyogo Framework for disaster risk
reduction, will mark a new era in our understanding
and conduct of risk management and humanitarian
assistance.
As the crisis in Syria enters its fourth year, the
suffering of the Syrian people continues while the
ramifications of the conflict become more alarming.
As our hopes continue to find a long-lasting political
solution to the crisis in Syria, Turkey will continue to
provide the necessary assistance to the Syrian people,
in close cooperation with the agencies of the United
Nations. The much-needed support of the international
community must be stepped up to meet the needs
of Syrians while building the resilience of the host
communities, which endure tremendous pressures.
Unfortunately, once again, we have heard baseless
allegations made by one delegation. Those are futile
attempts to divert attention from the enormous
destruction and human suffering caused by the Syrian
regime. What we are doing for the brotherly Syrian
people needs no further explanation. It is being done
before the eyes of the international community, in close

14-69064

12/12/2014

cooperation with international organizations, including
United Nations agencies.
Since the beginning of the crisis, Turkey has to
date spent more than $4.5 billion of its national budget
for Syrians in Turkey. However, our assistance to other
humanitarian emergencies also continues, covering a
wide geographical area, including the Central African
Republic, Iraq, Myanmar, Somalia and Ukraine. The
Global Humanitarian Assistance Report indicates that
Turkey became the third-largest Government donor in
2013.
As part of our response to the most recent Ebola
outbreak, we aim to continue our bilateral assistance to
the most-affected countries and to support the African
Union. We will also work with our partners during our
presidency of the Group of 20 to explore new, flexible
emergency-response mechanisms to address the
economic and social effects of similar crises.
Turkey continues to contribute to the Central
Emergency Response Fund. Our contributions have
reached $2.25 million since the Fund’s inception.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the report (A/69/303) of
the Secretary-General and endorses its analysis and
recommendations.
Switzerland, too, would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos for her tireless
commitment in leading the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
At the outset, Switzerland expresses its deep
concern at the conclusions of the negotiations on draft
resolution A/69/L.40, on strengthening the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance, which should be
adopted by consensus today. It is alarming that, year
after year, due to the intransigence of some Member
States, it remains impossible to make progress at the
normative level on central humanitarian issues such
as access and accountability to affected populations.
The humanitarian system has never faced greater
challenges, yet we are unable to respond to a critical
humanitarian imperative — the need to be accountable
to those we provide assistance.
Switzerland would like to focus on four points in
this debate.
First, Switzerland notes with concern that the
level of funding for humanitarian appeals continues to

A/69/PV.70

fall, while needs continue to grow, thereby impacting
the effectiveness of humanitarian aid. To narrow that
gap, we must improve risk prevention and develop
new partnerships and closer cooperation among
development and humanitarian actors. Switzerland
recognizes the efforts made in recent years to enhance
the effectiveness of the United Nations humanitarian
response system, in particular in terms of leadership
and coordination. However, much remains to be done
to improve accountability to affected populations.
Only by systematically putting those populations and
their needs at the centre of humanitarian activities can
such activities become more effective. That may sound
obvious. In practice, however, humanitarian planning and
response do not take the voices of affected populations
sufficiently into account. Effective humanitarian action
must also take account of the specific context. Above
all, it must respect the humanitarian principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence at
all times. Those universally recognized principles must
never be called into question.
In addition to enhancing the effectiveness of the
international humanitarian response system, it must
be recalled that crisis-affected States themselves bear
the primary responsibility for meeting the needs of,
and providing assistance to, their populations. At the
same time, interaction and interoperability among
stakeholders, including local and regional authorities,
civil society, regional and international organizations,
armed forces and the private sector, are becoming
increasingly important. Strong partnerships among
those actors must therefore to be fostered more
systematically, so as to strengthen the impact of
humanitarian action on the affected populations.
Secondly, with regard to the protection of, and
access to, beneficiaries, Switzerland is concerned
by the great price paid by those affected by conflict,
including displaced persons. The same applies to
humanitarian personnel, who are coming under attack
in unprecedented numbers. The parties to a conflict
have a responsibility to protect civilian populations, as
well as aid and relief workers, including medical staff.
Such personnel must enjoy the freedom of movement
they need to carry out their duties. Switzerland would
like to recall that swift, unhindered access to civilian
populations in need must be guaranteed by all parties to
a conflict. Switzerland also actively supports initiatives
to that end, such as the recent publication of two

14-6906413/29

A/69/PV.70

manuals aimed at improving the ability of humanitarian
organizations to gain access to affected populations.
Thirdly, where risk management and reducing
vulnerability are concerned, we are seeing more
frequent occurrence of natural disasters. They are
being further exacerbated by a variety of global
factors. Climate change, population growth, unplanned
urbanization and food- and water-related insecurity
are making populations increasingly vulnerable. Faced
with the recurrence and greater severity of such crises,
the international humanitarian response system is being
stretched beyond its capacity, and henceforth it cannot
cope with the urgent needs of millions of vulnerable
people. It is a matter of urgency that we move away
from a crisis-management approach to one based on
managing risk. Prevention pays off. It is essential to
focus on reducing vulnerabilities and strengthening the
resilience of local communities. To that end, further
actions must be taken to align planning and risk analysis
processes between humanitarian aid and development,
specifically by means of shared, objective evaluation
data. The post-2015 development agenda and the World
Humanitarian Summit process are opportunities that
must be seized.
Fourthly, the process leading up to the World
Humanitarian Summit, scheduled for 2016 in Istanbul,
is a unique opportunity to respond to the current
and future challenges faced by the humanitarian
community. Switzerland is very involved in the World
Humanitarian Summit process. My country will host
global consultations in October 2015. We would like
a substantial dialogue on the issues covered by the
summit process to take place more regularly at the
global level, in New York and Geneva in particular.
Calm discussions in an atmosphere of mutual trust and
openness among the various parties concerned would
contribute to the successful outcome of the process.
Finally, at the Istanbul Summit it will be crucial
to translate the expectations of the various regions
into concrete recommendations and to make the
voices of the affected populations heard. We hope that
the process will enable us to draw up a realistic and
ambitious agenda for post-2016 humanitarian action.
We also hope that rigorous monitoring will ensure
genuine progress. Rest assured that Switzerland will
do all that it can to support the success of the World
Humanitarian Summit.

14/29

12/12/2014

Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba appreciates the United Nations system’s work
in the area of humanitarian support and advocates its
strengthening.
My delegation would like to reiterate its
unconditional support for the heroic efforts of the
Palestinian people in their struggle to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination. They are the
victims of one of the most prolonged humanitarian
crisis facing the Organization, which requires particular
attention in this debate. It is essential that efforts be
redoubled to end the injustice committed against this
people and for the question of Palestine to be resolved
in all its aspects, including a just solution to the difficult
situation of Palestinian refugees.
Cuba reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and its firm and resolute support for all of
the actions aimed at promoting recognition of the
Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and their right to become
a full Member of the United Nations. The most recent
massacre committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip caused the death of over
2,000 Palestinians, the majority of them children,
women and the elderly, and resulted in more than
11,000 injured, many with permanent disabilities, and
the forced displacement of more than one third of the
population. The destruction of more than 5,000 houses,
civilian infrastructure and basic services networks has
aggravated the already difficult humanitarian crisis in
Gaza as a result of the illegal blockade and the ensuing
shortage of all kinds of goods.
Cuba calls for an end to the prolonged illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, the immediate,
unconditional and complete lifting of the cruel blockade
of Gaza, as well as the opening of the border-control
checkpoints in order to allow for free and permanent
access to humanitarian assistance, the provision of
essential goods and the facilitation of the movement
of people in and out of Gaza. We view with extreme
concern the large increase in the number of households
that face food insecurity — an increase from 27 per
cent in 2011 to 33.5 per cent in 2012. Broken down into
regions, 57 per cent of the homes in Gaza and 17 per
cent in the West Bank faced food insecurity in 2013.
In absolute values, that translates into 1.5 million
Palestinians suffering from food insecurity.

14-69064

12/12/2014

Cuba fully supports the Palestinian initiative for
a Security Council resolution to set a deadline for an
end of the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territories that began in 1967 and to make it possible
for the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination in
an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with its capital in East Jerusalem.
The construction and expansion of illegal
settlements call into doubt Israel’s seriousness about
peace negotiations and endanger the actual process. In
practical terms, those policies prevent the existence of a
Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 borders and the
possibility of finding a just solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. Cuba condemns those policies and
practices that violate international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention, United Nations resolutions
and the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice (see A/ES-10/273), and demands that an
immediate end be put to all of those illegal practices.
Humanitarian assistance should be carried out with
the full cooperation of the Government concerned.
In that connection, it is important to respect the
sovereignty of Syria and to work with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic so that humanitarian aid
does not become a political weapon against the Syrian
Government.
The United Nations has an obligation to respect
the principles governing humanitarian assistance for
the victims of conflict and humanitarian emergencies.
The victims of such conflicts trust the ability of the
Organization, which has accumulated experience in
the area. Respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law are essential to bring aid to those who
need it. But the ultimate solution is to end conflicts,
which in the final analysis constitute the core of the
problem. Cuba will continue to work to that end,
together with the other Member States.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Ms. Christensen (International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies): For the third
consecutive year, the Philippines has been hit by a
climate-related disaster that has had a devastating
impact on the lives of the affected people and regions.

A/69/PV.70

Luckily, the last storm that hit the Philippines did not
wreak as much havoc on the lives of the affected people
as did the previous two, thanks in large part to the efforts
of national and local authorities, the evacuation of over
1 million people before Typhoon Hagupit made landfall
and the resiliency of the people of the Philippines. In
addition to the damage caused by the strength of the
storm, including estimates of 30 to 60 per cent of
housing having been damaged close to the track of the
storm in Eastern Samar, the slow-moving Hagupit also
caused significant flooding and some landslides, which
exacerbated the situation, especially with regard to
infrastructure, crops and livelihoods.
As clearly evident from the impact of such
disasters on the Philippines, which has sustained
losses amounting to 5 per cent of its gross domestic
product every year since 2008, the impact of disasters
on poor countries and rapidly growing middle-income
countries is disproportionately high. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (A/69/303), disasterrelated economic losses have exceeded $100 billion for
the fourth consecutive year.
Given the frequency and severity of such
climate-related disasters and their devastating impact,
it is essential that efforts to adapt to climate change and
efforts to reduce disaster risk be closely linked. That
requires coordinated and comprehensive integration of
such considerations in private and public planning and
investment, and in the humanitarian and development
agendas of all actors. It also requires prioritizing
disaster-risk management and coping strategies for
affected communities themselves and increasing efforts
for public awareness and education regarding disaster
and climate risk.
The International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) works in partnership
with its 189 national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies and supports them in their role as auxiliaries
to their public authorities. In that context, the IFRC
works with national societies in building resilience
by strengthening the preparedness and capacities of
communities to better respond to, and recover from,
disasters, to promote actions that mitigate the adverse
effects of hazards and to protect development gains
from the impact of disasters.
Since the opening of the sixty-ninth session of
the General Assembly, Member States and the United
Nations system have prioritized action on the Ebola

14-6906415/29

A/69/PV.70

virus disease at numerous meetings, including in
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. The IFRC is grateful for
the leadership of the affected countries, and in particular
for the national staff and volunteers who are fighting
to turn the tide of the outbreak. We are also grateful
to all the countries that have been supporting those
efforts with financial, human and logistical resources,
as well as to the Secretary-General and his envoys,
including the team of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response, for their tireless efforts
and support.
The IFRC and its member national societies have
been responding to this emergency from the outset,
even before the magnitude of the crisis and its impact
on the whole region and beyond became clear. As we
recognize Ebola as a complex global crisis, we must all
work together in a coordinated, scaled-up and sustained
effort. We need to be vigilant, persistent and equipped
to respond to new challenges as they emerge.
To defeat Ebola, we need to simultaneously educate
communities, isolate and treat patients, trace and
monitor contacts, provide psychosocial support and
safely and respectfully bury those killed by the disease.
We need to reach remote towns and villages and explain
how the virus is transmitted, persuade people to change
behaviours contributing to the spread of the disease and
stop the fear, the misconception and the stigmatization.
At the same time, we should not ignore the impact of
the crisis on overall essential services, food security
and the livelihoods of entire communities.
In the longer term, it is vital that we learn the
lessons and invest in the health-care systems of the
affected countries. The epidemic has further weakened
already weak health systems that had limited resources
for sustaining essential health services to handle
other disease and pressures. As the United Nations
has highlighted, even as we focus intensely on the
immediate threat, it is not too soon to start helping the
affected countries recover.
Finally, as the General Assembly gears up for the
final phase of the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda, and as we prepare for the convening of the
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction to be
held in Sendai, Japan, and the engagement with the
World Humanitarian Summit, our main focus in all
these processes has been to work with Member States
and partners to adopt policies and recommendations

16/29

12/12/2014

that strengthen communities, making them more
resilient and providing them with the capacity to resist
shocks, manage risks and bounce back from disasters
and emergencies. That capacity has, until now, been
lost in the gap between humanitarian and development
agendas.
As we engage actively in those processes, the main
platform through which the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement can collectively engage with
States and agree on common agendas and commitments
remains the International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent. Our thirty-second International
Conference will be convened in Geneva in December
2015. We look forward to working with the States
parties to the Geneva Conventions in preparation for
the Conference.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 45/6, of 16 October 1990, I now call on the
observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.
Mr. Spoerri (International Committee of the
Red Cross): Improved coordination mechanisms, the
development of guidelines and the adoption of new
technologies have made it easier over the years for the
humanitarian sector to better address the needs and
aspirations of vulnerable groups. In recent years, the
need to uphold human dignity in all circumstances
has also been repeatedly reaffirmed in various forums
and through the adoption and ratification of key
international legal instruments, including in the field
of international humanitarian law.
Despite all that progress, however, from the
perspective of civilians affected by armed conflict, the
outlook is desperately bleak. In 2014, there have been
record numbers of people displaced by conflict and
other forms of armed violence, reportedly exceeding
50 million for the first time since the Second World
War. Although overall humanitarian funding has
grown significantly, the gap between resources and
needs has grown even further. At the same time, lack
of access — irrespective of the reasons for it — has
often left millions of people beyond the reach of even
the most basic humanitarian assistance and protection.
Many armed conflicts drag on for years,
sometimes decades, while new ones erupt, marked
by serious violations of international humanitarian
law, such as indiscriminate attacks, direct attacks on
civilians, including health-care personnel, and massive

14-69064

12/12/2014

destruction of infrastructure and livelihoods. That
leads to the flight of skilled workers, chronic poverty
and poor prospects for sustainable recovery. To reverse
those trends, States have a duty to better prevent
and resolve conflicts and to improve protection and
assistance for those caught up in armed conflict and
violence. Humanitarian actors are concerned only with
the latter task and can only play a subsidiary role in
that.
The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has a mandate to work for the faithful application
of international humanitarian law. To that end, it is
constantly engaged in confidential discussions with all
parties. Its purpose is to secure not only acceptance for
its presence based on trust, but also respect for the rules
of international humanitarian law.
While the responsibility for complying with
humanitarian law lies primarily with the parties to a
conflict, all States have a role to play in that regard.
One way of doing so is to explore new avenues for
developing effective compliance mechanisms, which
is an important topic on the agenda of the upcoming
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, to be held at the end of 2015 in Geneva.
Most importantly, however, States should demonstrate
their political commitment, notably by incorporating
humanitarian rules in domestic law and training their
military forces and others who may be called upon to
exercise authority in the event of armed conflict. The
ICRC further recalls the legal obligation undertaken
by all States, when they ratified the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, to respect and ensure respect for
the Conventions.
Providing an adequate response to the magnitude
and complexity of humanitarian needs generated by
contemporary conflicts requires a holistic response
and the active involvement of a wide range of
actors. The ICRC is committed to engaging with all
humanitarian and development actors who are actively
and effectively helping to improve the lives of people
affected by conflict. The aim is not for all humanitarian
actors to behave in the same way, but rather to draw on
their individual strengths while fully respecting their
respective mandates and expertise.
For the ICRC, a humanitarian response is best served
by maintaining distinct humanitarian coordination
processes whereby actors operate side by side in a spirit
of complementarity and collective responsibility. We

A/69/PV.70

see the added value of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement in its unique network of global
and local humanitarian actors working in accordance
with those principles, with access to those who are
vulnerable and in need of protection and assistance,
whether as a result of armed conflict, natural disaster
or other causes. With wide-ranging expertise that
covers almost all domains of humanitarian action, the
Movement is striving to improve its own coordination
mechanisms. We look forward to reporting in greater
detail on the progress made in that regard at the
International Conference at the end of 2015.
Humanitarian coordination has value only in so far
as it translates into effective protection and assistance
on the ground. That in turn means that humanitarian
workers must have access to people in conflict areas and
be able to engage with all belligerents. Unfortunately,
that is becoming more and more difficult. Recent
years have seen profound changes in the way conflicts
are waged, with ever-increasing dangers for all
humanitarian workers deployed in the field, whether
from the United Nations system, the Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement or local or international
non-governmental organizations.
The same holds true for health-care personnel. Over
the past two and a half years, the ICRC has recorded
2,400 violent incidents against health-care workers
and facilities in 23 countries around the world. Those
figures speak for themselves. We are encouraged to see
that there is wide support for that cause and that steps
are being taken on a number of fronts to improve the
situation.
Humanitarian workers are well aware that operating
in conflict settings is inherently dangerous and will
always entail certain safety risks. But it is unacceptable
that they be deliberately targeted by those seeking
to gain a political, military or economic advantage.
Such acts are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. We must do everything in our power
to prevent them.
For States, that includes the duty to investigate and
bring to justice the suspected perpetrators. States must
also seek to avoid blurring the line between political and
military initiatives, on the one hand, and humanitarian
action, on the other.
For humanitarian organizations, there is no
one-size-fits-all approach to managing security risks.
Some emphasize physical protection alongside armed

14-6906417/29

A/69/PV.70

escorts, or try to operate from a safe distance using local
staff, private contractors or local partners to implement
their programmes. For its part, in certain exceptional
cases, the ICRC has resorted to some of those measures.
But it puts much greater emphasis on being accepted by
all sides as a means of ensuring the safety of its staff.
In our opinion, no amount of modern technology or
so-called remote control can substitute for direct and
regular contact with beneficiaries, weapons-bearers and
the authorities controlling the areas where we operate.
Such proximity with affected communities affords us a
clear understanding of people’s needs, aspirations and
physical and psychological well-being, as well as of the
causes and consequences of any protection problems
that may arise.
Close contact with all the relevant armed forces
and organized armed groups allows us to pursue a
confidential dialogue through which the ICRC can
bring humanitarian issues to their attention and call
upon them to take corrective measures.
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
abide by the Movement’s fundamental principles and
are the ICRC’s primary partners. Its volunteers are
often the first to arrive on the scene, and we have daily
proof of their remarkable dedication and courage in
performing their humanitarian mission. Given their
unique operational capacity and understanding of local
conditions, national societies are often the preferred
partners of United Nations agencies as well, particularly
in polarized settings where the United Nations agencies
struggle to operate freely due to a lack of acceptance
and security.
The ICRC welcomes such cooperation when it can
help deliver desperately needed relief, but underlines
the importance of not overstretching national societies’
capacities and, above all, not undermining their
acceptance as neutral organizations. To that end,
their cooperation must be tailored to avoid giving the
impression that national societies operate under the
authority of United Nations agencies. Governments
must also grant national societies sufficient autonomy
to enable them to carry out their humanitarian mission
in accordance with the fundamental principles.
The basic assumption that humanitarian actors
who adhere to humanitarian principles will be granted
access is increasingly being challenged on a variety
of fronts. Some Governments see humanitarian
action as a threat to their sovereignty, despite the

18/29

12/12/2014

fact that existing humanitarian law strikes a balance
between sovereignty concerns and the imperatives of
humanitarian assistance.
Similarly, some non-State actors suspect humanitarian
organizations of having a political or military agenda.
A growing number question the validity of our
humanitarian principles or the approach that should
underpin our action. In all of those cases, the results
include obstacles to acceptance and access, whether
in the form of denied visas and other administrative
hurdles, thwarted attempts to contact leaders with
decision-making authority, outright refusals to permit
independent humanitarian action to go ahead, or even
threats and violence against our staff. Because the
consequences of all of that are so dire for those who
depend on humanitarian relief, it is imperative that
the international community redouble its efforts to
reach a renewed political consensus backing apolitical
humanitarian action.
In conclusion, it is our hope that the forthcoming
World Humanitarian Summit will further the dialogue
and lead to tangible progress. The Summit should not
focus solely on technical and peripheral issues, but
instead address the major factors affecting the current
erosion of the humanitarian endeavour. The ICRC
stands ready to take an active part in the discussions
aimed at clarifying the purpose and relevancy of future
humanitarian action.
Last year we celebrated the 150th anniversary of
the founding of the ICRC and of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement. This year is the
150th anniversary of the original Geneva Convention,
which was adopted to improve the condition of the
sick and wounded in war. As the nature of armed
conflict evolved, subsequent generations were inspired
to continue developing humanitarian law and the
protection and assistance available for the victims.
Today we have a shared responsibility to take up that
mantle.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 69 and its
sub-items (a) to (c).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/69/L.33, A/69/L.37 and A/69/L.40.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

14-69064

12/12/2014

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/69/L.40, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations”, I wish to put on the record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 53 of draft resolution A/69/L.40,
the Assembly would welcome the initiative of the
Secretary-General to hold the first World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul, Turkey, in 2016, aimed at sharing
knowledge and best practices in the humanitarian field
to improve the coordination, capacity and effectiveness
of humanitarian response. It would request the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to ensure
an inclusive, consultative and transparent preparatory
process. And it would encourage Member States and
stakeholders to participate in and contribute to the
process and outcome of the summit, as well as encourage
the Secretary-General to further engage Member States
regarding the process and outcome of the Summit.
Pursuant to the request set out in paragraph 53, the
first World Humanitarian Summit is to be held in 2016
in Istanbul. It is understood that all issues related to
the Summit, including the date, format, organization
and scope, are yet to be determined. Accordingly, in
the absence of modalities for the Summit, it is not
possible, at the present time, to estimate the potential
cost implications of the requirements for meetings and
documentation. Upon a decision on the modalities,
format and organization of the Summit, the SecretaryGeneral will submit the relevant costs of such
requirements in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. Accordingly, the
adoption of draft resolution A/69/L.40 would not give
rise to any financial implications under the programme
budget.
The Acting President: The Assembly will first
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.33, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,

A/69/PV.70

the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/69/L.33: Armenia, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mongolia, San Marino, Turkey,
Ukraine and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.33?
Draft resolution A/69/L.33 was adopted (resolution
69/133).
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.37,
entitled “Twentieth anniversary of the participation of
volunteers, White Helmets, in the activities of the United
Nations in the field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation
and technical cooperation for development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/69/L.37: Andorra, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.37?
Draft resolution A/69/L.37 was adopted (resolution
69/134).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.40, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/69/L.40: Andorra, Chile, Costa
Rica, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Georgia,

14-6906419/29

A/69/PV.70

Guatemala, Israel, Mexico, Monaco, Poland, San
Marino, Switzerland and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.40?
Draft resolution A/69/L.40 was adopted (resolution
69/135).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore on a point of order.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): Singapore would like to raise
a point of order on behalf of the States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) with
reference to the issue of the order of speakers under this
agenda item.
ASEAN States members have considered
sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 to the annex to
resolution 65/276, on the participation of the European
Union (EU) in the work of the United Nations, which
states that:
“In accordance with the present resolution, the
representatives of the European Union, in order to
present positions of the European Union and its
member States as agreed by them, shall be:
“Invited to participate in the general debate of
the General Assembly, in accordance with the
order of precedence as established in the practice
for participating observers and the level of
participation”.
Therefore, in keeping with the letter and spirit of
resolution 65/276, ASEAN States members are of the
opinion that the EU observer delegation, in its capacity
as observer, should kindly speak after all regional and
major groupings that are represented by States, unless
the EU is represented also by a Member State.
That is the principle application of resolution
65/276. Hence, ASEAN would request that an ASEAN
State member, when speaking on behalf of the group,
speak before the European Union if the latter is
represented by the EU observer delegation.
The Acting President: I have been informed
by the Secretariat that the list of speakers is built in
accordance with resolution 65/276 and the note by the
Secretary-General contained in document A/65/856.
The General Assembly takes note of the statement by
the representative of Singapore.

20/29

12/12/2014

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 69 and its sub-items (a)
to (c).
Agenda item 31
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of
China transmitting the report of the Kimberley
Process (A/69/622)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.39)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.39.
Mr. Wei Chuanzhong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Pursuant to paragraphs 32 and 33 of resolution 68/128,
as Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2014 I wish to
present to the current session of the General Assembly
the report (A/69/622, annex) on the implementation of
the Kimberley Process, and to introduce, on behalf of
the Process, draft resolution A/69/L.39, entitled “The
role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”.
The draft resolution was prepared and submitted
by China. The co-sponsors of the draft resolution
include Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
the Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Uruguay and the United Kingdom. I thank the
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.39 for their
support. I also thank all parties for their participation
in the consultations and for their efforts.
The relevant language in the draft resolution is
taken from the communiqué adopted by all members
by consensus at the plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process that took place in Guangzhou, China, on
14 November 2014. I wish to take this opportunity
to thank all delegations for their professional and
constructive contributions to their negotiations on the
draft resolution, and for achieving consensus. I look
forward to the adoption of the draft resolution.

14-69064

12/12/2014

I would like to point out that the draft resolution is a
consensus text and, as is the usual practice, the General
Assembly adopts it by consensus after the current Chair
presents it each year. I therefore introduce this draft
resolution as requested by the resolution 68/128. On
behalf of China, I am honoured to serve as Chair of the
Kimberley Process for this year.
In 2002, ministers and leaders of delegations
from 37 countries reaffirmed their commitment to the
effective control of the trade in rough diamonds. Since
its inception, the international certification scheme
for rough diamonds has included 54 participants
representing 81 countries, including the 28 States
members of the European Union (EU) represented by
the European Commission.
In addition, we are very pleased to see the
participation of Greenland through the EU in the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. Apart form the
member States representing national Governments, civil
society has also shown much interest and participated
in the Kimberley Process. Furthermore, the Kimberley
Process has received important contributions from such
industry representatives as the World Diamond Council
and the Association of African Diamond Producers,
as well as the Diamond Development Initiative. The
Kimberley Process has enormous responsibilities, as the
scheme has an important bearing not only on stability,
people’s livelihoods and economic development in the
vast diamond-producing areas, but on the livelihoods of
millions of people around the world.
The draft resolution acknowledges the progress
made by the Kimberly Process in the following areas:
strengthening the implementation of the peer review
system, increasing the transparency and accuracy of
statistics, promoting research into the traceability of
diamonds, promoting inclusiveness by broadening the
level of involvement by Governments, industry and
civil society in the Kimberley Process, fostering a sense
of ownership by participants, improving information
and communication flows and enhancing the capacity
of the Process to respond to emerging challenges.
The draft resolution expresses appreciation to
China, Guinea, Australia and Guyana for receiving
review visits in 2014, welcomes the commitment of
those countries to continuously open their certification
system to reviews and improvements, and calls upon
all participants to invite and receive review visits,

A/69/PV.70

in accordance with the peer review system of the
Kimberley Process.
The draft resolution takes note of Security Council
resolution 2153 (2014), which ends the measures set
out in resolution 1643 (2005) to prevent importation
by any State of rough diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire.
It also notes that, in its 2014 final communiqué , the
Kimberley Process plenary meeting accepted the
invitation of Côte d’Ivoire to host a review visit in early
2015, in line with the timing and obligations set out in
resolution 2153 (2014). It also encourages Côte d’Ivoire
to continue implementing the recommendations in the
review mission report, its transition strategy and postembargo plan of action. The draft resolution encourages
the friends of Côte d’Ivoire to continue providing
support to Côte d’Ivoire for the implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, as well as for
its continued participation in regional cooperation and
law enforcement activities, as requested by resolution
2153 (2014). The draft resolution also encourages the
Kimberley Process to continue to actively collaborate
with the United Nations Group of Experts on Côte
d’Ivoire, established pursuant to Security Council 1584
(2005), and with Côte d’Ivoire, aiming at the resumption
of trade in rough diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire.
The draft resolution welcomes the initiative of
Kimberley Process participants in West Africa to
enhance their cooperation in the implementation and
policy harmonization of the Process by adopting a
regional approach for the Mano River region, and
encourages countries in that region, the technical
team, the Property Rights and Artisanal Diamond
Development project and other implementing partners
to continue their work.
The draft resolution notes that the Kimberley
Process plenary meeting reaffirmed its administrative
decision on ensuring that diamonds from the Central
African Republic are not introduced into the legitimate
trade, as approved by written procedure on 11 July
2014, acknowledged the progress made by the Central
African Republic on the implementation of its work plan
and road map for addressing issues of non-compliance
with Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
minimum requirements and strengthening the internal
control system. The draft resolution also encourages
the Central African Republic to continue working
closely with the African Union, relevant United Nations
bodies, in particular the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2127 (2013), the

14-6906421/29

A/69/PV.70

international community and neighbouring countries
on issues concerning Certification Scheme compliance
compliance issues.
The draft resolution notes the decision of the
plenary meeting regarding the participation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the Kimberley
Process, welcomes the special efforts made by China,
as Chair of the Kimberley Process, in relation to that
matter and invites the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to continue its efforts towards full integration into the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme through the
steps outlined in the Kimberley Process communiqué
of 30 November 2012.
The draft resolution also notes the commitment
of the Kimberley Process to continue dialogue
on the decision-making mechanism and on the
definition of conflict diamonds, in accordance with
the final communiqué of the plenary meeting held in
Johannesburg in November 2013. It also acknowledges
that the plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process
adopted amendments to the administrative decision
on the participation of observers in the work of the
Process, clarifying the nature of the participation of
their representatives in the events and/or activities of
the Process.
Moreover, I regret to point out that, at the plenary
meeting this year, we failed to elect a Vice-Chair for
the Kimberley Process in 2015. We had two candidates,
namely, the United Arab Emirates and Australia, but
the plenary could not reach an agreement on which
country would take the vice-chairmanship. Hence, the
Chair of the Process will continue consultations on this
matter.
With regard to the future development of the
Kimberley Process, we note that there have been
changes since the creation of the Process, in 2003, in
particular on the part of some industry and civil society
organization participants. We are willing to adhere
to the principle of consensus so that the process can
continue and grow and be able to respond to daunting
challenges in future.
I wish to thank the Republic of South Africa for
all its contributions to the Kimberley Process. The first
meeting of the Process was held in South Africa, and
we celebrated the tenth anniversary of the Process there
last year. South Africa has left a deep impression on
all participants of the Process. In that regard, I wish to
especially thank Ambassador Nhlapo of South Africa,

22/29

12/12/2014

the former Chair, who is no stranger to many people
inside this institution. I also wish to congratulate
Angola on its election as Chair of the Process in 2015,
and look forward to seeing even greater achievements
of the Process under the leadership of Angola, a major
diamond producer.
Finally, I wish to thank once again all those States
that have supported the draft resolution and ask the
Assembly to take note of the annual report on the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and to adopt
the proposed draft text, as has been the case in previous
years.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States,
which act as a single participant in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, would like in the first
place to commend the People’s Republic of China for
its successful chairmanship of the Kimberly Process
and to welcome the results achieved, so far as they
illustrate the important efforts deployed to continue
strengthening the Kimberley Process and to confront
the challenges of the future.
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme’s
credibility as an international process depends on
effective implementation and enforcement by its
participants. In that regard, the European Union
welcomes the endorsement of the Working Group
on Monitoring of a guidance document on a new
template for annual reporting. We also welcome the
memorandum of understanding between the European
Union, Belgium and the People’s Republic of China
on bilateral electronic exchange of Kimberley Process
certificates, which builds on the data-sharing platform
developed between the European Union and India as
presented at the Kimberley Process plenary meeting in
Johannesburg in 2013. The European Union considers
this a good-practice example for all Kimberley Process
participants, particularly international diamond trading

14-69064

12/12/2014

centres, to enhance transparency and information
sharing.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process Working
Group on Monitoring, the European Union has actively
contributed to strengthening the implementation of the
Certification Scheme and encourages participants to
continue committing themselves to enhanced scrutiny
through Kimberley Process peer review visits, as
well as to substantive annual reports. The European
Union would in particular like to express appreciation
to Australia, Guinea and Guyana for having hosted
review visits in 2014, and to the countries that have
invited review visits in 2015-2016, noting that the
administrative decision on peer review calls for all
Kimberley Process participants to host a review visit
every three years. We firmly believe that the consistent
use of these implementation tools will strengthen the
ability of the Process to tackle illicit trade in conflict
diamonds. We call on all participants to step up efforts
in this respect.
The European Union welcomes the fruitful work
done during the year, notably the commitment of the
recent Kimberley Process plenary meeting to consider
relevant recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force report related to risks in the diamond supply chain
and the agreement to assess those recommendations in
the context of ongoing efforts.
The European Union welcomes the efforts of
the Kimberley Process to assist the authorities of the
Central African Republic in responding to the situation
of violence that risked rough diamonds from conflict
areas entering the diamond supply chain and led to the
temporary suspension in trade in rough diamonds from
the Central African Republic by the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme. The European Union welcomes
the Kimberley Process’s efforts to monitor the situation
and provide technical assistance to the Central African
Republic and neighbouring countries with a view to
enhancing their capacity to detect conflict diamonds
entering legitimate trade. Furthermore, the European
Union appreciates the efforts made by the Central
African Republic authorities on the implementation
of its work plan and road map for addressing issues
of non-compliance with the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme’s minimum standards. We
welcome the fact that the plenary meeting determined
that a review mission should go to the Central African
Republic as soon as possible to verify the situation and
see what further support can and should be provided.

A/69/PV.70

In the light of Security Council resolution 2153
(2014), Kimberley Process engagement with Côte
d’Ivoire has illustrated the positive role that the Scheme
can play in situations where the production of, and
trade in, diamonds might affect peace and security. The
European Union welcomes the good cooperation with
the authorities of Côte d’Ivoire in meeting the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme’s requirements, which
led to the lifting of the United Nations embargo over
trade in rough diamonds in resolution 2153 (2014). The
Union is determined to further support Côte d’Ivoire’s
efforts in its transition strategy and road map towards
the resumption in the trade of rough diamonds, enabling
the proceeds of Ivorian diamonds to contribute to
recovery and development of the country.
In that context, through its Instrument for Stability,
the European Union is providing technical assistance
for promoting the formalization of the artisanal mining
sector and to reinforce the country’s chain of custody
through the Property Rights and Artisanal Diamonds
for Development programme, which is jointly funded
together with the United States Agency for International
development. The Antwerp World Diamond Centre,
with the support of Belgium, has also provided a
capacity-building programme on diamond evaluation
to the Ministry of Mines of Côte d’Ivoire.
With regard to other countries in West Africa, the
European Union welcomes the Kimberley Process’s
continued engagement with Liberia under Security
Council resolution 2079 (2012), as regional cooperation
remains key to ensuing stability in the region. In
that context, the Union also very much welcomes the
initiatives from participants in the Mano River region
to enhance their cooperation on the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme implementation and policy
harmonization efforts, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2153 (2014), and the Kimberley
Process’s efforts to support that work by establishing
the technical support team that regularly reports to the
Kimberley Process Working Group on Monitoring. The
European Union regrets the fact that the Republic of
Liberia, the Republic of Sierra Leone and the Republic
of Guinea were unable to send representatives from
their capitals to the plenary meeting due to the ongoing
Ebola crisis. The Union welcomes the Kimberley
Process’s ongoing efforts to provide support and
technical assistance in addressing the needs of those
countries and all diamond-mining communities
affected by Ebola.

14-6906423/29

A/69/PV.70

In 2014, the international community has
demonstrated its determination to act collectively
and constructively through the Kimberley Process as
a valuable instrument in preventing diamonds from
fuelling conflicts and, ultimately, in contributing
to economic and social development, particularly
in developing countries. In that context, the Union
welcomes the framework for implementation of the
Washington Declaration on Integrating Development
of Artisanal and Small Scale Diamond Mining with
Kimberley Process Implementation, and looks forward
to working closely in support of Angola’s efforts as
future Chair of the Kimberley Process and Chair of the
Working Group on Artisanal and Alluvial Production.
In looking ahead, the European Union welcomes
the decision taken at the twelfth Kimberley Process
Meeting, held in Guangzhou, to continue dialogue
on decision-making and the definition of conflict
diamonds. The European Union welcomes the fact that
in recent years the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme has succeeded in assisting Governments in
responding to new situations of conflict and violence.
We strongly support the efforts of the Process to evolve
and adapt to meet future challenges in the global
diamond supply chain and to provide assurance for
consumers that diamonds are not tainted by violence.
Before I conclude, please allow me to stress
that one of the unique features of the Process is its
tripartite structure. Both industry and civil society are
essential elements of the Kimberley Process, and have
contributed much to its establishment and operation. In
that respect, the European Union calls on all participants
and observers to recognize the full diversity of opinions
within the Process, and to continue working together to
further enhance the Scheme’s credibility. In particular,
we rely on a close working relationship with all of our
partners in the civil society coalition to ensure that the
Process remains an effective tool for peacebuilding
and conflict prevention, to monitor the efficacy of the
Kimberley Process in diamond-mining communities
across the globe and to continue to challenge us to do
more and do better. We will continue to rely on that
relationship to ensure that the Process remains an
effective tool in future. Last but not least, the European
Union encourages Kimberley Process participants
and observers to uphold the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights.
I already had a chance to express our gratitude to
the People’s Republic of China for its stewardship of

24/29

12/12/2014

the Process this year. We now warmly welcome Angola
as the incoming Chair, and welcome Angola’s vision
as Chair for 2015 to further strengthen the Kimberley
Process by ensuring that the trade in rough diamonds
is used for the benefit of all people. We welcome and
support the commitments Angola has made for its
chairmanship, including commitments to strengthen
dialogue with civil society and to promote respect for
human rights. We look forward to working closely with
Angola to bring renewed impetus and strength to the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the People’s Republic of China for its
chairmanship and able stewardship of the Kimberley
Process in 2014, including the important contribution it
made to curb the trade in conflict diamonds.
This year has seen many achievements, including
the strengthening of the implementation of the peer
review system, the enhanced transparency and
accuracy of statistics and the increased involvement
by Governments, industry and civil society in the
Kimberly Process Certification Scheme. I would also
like to extend Israel’s welcome to the incoming Chair,
Angola. We look forward to engaging closely in the
coming year.
Diamonds are formed in a particular context
of chemical compounds and minerals, heated and
crystallized over many years. Conflict diamonds are
also created in a specific context — that of poverty,
oppression and violence. For decades, conflict
diamonds were used as a tool of warfare and a source
of cash flows for warlords. Just 14 years ago, diamonds
obtained under the most terrible human conditions were
being used to fund civil wars. From Angola to Liberia
and from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Sierra Leone, blood diamonds undermined legitimate
Governments and led to the enslavement and death of
millions of innocent men, women, and children.
Diamonds may be a luxury for millions of
people around the world, but we — the international
community — do not have the luxury of ignoring gross
human rights violations. Eleven years ago, an alliance
of Governments, industry and civil society members
united to address the crisis. The Kimberley Process was
born out of a recognition of the fact that the mining,
refining and merchandising of diamonds needed
responsible oversight. The idea was to create a process
as transparent as the diamonds being certified. It would

14-69064

12/12/2014

assure buyers that the diamonds they purchased were
free from violence and human rights abuses. Thanks to
a global commitment matched by global action, 99 per
cent of diamonds sold today are certified as conflictfree. That dramatic accomplishment proves that nations
can do well by doing good. Consider the following— if
we had this success in the mining industry, it means
that we can replicate our success in the oil, energy,
coffee and other natural resource industries.
As the world’s leading exporter of diamonds and
the third-largest trading centre for diamonds, Israel
was one of the first countries to raise awareness about
conflict diamonds, one of the first countries to play
a part in establishing the Kimberley Process and the
first country to issue a certificate when the Kimberley
Process went into effect, in 2003. Today, we are just
as committed to ensuring that each and every diamond
is certified as conflict-free throughout its entire life
cycle — from the mine to the display case.
Israel would like to warmly congratulate Côte
d’Ivoire for implementing the requirements of the
Security Council resolutions and for moving towards an
early resumption of the international trade of its rough
diamonds. We will continue to follow Côte d’Ivoire’s
success as it implements its plan of action and creates
the necessary conditions for a significant export of
Ivorian rough diamonds.
Israel would also like to acknowledge the progress
made by the Central African Republic in addressing
issues of non-compliance with the Kimberly Process
Certification Scheme requirements. We strongly
encourage further cooperation with the African Union
and the relevant United Nations bodies as the Central
African Republic strengthens its internal control
system.
Israel also reaffirms the importance of the tripartite
nature of the Kimberley Process. Civil society must be
fully involved in the Kimberley Process, particularly
in monitoring implementation on the ground. The
Kimberley Process must also enhance collaboration
with diamond industry associations, international
organizations and enforcement agencies. All of those
stakeholders benefit from exchanging information.
Millions of people, from small-scale miners to heavy
equipment operators, and from cutters to polishers,
rely on the diamond trade for their livelihoods. When
managed and traded responsibly, legally mined
diamonds can accelerate development and improve

A/69/PV.70

living standards for millions of people. We all therefore
have a duty. We have a duty to the miners who depend
on diamonds for their livelihoods. We have a duty to the
nations blessed with natural resources to demonstrate
that prosperity can replace poverty. And we have a
duty to future generations to ensure that cooperation
triumphs over conflict.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would first like to congratulate the
People’s Republic of China on its successful chairing
of the Kimberley Process in 2014, and to express our
appreciation to the Chinese delegation for preparing
today’s draft resolution on the role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict (A/69/L.39), which we support and
of which we are a sponsor. I would also like to take
this opportunity to wish the Republic of Angola every
success as it takes over the chairmanship of the Process
for 2015.
The Russian Federation has been an active
participant in the Kimberley Process since 2000.
We value its activities and commend its dynamic
development and growth as an international authority
in its work as an effective instrument for collectively
preventing conflict diamonds from penetrating
the market. We believe in strengthening national
systems for internal control of the diamond and rough
diamond trade. We support increasing other countries’
involvement in the Process. We value the efforts of the
Kimberley Process to carry out the tasks outlined for it
in Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We would like to urge that their effective implementation
requires further development of the Process’s legal
basis. We note the timeliness of the work of revising
the global certification system for rough diamonds
and the Kimberley Process’s development of standards
based on development requirements, which include new
administrative decisions within the framework of the
Kimberley Process committees and the formulation
of timely decisions based on the current situation of
diamonds in the mining sector.
We support the strengthening of internal controls
over the mining of rough diamonds and over production,
cutting and trading centres, as well as increasing the
transparency of the Kimberley Process’s statistics and
providing access to those statistics to all interested
international bodies. We emphasize the unacceptability
of politicizing the Process, making major changes to its
structure and working principles, including involving
it in any kind of issue that goes beyond the scope of

14-6906425/29

A/69/PV.70

its mandate. Any distortion of its process or departure
from the principle of consensus in taking decisions is
also unacceptable. We think it is counterproductive
to include questions about the competence of the
Kimberley Process in other international forums such
as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the World Trade Organization and so
forth. We firmly believe that we should continue to
work to achieve constructive development for conflict
diamonds and that it should be done directly within the
Kimberley Process, with the emphasis on multilateral
contributions from all involved in developing its
potential.
We take a positive view of the cooperative activities
between United Nations bodies and the Process in the
area of the implementation of the requirements of the
international Certification Scheme for rough diamonds,
and the elimination of the trade in illicit diamonds from
areas of conflict. For its part, the Russian Federation
has scrupulously and fully complied with all the
requirements of the Process’s Certification Scheme
for rough diamonds, which was confirmed by the
Kimberley Process’s review visit to our country in 2013.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I would like to thank
the President for convening this annual briefing and
allowing my delegation to contribute to the topic under
discussion. We welcome the report (A/69/622, annex)
of the 2014 Chair of the Kimberley Process, and wish
to express our satisfaction with the excellent manner in
which China carried out its stewardship. We are very
grateful for the hospitality provided by China both
during the intersessionals and the plenary, as well as
for its leadership role during the process.
As a founding member of the Kimberley Process
and a consummate dependent on the sparkling stones
we call diamonds, Botswana places a very high
premium on the legitimate exploitation, sale and
trade of rough diamonds. A blessing to our nation
and a precious natural commodity, diamonds have
played an important role in transforming the lives of
our communities, bringing food to the table, sending
young people to school, providing free health care for
all and building infrastructure. For that reason, we are
committed to safeguarding and promoting the integrity
of the diamond industry and preserving its wealth for
posterity. Informed by our long-term national interests
and an overall strategic vision for harnessing our natural
capital, we are committed to doing good with diamonds
while using the industry to invest in our people. To that

26/29

12/12/2014

end, we will continue to work with the international
community and with stakeholders — while putting the
welfare of our people first — to curb the illicit flow
of rough diamonds. Simply put, we will continue to
do good with diamonds, because diamonds are for
development. We recognize, however, that in many
parts of the world so-called conflict diamonds have
been used to fuel conflict, while undermining the rule
of law and disrupting governance. We stand ready to
share lessons, experiences and best practices with those
producers and manufacturers willing to do so.
We wish to reiterate our strong support and faith
in the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and
in the Kimberley Process as an important framework
between Governments, the industry and civil society
for promoting the integrity of the industry while
finding ways to avoid conflict. Over the years, we have
had excellent relationships based on mutual respect and
cooperation with key actors in the Process, especially
from civil society and industry. We are committed
to continuing that strategic partnership and working
together for the good of humankind. We are very proud
of the Kimberley Process mechanism and believe that
it has been instrumental in shaping Security Council
measures aimed at combating the illicit trade in rough
diamonds.
We welcome the 2014 report, which we believe
clearly illustrates the progress made so far while
underlining the urgent need for reforming and
strengthening the Kimberley Process. We believe that
is the only way that the Process can respond effectively
to today’s existing and emerging challenges.
As we move forward, we wish to welcome and
engage potential participants that wish to be a part of
the Kimberley Process family. As a result of Security
Council resolution 2153 (2014), of 29 April, we are
delighted to welcome back Côte d’Ivoire. We look
forward to seeing that great country resume the sale
and trade of diamonds as mandated by the Certification
Scheme. We were encouraged by the resilience of the
Ivorian people during the sanctions period and are
happy to see them back on their feet. To that end, we
look forward to seeing them implement their postsanctions strategy.
On the other hand, we continue to be deeply
concerned about the ongoing conflict in the Central
African Republic. We are worried that the prolonged
conflict, as well as the instability and insecurity

14-69064

12/12/2014

inflicted by the militias, has already had a negative
impact on the socioeconomic life of the country’s
citizens. We are aware that thousands of women and
children remain displaced in the affected areas, while
access to schools and health care is a challenge. We
know that the Central African Republic’s leadership has
every intention of seeing this conflict end so that the
people can resume their normal lives, including selling
diamonds. We appreciate the openness and candour
with which the Government engages the Kimberley
Process as a whole, and we wish it the best as it tries
to strengthen its internal controls. For our part, we will
do whatever we can within the Process to help bring
normalcy to the Central African Republic.
Finally, we wish to congratulate Angola, the
incoming Chair for 2015, with which we look forward
to working as we carry the Kimberley Process forward.
Ms. Hamilton (United States of America): We
thank China for chairing the Kimberley Process during
2014 and applaud Angola for its assumption of the Chair
as of 1 January 2015. Angola has set out an ambitious
agenda for its chairmanship during 2015, including, as
it has said, leading the transformation of industrial and
artisanal diamond mining and marketing in a venture
of peace and prosperity and respect for human rights,
communities and peoples for the benefit of nations.
The United States strongly supports the work of the
Kimberley Process. We believe it plays an important
and necessary role in ensuring that diamonds do not
contribute to conflict. The United States looks forward
to working with Angola and other Kimberley Process
participants and observers in promoting greater
cooperation within the organization, including civil
society and industry, as represented by the World
Diamond Council, together with the World Customs
Organization and other international organizations.
We also look forward to broadening the definition
of conflict diamonds in order to address potential
problems and ensure consumer confidence in the
world’s diamond supply.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
31.
A number of representatives have asked for the
floor in exercise of the right of reply. May I remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention

A/69/PV.70

and to 5 minutes for the second intervention and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Every year we are forced to
listen to the Palestinian observer’s lectures. Every
year I know that those lectures have two unmistakable
qualities: they are long and they are wrong. Amid the
tired accusations, one resounding message emerges: the
Palestinian leadership is never at fault. The Palestinian
leadership has demonstrated no self-criticism, no
responsibility, no accountability — a Palestinian culture
of impunity. Listening to the Palestinian observer, one
would believe that the Palestinian leadership has no
responsibility for the well-being of their people or for
the strength of their economy.
While the Palestinians are busy condemning,
criticizing and bashing Israel at the United Nations,
Israel is busy supporting the Palestinian economy and
developing their infrastructure. Israel, the Palestinian
Authority (PA) and the United Nations together agreed
on a tripartite mechanism for the reconstruction of
Gaza. I regret that, yesterday, the Palestinian observer
could not share some of his views on that important
mechanism. Israel is abiding by its commitments to the
mechanism, but the PA is dragging its feet, as reflected
just yesterday in the statement made by Special
Coordinator Robert Serry.
The truth is that the reconstruction of Gaza is
not high on the agenda of President Abbas or the PA.
Consider the following. In view of all that Abbas has
said about his commitment to Gaza, he has not even set
foot in the Gaza Strip — especially not in the past three
months, after the recent operations and in-fighting in
Gaza. He is far too consumed by dreaming up new
ways to blame Israel, including by coming to the United
Nations.
Despite the obstacles erected by the Palestinian
Authority, thousands of tons of cement and construction
materials have been made available by Israel for
construction projects. Additionally, Israel has ensured
that food and goods continue to flow uninterrupted into
the Gaza Strip.
The Palestinians monopolize the time of this body
to complain about their financial troubles. A closer look
at the budgetary priorities of the PA would prove that
is another example of trying to deflect responsibility.
Every year, 4 per cent of the PA budget is used to pay
salaries to terrorists in Israeli prisons. That amounts
to $130 million. The Palestinian Authority’s message

14-6906427/29

A/69/PV.70

to its people could not be clearer: the more you slay,
the more we pay. They are far more interested in
funding terrorists than in investing in social services.
Instead of funding terrorism and terrorists, perhaps the
Palestinian Authority could turn its attention to repaying
its $430 million debt to the Israeli electric company.
Despite that growing debt, Israel is continuing to build
four substations to improve the scope and quality of
electricity provision to the Palestinians.
In recent years, countless scandals involving
corrupt senior Palestinian Authority and Fatah officials
have been exposed. For example, last year a report
by the European Court of Auditors revealed that
European aid amounting to €2 billion had been lost to
corruption and spending abuses. Will anyone question
the Palestinian Authority on that gross abuse? Will
anyone question the Palestinian observer here on such
abuse? According to Palestinian polls, 78 per cent of
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza think that the
Palestinian Authority is corrupt. The sample found that
64 per cent of Palestinians think that Hamas is corrupt.
The Palestinian Authority is able to deflect
responsibility because the international community is
granting the Palestinian leadership impunity. It is time
for the Palestinian Authority to assume responsibility.
It must stop blaming Israel and start being accountable.
Israel is fully committed to a two-States-for-twopeoples solution, through direct negotiations between
the Israeli and the Palestinian sides. That is the only
way to achieve a sustainable and lasting solution to our
conflict.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We asked for the floor in exercise of the right
of reply in connection with the fact that the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine included certain
political assessments, in particular regarding the
convoys of humanitarian assistance that Russia has
been sending to Donbas. The word “illegal” was used
in that connection. We would like to recall that from the
very outset Russia has stated its openness to dialogue
and cooperation with the Ukrainian side concerning the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those among the
population who are suffering.
The Russian side has always informed the
Ukrainian authorities of the convoys’ destination and
called upon Ukrainian customs officials to conduct
their inspections. As the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe has noted, Ukrainian personnel

28/29

12/12/2014

are represented at the checkpoints. In fact, the two most
recent convoys were inspected by Ukrainian customs
and border officials, who found nothing unlawful
contained within, except for humanitarian supplies.
We hope that in future the Ukrainian side and the
International Committee of the Red Cross will be better
prepared to assist Russia in supplying humanitarian
assistance to Donbas.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have requested the floor in order to exercise
my right of reply to the statement delivered today by the
representative of Turkey.
In reference to the statement made by the
representative of Syria, the Turkish representative noted
that the Syrian statement consisted purely of baseless
allegations. Before replying, I wish to recall the words
of the Syrian representative in reference to Turkey. First,
he recalled that for months the Turkish Government
had refused to allow humanitarian convoys travelling
to Syria to cross the Nusaybin border crossing. I do
not know why the representative of Turkey claimed it
was a baseless allegation, given that it was one of the
main impediments to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2165 (2014), in terms of access for
humanitarian assistance crossing the border.
The second point contained in the Syrian
representative’s statement in reference to Turkey is that
terrorists are being trained in special camps on Turkish
territory. That is true. It is well known and recognized
by many international officials. Even United States
intelligence officials have recognized that terrorists are
being trained in Turkey.
In that context I wish to state that my country
agrees with Turkey on one point noted by the Turkish
representative, namely, that Turkey’s action vis-à-vis
the Syrian people is clear. In fact, Turkey’s action is
clear, obvious and undisputed. For example, there are
currently 14,000 terrorist fighters in Syria from the
Caucasus, Chechnya and various other nationalities,
who entered Syria by one of two ways: either by the
northern border between Turkey and Syria, or by falling
from space, with the help of the United States National
Aeronautics and Space Administration — or they came
from Mars.
According to hundreds of international news and
other reports, including from the West and even from
Turkey, illegitimate practices by the ruling Turkish

14-69064

12/12/2014

Justice and Development Party, supported by the
regime, have left the borders wide open for terrorists to
enter Syria. That stance is well known, even by Turkish
officials themselves.
In that context, I refer to a recent report published
by Global Research, a Canadian research centre. It
documents that Turkey is protecting Daesh combatants
and providing them with all the necessities, including
supply lines. The report also states that Daesh is not
only financed by the sale of oil stolen from Syria, but
also by ransom payments for hostages. Those funds
pay for supplies and convoys to pass across the Turkish
border every day.
For over three years, Turkey has daily allowed
floods of provisions, fighters and heavy weaponry to

A/69/PV.70

cross the Turkish border to supply Daesh in Syria. As
recently as June, Turkish customs officials allowed
47 tons of terrorist weapons to pass into northern
Syria. Even a Turkish report confirms that some Daesh
fighters connected to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant had been arrested and held in Turkish prisons,
among whom were leaders of Daesh.
I would like to urge the Turkish representative to
work in the interests of the friendly Turkish people,
who are genuinely opposed to the aggressive regional
policies of the Government, and to urge the Government
to promote peace and security in the region, instead of
spreading chaos and terrorism.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

14-6906429/29
