A /71/PV.55

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

55th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 7 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Bouah-Kamon
(Côte d’Ivoire), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/71/L.27)
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/71/74 and
A/71/74/Add.1)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/71/362)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea at its seventeenth
meeting (A/71/204)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.26)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/351)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.24)
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
extends its thanks and appreciation to South Africa and
Norway for coordinating our annual draft resolutions
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/71/L.26) and
sustainable fisheries (A/71/L.24) and to Palau for
its work on the draft resolution on World Tuna Day
(A/71/L.27).
As another year draws to a close, it comes as no
surprise that we will adopt the first two annual draft
resolutions on the most massive and comprehensive
subject that we consider every year. After all, water
covers more than two thirds of the Earth’s surface,
and one half of that surface comprises the high seas,
which are beyond the jurisdiction of any State. Our
sustained global cooperation is therefore paramount.
Sustainable Development Goal 14 of our 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development binds us to conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources.
They form an integral and essential component of
the planet’s ecosystem and are therefore critical to
sustaining it.
The Philippines is a State party to the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-42334 (E)

*1642334*

A/71/PV.55

Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments. We are
committed to the conservation and optimum utilization
of straddling and highly migratory fish stocks, both
within and beyond the exclusive economic zone, and the
management of those stocks based on a precautionary
approach and the best available scientific information.
The Philippines is also committed through the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) to eliminating illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, and subsidies that contribute
to such fishing and overcapacity, and to enhancing
actions to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems from
significant adverse impacts.
The draft resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea before us articulates our deepening concern over
the continued threat of human activity on marine
environments and biodiversity. It reaffirms our Rio+20
commitments to improve our understanding of the
adverse impact of climate change on oceans and seas.
We look forward to the next Informal Consultative
Process next May on the effects of climate change on
the oceans. We will also follow the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, which has entered its second cycle. Consistent
with the Manila Declaration on Furthering the
Implementation of the Global Programme of Action
for the Protection of the Marine Environment from
Land-based Activities, we must enhance our action
to address marine pollution, including marine debris,
which compromises the health of the oceans and marine
biodiversity. We need to neutralize, if not reverse, the
adverse economic, social and environmental impacts
of the physical alteration and destruction of marine
habitats that might result from land-based and coastal
development activities.
Moreover, in remaining consistent with the 2010
Manila amendments to the International Convention on
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping
for Seafarers, we must enhance maritime safety and
security, and combat piracy. The Philippines once again
calls on all States that have not yet done so to ratify
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), our constitution for the oceans and seas,
and contribute to its universality. UNCLOS has become
the key to ensuring global and regional peace in our
just and sustainable use of the world’s oceans and their
resources, representing a delicate and careful balance of
2/20

07/12/2016

the rights and obligations of all States parties, whether
big or small, rich or poor, or coastal or landlocked.
Our commitment to the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes extends to the 12 July
award rendered by the arbitral tribunal constituted
under annex VII of UNCLOS for the settlement of
disputes. In clarifying the maritime entitlements of the
relevant parties, that decision has upheld the primacy
of international law as the cornerstone for a rulesbased regional and international order. It is final and
binding on the parties and is now part of international
jurisprudence in the maritime domain.
In that spirit, the Philippines reaffirms its support
for the treaty bodies. We continue to follow the judicial
work of the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, and we join in the commemoration of its twentieth
anniversary this year. We also attach great importance
to the work of the International Seabed Authority,
which seeks to more equitably and more sustainably
manage the mineral-related activities in the Area and
our common heritage and its contribution to capacitybuilding and marine scientific research. We also
applaud the progress in the work of the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in considering
submissions on the establishment of the outer limits
of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, in
conformity with article 76 of UNCLOS.
The Philippines looks forward to another important
year next year, when we will discuss the specifics of
a future international legally binding instrument
under UNCLOS on the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction. We will also dissect Sustainable
Development Goal 14 at a conference meant to address
how to best conserve and sustainably use the oceans,
seas and marine resources for sustainable development.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The past
year witnessed remarkable achievements in the work
of the three institutions that are based on the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, namely, the
International Seabed Authority (ISA), the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) and the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. In that
connection, I wish to express my congratulations on
their achievements.
I also wish to thank the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea for its diligent work as the
secretariat that has ensured the smooth conduct of the
16-42334

07/12/2016

necessary work. Draft resolutions A/71/L.26, entitled
“Oceans, the law of the sea”, and A/71/L.24, on
sustainable fisheries, take stock of overall developments
in international oceans and the law of the sea over the
past year. Draft resolution A/71/L.27, on World Tuna
Day, is of great significance, as it demonstrates our
commitment to the protection of marine biological
resources. The Chinese delegation has played an
active and constructive part in the consultations on the
aforementioned resolutions. I would also like to express
my appreciation to the facilitators for their efforts and
contributions. While much progress has been made in
the area of the oceans and the law of the sea, many new
issues and challenges have also emerged. In that regard,
I wish to take this opportunity to share the Chinese
position and ideas.
First of all, we should strengthen international
cooperation so as to realize the sustainable development
of the oceans and seas, which are the home of all
humankind and a valuable space for sustainable
development. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development sets a higher bar for us in the protection
and sustainable use of the oceans and seas. We must
foster the awareness of a community of humankind
with a shared future and engaged in close cooperation.
We must join hands in tackling various challenges
relating to the oceans and seas. China has put forward
initiatives for developing the blue economy and building
the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which we believe
would greatly promote international cooperation on
maritime affairs. China hopes that the international
community will jointly promote the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
realize sustainable marine development.
Secondly, we must promote the rule of law on
the oceans and seas and establish and maintain a fair
and reasonable maritime order. The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea has provided a
comprehensive legal framework and the foundation
for the maritime activities of States parties. It has
set forth balanced provisions regarding the rights
and obligations of States parties with regard to the
peaceful use and conservation of the oceans and seas.
All parties must uphold the purposes and principles of
the Convention and interpret and apply the Convention
and its dispute-settlement mechanism with goodwill
and in an accurate and comprehensive manner, and
must avoid abusing its provisions. In that respect, the
Tribunal can play a more positive role. This year marks

A/71/PV.55

the twentieth anniversary of the Tribunal, and China
wishes to congratulate it on its achievements over the
past 20 years. We hope the Tribunal will continue to
make efforts to effectively safeguard the authority and
integrity of the Convention.
China appreciates the positive contribution made
by the Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf to maintaining the balance of the legitimate rights
and interests of coastal States, on the one hand, and
the overall interests of the international community,
on the other. The Commission also seeks to promote
the stability of the international maritime order. We
support the Commission in its efforts to continue to
fulfil its responsibilities, in strict compliance with the
Convention and its own rules of procedure.
Thirdly, we must fully coordinate our positions and
steadily advance international maritime governance.
Right now, the attention of the international community
is focused on the negotiation of an international
agreement on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond the areas of
national jurisdiction. Parties should engage in thorough
exchanges and consultations during the negotiations,
and fully consider the legitimate need of countries,
developing countries in particular, to use marine
biological resources. Parties should also advance the
negotiation process steadily. It is undesirable to seek a
result in haste. The new agreement must not compromise
the rights of navigation, scientific research, fishing and
mining that countries enjoy under the Convention.
The priority of the work of the International Seabed
Authority is to formulate regulations governing the
exploitation of seabed resources. As such regulations
bear most directly on the exploitation of the
international seabed mineral resources, the Authority
needs to hear the views and ideas of all sides, take a
prudent approach in its considerations and conduct its
work in a progressive manner and on a sound scientific
and factual basis.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to and actively supports international
endeavours in the areas of oceans affairs and the law
of the sea, and has made donations, within its capacity,
to ISA and CLCS in support of their work. China is in
favour of the provisions in this year’s draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea that seek to include the
landlocked developing countries and middle-income
countries in difficult circumstances in the scope of

16-423343/20

A/71/PV.55

capacity-building assistance and technical assistance.
We believe that this is conducive to promoting a greater
contribution of developing countries to the oceans and
the law of the sea affairs and will be helpful to the
common development of all countries.
China highly values peace and stability in the
South China Sea. We have always taken a constructive
and responsible approach in addressing the issue of the
South China Sea. Currently, thanks to the joint efforts of
China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
the situation in the South China Sea is developing in a
positive direction. The issue is back on the right track of
dialogue and consultations. We hope that all countries
concerned will work with us to seek a solution to the
dispute through negotiations and consultations in a
joint effort to maintain peace and stability in the South
China Sea. The so-called arbitration on the South China
Sea is, however, null and void and is absolutely not
binding. China does not accept it, has not participated
in it and does not recognize it. In the interest of the
international rule of law, the page has been turned on
the so-calledarbitration.
China will always act as a defender of the
international maritime rule of law, a builder of
a harmonious maritime order and a promoter of
sustainable marine development. We look forward to
continued efforts to strengthen cooperation with all
countries so as to further promote the protection and
sustainable use of oceans and seas.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer
of the European Union (see A/71/PV.54). I will make
several brief remarks and limit them to draft resolution
A/71/L.27, on the proclamation of World Tuna Day.
As a country with more than 6,000 kilometres of
coastline along our mainland and islands combined,
Croatia is proud to be one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution. The fact that it has attracted almost
60 sponsors from all regions of the world confirms
the awareness of global communities of the need to
safeguard tuna, and through it, protect the value of
world oceans and seas and their resources. In particular,
Croatia would like to express its gratitude to the Republic
of Nauru and the other countries of the Pacific small
island developing States group for their engagement in
presenting draft resolution A/71/L.27, which serves as
a testament to the high level of the world’s awareness
of the efforts to protect and safeguard the tuna species.
4/20

07/12/2016

Tuna fishing has had a long tradition in Croatia
since the fifteenth century, and that highly valuable
and nutritious fish species has proven to be a precious
commodity and food source for generations of
Croatians. With the aim of honouring the tuna, once
Croatia had gained independence and started minting
its own coins, our country paid tribute to the tuna fish
in 1994 by putting it on its two-kuna coin. Croatia thus
stands proud as the only country in the world with the
tuna fish featured on its official currency.
Tuna fishing and farming form an important part
of the local economy of Croatia’s coastal regions. The
Atlantic bluefin tuna is the most widespread species in the
Adriatic Sea and an important export product of Croatia
that is sold worldwide. Needless to say, tuna stocks
are not infinite. In fact, the species is classified today
as “endangered” by the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
Therefore, every national and international effort to
protect and conserve the species is as important as it is
necessary, whether on the part of national authorities or
on the part of international organizations.
In closing, Croatia is looking forward to further
cooperation with all like-minded countries in
protecting the tuna species. Let us hope that the newly
proclaimed World Tuna Day will send a strong and
positive message aimed at raising awareness of the
importance and vulnerability of the species. By doing
so, the world community will help in preserving tuna
as a food resource as well as a driver of economic
development and employment for coastal communities.
Moreover, it will serve as another small but important
positive contribution towards the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Ms. Sigurðardóttir (Iceland): The oceans are of
fundamental importance to all life on earth. They are
important in food security, as routes for international
transportation and communication, and as factors in the
world’s weather and climate systems. It is imperative
for all of us, individually and collectively, to keep our
oceans clean and the marine environment healthy.
The many yearly activities related to oceans and the
law of the sea at the United Nations are a testament to
the importance of that field. The United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and
the Law of the Sea, the Regular Process and the annual
negotiations on the two landmark draft resolutions
that we are discussing today are a few examples of the
16-42334

07/12/2016

numerous oceans-related processes. Additionally, this
year we undertook reviews of the 1995 United Nations
Fish Stocks Agreement and the impacts of bottom
fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems.
The entry into force of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Agreement on
Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing in June is
welcomed by Iceland, as it provides an important tool
to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing.
The importance of oceans is further confirmed by
Sustainable Development Goal 14, which addresses the
conservation and sustainable use of oceans, seas and
marine resources. Seas and oceans have great potential
for innovation and growth in a number of sectors and
in contributing to poverty eradication and sustained
economic growth.
The sustainable management of the oceans will
be in focus next year at both the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development and the Conference
to Support the Implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14, which is meant to underpin
existing processes and encourage wider partnerships
in that field. Iceland will participate actively in those
events, sharing experiences and working with other
stakeholders to mark the way towards achieving our
common goal of healthy oceans and the sustainable use
of marine resources.
Iceland stresses the importance of including
oceans-related considerations in the implementation of
climate policies. According to scientific information,
the period from 2011 to 2015 was the warmest five-year
period on record globally, with 2015 the warmest year
on record to date. Arctic sea ice continued its rapid
decline in the same period, reaching the lowest winter
maximum on record in 2016 for the second year in a
row. In Iceland, we are also witnessing the accelerating
recession of our glaciers and record high temperatures
in recent years.
That development has direct consequences for the
oceans. Global sea levels have continued to rise in recent
years, fish stocks are changing distribution owing to
changing temperatures in the oceans, and within a few
decades we may even see an ice-free Arctic during the
summer. Orchestrated action in that field by the global
community has never been more urgent. We therefore
welcome the decision by the Assembly to focus the

A/71/PV.55

discussions at the next Informal Consultative Process
on the theme of the effects of climate change on oceans.
International cooperation, coordinated solutions
and a common legal framework are needed to address
the challenges facing the oceans and the marine
environment. The core international legal instrument
in that field is the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which establishes the
overarching legal framework within which all activities
on the oceans and seas must be carried out.
Two implementing agreements under UNCLOS are
already in force, and the General Assembly decided in
resolution 69/292 to commence development of a third
one. A Preparatory Committee was established by that
resolution to develop an international legally binding
instrument under UNCLOS on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, and it has worked
diligently this past year under the able chairmanship of
His Excellency Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago. By the end of next year, the Committee
will make substantive recommendations to the
General Assembly on the elements of a draft text of an
international, legally binding instrument on that issue.
Iceland participates actively in that work and
has consistently emphasized the importance of the
mandate of resolution 69/292. Issues already subject
to an adequate international legal regime should not
be reopened, and, as prescribed in paragraph 3 of that
resolution, the work
“should not undermine existing relevant legal
instruments and frameworks and relevant global,
regional and sectoral bodies”.
A good example of that is high-seas fisheries, which
are subject to the legal regime of the Law of the Sea
Convention, which is complemented by the 1995 United
Nations Fish Stocks Agreement. The future instrument
governing areas beyond national jurisdiction must,
accordingly, adapt to those and other existing legal
instruments.
In Iceland’s view, the greatest challenge for the
negotiations on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction will be finding a solution to how this can
best be done. We look forward to the constructive
work of the Preparatory Committee in 2017 and to its
consensus-based outcome before the end of next year.

16-423345/20

A/71/PV.55

Iceland attaches great importance to the work of
the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf.
We take note of the serious concern expressed in draft
resolution A/71/L.26 on the oceans and the law of the
sea with respect to the critical lack of funds in the
voluntary trust fund for the purpose of defraying the
cost of participation of developing States members of
the Commission in the meetings of the Commission.
We will continue to make contributions to the trust fund
and encourage other Member States to do the same.
This year, we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Iceland
pays tribute to the Tribunal’s important contribution
to the peaceful settlement of disputes concerning the
law of the sea. As we approach the election of judges
next year, we are encouraged by nominations of female
candidates and hope for a better gender balance in the
very near future.
Iceland highly appreciates the valuable assistance
States enjoy in their work in the field of oceans and the
law of the sea. We are particularly grateful to all the
able staff at the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for their unflagging support and outstanding
work. We also want to commend the facilitator of the
draft resolution on sustainable fisheries (A/71/L.24),
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway, and the facilitator
of the draft resolution on oceans and law of the sea
(A/71/L.26), Mr. Thembile Joyini of South Africa,
for their professional work and able stewardship in
the negotiations of these draft resolutions. Finally,
we would like to thank their predecessors, Ms. Alice
Revell of New Zealand and Ambassador Eden Charles
of Trinidad and Tobago, for their excellent work in
recent years.
Iceland is heavily dependent on the sustainable use
of living marine resources. Healthy oceans and robust
marine ecosystems remain a constant concern for our
nation of seafarers and fishermen, and international
cooperation towards that aim is a long-standing priority
for us. We therefore welcome the adoption of the two
annual landmark resolutions in this field, as well as
draft resolution A/71/L.27 on World Tuna Day under
discussion here today. Iceland stands ready for another
active year of ocean affairs in 2017.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): I would like to begin by
thanking the President of the General Assembly for
convening today’s debate under sub-items (a) and (b)
of agenda item 73, on oceans and the law of the sea and
6/20

07/12/2016

sustainable fisheries, respectively. These are of course
issues of great importance to Fiji and the Pacific. The
growing prominence of oceans issues at the United
Nations in 2016, and, naturally, in the coming year, is
indeed gratifying for us and indicative of the President’s
strong commitment to the oceans.
Fiji aligns itself with the statements made by
the Permanent Representative of Palau on behalf of
the Pacific small island developing States and the
Permanent Representative of Micronesia on behalf of
the Pacific Islands Forum (see A/71/PV.54).
We join other delegations in commending the
work done by Mr. Thembile Joyini of South Africa,
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway and Mrs. Margo Deiye
of Nauru in coordinating, under the current agenda
item, the draft resolutions on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/71/L.26), sustainable fisheries (A/71/L.24) and
World Tuna Day (A/71/L.27), respectively.
Fiji attaches great importance to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
It is a monumental achievement of the international
community of the United Nations, which has provided
the very foundation that gives life to the governance of
our oceans and the law of the sea. Our commitment to
UNCLOS is reflected by the fact that Fiji was the first
country to ratify the Convention in 1982.
For Fiji, a large-ocean State, the ocean is the
lifeblood of its economy and its people. The ocean
provides us with one of our key sources of income and
therefore of economic growth and development, which
speaks volumes for our active involvement in oceansrelated issues at the United Nations. We very much
welcome the adoption of the draft resolution on World
Tuna Day, the adoption of which will certainly help raise
awareness annually on the critical challenges facing
our world fisheries today, including, inter alia, illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and overfishing. In
the same vein, we look forward to the adoption of the
draft resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea and
on sustainable fisheries, which have been strengthened
this year by the convening of the Fish Stocks Agreement
Review Conference held in May 2016.
We emphasize the vulnerability of Fiji and other
countries in our region in face of such threats as
rising sea levels, climate change, ocean acidification,
marine pollution, depletion of fish stocks and the
unpredictability of weather patterns, to name but a few.
These are long-standing issues that have been raised
16-42334

07/12/2016

time and again at the United Nations. Addressing them
will certainly require us to move beyond the businessas-usual approach. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, with the stand-alone
Sustainable Development Goal 14, on oceans, is a step
in the right direction and reflects the diverse approaches
taken to address oceans issues.
The year 2017 marks a very important year for
oceans, when the global community will come together
in New York from 5 to 9 June for the high-level United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14. Fiji, together with
Sweden, as hosts of the Conference, would like to
encourage all Member States to participate at a high
level. The June 2017 Conference will be a moment of
truth as far as the oceans are concerned. It will provide
an opportunity for all stakeholders to come together to
learn more about the truth of the current state of the
oceans and what needs to be done to ensure we reverse
the decline in their health.
The Conference is expected to be the game-changer
that the ocean desperately needs to galvanize support
and resolve once and for all for taking affirmative
steps towards saving the oceans. At the Conference,
we encourage all Governments to come forward and
devise an ambitious call to action to set a positive
tone. More importantly, however, we encourage all
other stakeholders to participate at the partnership
dialogues and build successful partnerships with a
view to advancing the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14.
Mrs. Rolón Candia (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Zambia on
behalf of the group of landlocked developing countries
(see A/71/PV.54). In our national capacity, we wish to
make a few comments.
We too thank the Secretary-General for his report
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/71/74) and for the
other documents related to the topic. We also wish to
take this occasion to express the high value we attach to
the work of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea, within the Office of Legal Affairs.
This is the first time that Paraguay is co-sponsoring
the annual draft resolution on oceans and the law of
the sea (A/71/L.26), which will be submitted to the
General Assembly for adoption in the next several days.
We welcome the fact that the text includes references

A/71/PV.55

to landlocked developing countries and, in particular,
references to capacity-building. For Paraguay,
the inclusion of countries with our geographical
characteristics represents progress because the
challenge of sustainably using marine resources is
global and involves all humankind. We are aware that
any action taken in the marine environment entails
consequences that will eventually affect all countries,
not just coastal States.
The value of the oceans and seas is incalculable for
humankind. My delegation recalls the commitment of
the entire international community to the conservation
and appropriate use of the marine environment. We
believe that a large share of our efforts must be directed
towards that end. Accordingly, members should pay
heed to the conclusions of the report of the SecretaryGeneral with regard to the negative effects that will
impact the oceans unless urgent measures are taken on
a global scale to guide human behaviour and activities
towards a more sustainable use of the oceans.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the signing of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
we have made progress in establishing frameworks
for action for the years to come. The challenge lies
in implementation. We emphasize that our work must
be general and collective, with a view to carrying out
effective actions that encourage the use of resources
in a responsible manner. We understand, therefore,
the necessity of our participation in international and
regional forums on matters pertaining to the oceans and
seas in order to transofrm our invaluable experiences
into policies that should contribute to the sustainability
of resources.
We remind the General Assembly that landlocked
developing countries represent 12.5 per cent of the
Earth’s surface, approximately 4 per cent of the world’s
population and, at the United Nations, slightly more
than 16 per cent of its membership. Most global trade
is facilitated through the oceans and seas. That is an
inescapable reality for my country. The sustained
growth of our economy has led to an increase in
trade leading to a greater demand for the transport
of exported and imported goods — a demand that, in
turn, has favoured the development of transportation
services. Today, Paraguay has the third largest fleet of
inland navigation vessels in the world, which transport
goods along rivers and connect to high-seas vessels. In

16-423347/20

A/71/PV.55

that context, Paraguay reaffirms that landlocked States
must enjoy the freedom of transit through the territory
of transit States by all means of transport under articles
87, 91 and 125 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and in accordance
with the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing (resolution 69/137).
Paraguay participated in the negotiations on
UNCLOS, one of the most important multilaterally
agreed instruments in history. It represents a concrete
example of humankind’s collective efforts in the
drafting of an instrument that regulates the use of
one of the vital resources of the planet, and its scope
encompasses the political, economic and strategic
spheres. The Convention has been in force for more
than two decades and is no stranger to the challenges
that globalization and growth in trade represent. My
delegation understands that it is possible to improve the
conservation and sustainable use of ocean resources in
accordance with international law, which means that it
is necessary to continue to strengthen the institutions
created under the Convention.
Finally, in that regard, the delegation of Paraguay,
now more than ever, encourages all States to consider
the consequences of pressures placed on the seas
and oceans that can seriously affect the lives of
future generations.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like
to thank Mr. Thembile Joyini of South Africa and
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for having facilitated
the omnibus draft resolution A/71/L.26, on oceans and
the law of the sea, and draft resolution A/71/L.24, on
sustainable fisheries, respectively, and for their work
during the intensive rounds of negotiations that were
held. Similarly, we express our appreciation to the
delegation of Nauru for its work on draft resolution
A/71/L.27,
8/20

07/12/2016

on establishing World Tuna Day.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight in
greater detail three aspects in connection with oceans
and the law of the sea that are of particular relevance
to my delegation. First, with respect to an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction, Mexico notes with
satisfaction the work carried out by the Preparatory
Committee during the two meetings that were held
in 2016 with a view to drafting a legally binding
instrument. In that vein, we commend Ambassador
Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago for his work.
We welcome the progress that has been made,
particularly with regard to the guiding principles
for that instrument, the necessity to subordinate the
agreement to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the need to respect the
sovereignty of States over their continental shelf. We
expect that our work will continue in a positive manner
to develop a future agreement during the two meetings
to be held in 2017.
Similarly, we underscore the work under way at the
thirteenth Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity, now being held in Mexico,
particularly in connection with that subject. We
hope that, within the framework of the Conference,
decisions will be taken to step up the protection of
biological diversity in oceans and seas. We also support
the idea that the new agreement on the areas beyond
national jurisdiction should be circumscribed by
UNCLOS, while providing sufficient and appropriate
complementary elements to ensure the protection of
the areas beyond national jurisdiction, specifically in
matters relating to marine protection.
Secondly, concerning the pollution of oceans
and seas caused by plastic and microplastics, Mexico
welcomes the outcome of the seventeenth meeting of
the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, held this
past June. In that regard, we emphasize the need to
continue working in that area so as to better understand
the effects of such debris on marine ecosystems. My
delegation is concerned about the lack of knowledge
concerning the impact of marine debris on marine
ecosystems and species and on human health. We call
16-42334

07/12/2016

for cooperation among States to confront the problem
and to raise public awareness on the issue.
Finally, I will mention illegal trafficking at sea and
the illegal trafficking in wildlife. Mexico notes with
satisfaction the addition of references to combating
illegal maritime trade, including wildlife, in various
paragraphs of the omnibus draft resolution. This is one
of the priority areas in the current law of the sea agenda.

A/71/PV.55

delegation has consistently championed the regular
process of the Global Assessment of the State of the
Marine Environment. The painstaking work of experts
within the framework of the first assessment cycle
enabled us to gather and organize a great deal of very
useful information. We welcome the preparations for
the second cycle of Global Assessment and expect it to
be successful.

We further wish to emphasize the usefulness of
various international conventions in place to fight
illegal trafficking in protected species. Their various
provisions already constitute an effective means of
taking action. Mexico is party to those conventions,
and we hereby reiterate our commitment to fighting
such illicit trafficking in maritime areas under our
jurisdiction.

We note the rich discussion during the seventeenth
session of the Informal Consultative Process on the issue
of maritime debris, plastics and microplastics. We view
this forum as an important platform for the exchange
of views on a broad gamut of issues. It should continue
to be held regularly. Special attention must be devoted
to the issues of the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biodiversity beyond national jurisdictions.

In conclusion, Mexico calls upon all States to
cooperate and continue working to reduce instances
of illicit trafficking within the framework of relevant
international conventions.

The Russian delegation actively participates
in the work of the relevant Preparatory Committee
established by the General Assembly. Unfortunately, the
Committee’s past two sessions have not thus far led to
a convergence on positions on key issues, in particular
the scope and purpose of the future agreement and
the profit-sharing procedures from the use of marine
biodiversity. Our priorities here were spelled out in
detail during the work of the Committee. We would like
to very briefly state the following.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For our country, a major maritime Power,
improving international cooperation in the global
oceans is of special importance. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for the preparation of detailed and
very informative reports on this issue.
We take note of the work carried out by the bodies
created pursuant to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We would like to congratulate the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on the
twentieth anniversary of its founding and on the success
of the events that have been held to celebrate that
milestone. The Tribunal approached this anniversary
with substantial successes.
Next year will mark the thity-fifth anniversary of
the establishment of the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf. Its burden of work grows from
year to year. We would like to draw the attention of the
members of the Assembly to the necessity of ensuring
appropriate conditions of service for the members of
the Commission, including the long-standing problem
of their medical insurance coverage while in New
York. Important and technically complex tasks face the
International Seabed Authority.
We are convinced that measures to conserve and
sustainably use the global oceans’ resources must be
crafted on solid scientific foundations. That is why our

On the whole, we believe that marine activity should
not be restricted, unless based on solid scientific and
international legal reasons. A possible new document
on marine biodiversity should not, in our view,
duplicate or substitute existing mechanisms, including
the 1995 Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and the
system of regional fisheries management organizations
(RFMOs) created pursuant to it. The 1995 Agreement is
of great importance for the conservation of fish stocks
and for providing for a genuinely sustainable industry.
We back further improvement of measures to combat
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. It is with
satisfaction that we note the activity of the International
Maritime Organization in that field, inter alia, in the
area of strengthening real links between flag States and
its vessels. We urge States to cooperate to create new
RFMOs and enhance the effectiveness of existing ones.
Our delegation backs the adoption by the General
Assembly of draft resolutions A/71/L.26 and A/71/L.24,
on oceans and the law of the sea and on sustainable
fishing, respectively. We convey our gratitude to those
that have worked for draft resolution A/71/L.27, on World

16-423349/20

A/71/PV.55

Tuna Day. We would like to thank the coordinators of
the informal consultations and the staff of the Division
of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, who have so
unswervingly provided expert assistance to delegations
in their work on the aforementioned documents.
In conclusion, we would like to very briefly respond
to the statement made by the Ukrainian delegation,
which has again misused the rostrum of the General
Assembly. We again heard a number of unsubstantiated
claims that bear no relation to the agenda item being
considered. Nevertheless, since we are talking about it
now, we will clarify and explain yet again that Crimea
is now part of the Russian Federation as a result of
the expression of free will of the population of the
peninsula. Russia, as a coastal State, has its sovereignty
and rights and exerts its jurisdiction over maritime
areas in accordance with international law. In good
faith, our country has fulfilled all its obligations under
international maritime law when it comes to maritime
areas, which its sovereignty and jurisdiction cover,
including off the coast of Crimea.
Mrs. Diéguez La O (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba attaches crucial importance to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea for the maintenance
and strengthening of peace, order and the sustainable
development of oceans and seas. The Convention is a
true milestone in the codification of the international
law of the sea and has been ratified by the overwhelming
majority of Member States. The Convention establishes
an appropriate legal framework, which is universally
recognized, within which all activities in the oceans and
the seas should be carried out. It is important that the
integrity of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea be preserved and that all of its provisions be
implemented as a whole. Oceans and the law of the sea
affairs should fall under the supervision of the General
Assembly to guarantee greater coherence in efforts to
address those issues and to equally equal benefit all
Member States.
Cuba has made and continues to make significant
efforts to implement national strategies for the
sustainable development and protection of the marine
environment with a view to ensuring coherent,
progressive and effective implementation of the
Convention’s provisions. The Cuban State has a solid
institutional framework and national legislation related
to the law of the sea, and the Government of Cuba is
taking all steps it can to successfully address crimes
at sea, for example, illicit trafficking in narcotics and
10/20

07/12/2016

psychotropic substances, illegal human trafficking and
piracy.
Cuba reiterates the importance of bolstering
international cooperation in the management of marine
resources and in the protection of the oceans and their
biodiversity, in accordance with the principles of
international law, and of safeguarding the due respect
for the jurisdiction of sovereign States over their
territorial sea and in the management of resources in
the exclusive economic zone and on their continental
shelf. We firmly support the commendable work of
the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf
and urge all Member States to provide their support,
so that the Commission can carry out its work with the
necessary resources. The Commission must be able to
carry out its work quickly and effectively, and, at the
same time, fulfil its established legal requirements.
It is vitally important to preserve marine
biodiversity resources for future generations. The
regime by which those resources are exploited will
have a direct impact on many developing countries, the
majority of which are small island States. Cuba supports
efforts to achieve a convention on marine biodiversity
beyond the areas of national jurisdiction. We urge
all members of the international community to work
together in the meetings of the Preparatory Committee
on that topic, so that we can achieve concrete results by
the end of next year and so that we can have a binding
international instrument on that important issue.
The continuing rise in sea levels and the increase in
the effects of climate change in recent decades, given
humankind’s predatory actions towards nature, threaten
the territorial integrity of many States, especially small
island States, some of which are doomed to disappear if
immediate measures are not taken. The interconnection
of oceanic systems and their close relationship with the
dramatic climate change affecting humankind oblige us
to comply urgently with the established commitments
in both areas. Cuba reiterates its commitment to protect
the environment and the law of the sea.
We cannot conclude this statement without
expressing our appreciation for the work carried out
by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea for its dedicated work in promoting the law of the
sea and the issues related to oceans. We would also
like to thank the two coordinators of draft resolutions
A/71/L.24 and A/71/L.26, which we are considering
16-42334

07/12/2016

today and which will be adopted with the support of
our delegation.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Brazil continues
to attach great importance to the annual debates on
oceans and the law of the sea. Those debates reflect
our awareness that the problems of the ocean space
are closely interrelated and need to be considered as
a whole and with the broadest possible participation.
They also attest to the historical significance of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as
an important contribution to the maintenance of peace,
justice and progress for all of the peoples of the world.
In that regard, we would like to express our thanks
for the reports prepared by the Secretary-General
(A/71/74 and A/71/74/Add.1) and the work carried out
by Director Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli and the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, which greatly
help to inform and facilitate our debates. Let me also
express appreciation for the spirit of cooperation that
continues to prevail in the crafting of both of the draft
resolutions before us on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/71/L.26) and sustainable fisheries (A/71/L.24). In
that regard, we would also like to thank Mr. Thembile
Joyini of South Africa and Mr. Andreas Kravik of
Norway for facilitating the informal consultations on
those draft resolutions.
This year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries
contains provisions that address critical issues, such as
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
and ghost fishing and the importance of rebuilding
stocks. We welcome the inclusion in the text of several of
the recommendations made by the Review Conference
on the Fish Stocks Agreement, which was chaired by
Professor Fábio Hazin from Brazil.
Brazil is also a sponsor of the draft resolution
on World Tuna Day (A/71/L.27), and we appreciate
the efforts carried out by Nauru to facilitate the
negotiations on that text. We reiterate the need for
enhanced cooperation in ensuring the sustainable use of
such fisheries and the importance of strengthening the
work carried out by the Joint Meeting of Tuna Regional
Fisheries Management Organizations, in particular
through the updating of their legal frameworks and
the adoption of management measures in line with
scientific advice.
Cooperation is also instrumental in the Preparatory
Committee process dealing with fisheries beyond the
areass of national jurisdition. The engagement of all

A/71/PV.55

delegations in the debates held during the first and
second meetings of the Preparatory Committee are
key to advancing towards the drafting of substantial
recommendations to the General Assembly. For Brazil,
accessing and sharing benefits, capacity-building and
the transfer of marine technology should be at the core
of the envisaged instrument. Those elements are crucial
to realizing one of the main purposes of the Convention,
namely, that particular attention should be given to the
special interests and needs of developing countries.
In our view, the fair and equitable sharing of the
benefits that arise from the use of marine genetic
resources beyond national jurisdiction must, therefore,
be ensured. Due consideration must be given not only
to the development of a mechanism for such sharing
of benefits, but also to accessing those resources.
Promoting and facilitating access, in the natural
environment or through data samples, will contribute
to creating sustainable and long-term benefits.
We continue to strongly support the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, which is key to enhancing the scientific
understanding of the oceans so as to better protect
the marine environment. We thank all of the experts
who have devoted their time to the fulfilment of that
important task. We also welcome the discussions held
to improve the process in its second phase and stress
the importance of ensuring proper funding to achieve
the goals of the process.
The Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf continues to be faced with several challenges. In
addition to a heavy workload, it now faces the challenge
of ensuring the proper participation of members from
developing countries in the context of the limited
resources in the trust fund.
Last year marked a turning point with respect to
the oceans, in view of the adoption of Goal 14 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Brazil
reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda and looks forward to contributing to
the success of the Fiji Conference to be held next year.
The Acting President: In accordance with resolution
51/6, of 24 October 1996, I call on the Secretary-General
of the International Seabed Authority.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
The International Seabed Authority is making its first

16-4233411/20

A/71/PV.55

intervention at the seventy-first session of the United
Nations General Assembly today. In that connection, I
wish to express the Authority’s warmest congratulations
to His Excellency Mr. Peter Thomson on his election as
President of this organ.
With reference to the draft resolutions on the
oceans and the law of the sea matters before the General
Assembly, I express my appreciation to Member States
for deeming it appropriate once again to highlight in the
content of those draft resolutions some of the important
and latest work of the International Seabed Authority. I
express my thanks and gratitude for the detailed reports
of the Secretary-General (A/71/74 and A/71/74/Add.1),
which once again provide comprehensive background
information on oceans and law of the sea matters for
our review. The efforts and hard work of the dedicated
Director and staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea are much appreciated, and their
continued excellent cooperation with the secretariat
of the International Seabed Authority must again
be commended.
The draft resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/71/L.26) notes that 28 work plans for exploration
for the three mineral resources presently identified
by the Authority have been approved by the Council
of the Authority. The Authority has signed three new
exploration contracts so far this year. Two are for
polymetallic nodules, signed with United Kingdom
Seabed Resources Limited on 29 March and with the
Cook Islands Investment Corporation on 15 July. The
third plan of work is for polymetallic sulphides and was
signed by the Government of India on 26 September.
It is anticipated that the signing of the two
remaining approved plans of work — submitted by
China MinMetals Corporation for polymetallic nodules
and by the Government of the Republic of Korea for
polymetallic sulphides — will be signed prior to the
twenty-third session of the Authority in July 2017.
Following the signing of those two contracts, the
number of exploration contracts will reach 28, that
is, 17 for polymetallic nodules, six for polymetallic
sulphides and five for cobalt-rich ferromanganese
crusts. On behalf of the Authority, I express my thanks
and appreciation to those entities and their sponsoring
States for their commitment to the concept of the
common heritage of humankind and their confidence
in the work of the Authority.
12/20

07/12/2016

The Council, based on the recommendations of
the Legal and Technical Commission, approved six
applications for the extension of contracts for exploration
for polymetallic nodules for another term of five years.
The concerned contractors were Interoceanmetal Joint
Organization, Yuzhmorgeologiya, the Government of
the Republic of Korea, China Ocean Mineral Resources
Research and Development Association, Deep Ocean
Resources Development Co. Ltd. and the French
Research Institute for the Exploitation of the Sea. An
additional application for extension was received in
September from the Government of India, which will
be considered by the Commission at its next meeting, in
February 2017. I would like to encourage contractors to
take advantage of the extension period of the contracts
to strengthen cooperation in the development of mining
technology and pilot tests of deep-sea mining.
Marine environmental protection is an equally
important mandate of the Authority, and we have
continued to request all contractors to make their
environmental data readily and publicly available. The
Authority will shortly convene three workshops relating
to that environmental work: a workshop to review the
implementation of an environmental management plan
for an area of the Pacific Ocean where we have the most
nodule contracts, a scientific workshop together with
marine-reserve management specialists to determine
the suitability or need for amendment of the areas of
particular environmental interest, and a workshop on
impact reference zones and preservation reference
zones.
I call for the broadest participation of all
concerned States parties, observers and stakeholders
in those workshops. References to and support for the
Authority’s role in the promotion of marine scientific
research and the protection of the marine environment
in the Area are commended.
Following the Authority’s workshops on the
taxonomic standardization of the macro, micro and
meiofauna associated with polymetallic nodules in the
Area, I am pleased to report that the contractors with
the authority to explore for polymetallic nodules in the
Area have begun to utilize those standards in reporting
on the fauna in their exploration areas. To my mind, that
is extremely important, since it enables the Authority
to obtain the necessary information to protect the
marine environment. Such taxonomic standardization
workshops will be needed for polymetallic sulphides
and cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts as well.
16-42334

07/12/2016

At its last session, the Authority took decisive
steps to adopt its budget, elect members of the Finance
Committee and elect members of the Legal and
Technical Commission and members of the Council.
The Assembly also elected Mr. Michael Lodge of the
United Kingdom as the next Secretary-General of the
Authority. The Assembly also continued its work on the
article 154 periodic review of the regime of the Area,
an exercise to be completed during the twenty-third
session, in 2017.
As part of the Authority’s continued work on
the formulation of the exploitation framework of
minerals in the Area, I am happy to report that by the
due date, a total of 45 submissions were received on
the zero draft of the Exploitation Regulation. Among
them, eight were submitted by Governments — seven
members and one observer — 10 by contractors, one
by an international organization and 19 by institutions
and non-governmental organizations. I was concerned
that no comments had been received from the African
Group, the Eastern European Group or the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States. I would like
to urge developing States to get more involved in the
formulation of the exploitation code, which would
lead to the implementation of the principle of the
common heritage of mankind, which promises to bring
substantial economic interests to developing States.
Echoing the words of the draft resolution, I wish
to convey the Authority’s appreciation to those who
have made contributions to the Authority’s Endowment
Fund and its Voluntary Trust Fund. The Authority’s
Endowment Fund promotes and encourages the conduct
of collaborative marine scientific research in the
international seabed area for the benefit of humankind.
The General Assembly, as can be gathered from the
text of the draft resolution, attaches great importance to
capacity-building. Despite their not being specifically
mentioned, I wish to refer the Assembly to the
approximately 200 training opportunities that will
arise in the next five years as a result of contracts for
exploration that have been issued or extended by the
Authority since 2011. These opportunities include at-sea
training, doctorate and master’s degree programmes,
workshop internships, fellowships and engineering
programmes. I have no doubt that those opportunities
will enhance the building of the capacities of developing
States in marine science and technology development
and utilization, as well as in the law of the sea and
the deep-sea mining regime. I urge Member States to

A/71/PV.55

realize the value of those training opportunities and to
nominate qualified candidates for those forthcoming
training places.
In conclusion, the Authority has continued its full
efforts, within its resources, towards the realization
of the unique regime of the common heritage of
humankind. Since this is the last time that I address
this body in my capacity as Secretary-General of the
International Seabed Authority, I wish to recall a few
matters that require our attention. I wish to point out,
inter alia, the need for pilot mining collector tests as
our work progresses in establishing a regime for deepseabed mining. Such tests will enable us to ascertain the
feasibility of mining and, at the same time, provide us
with the necessary data and information to determine
the environmental impact of the collectors, which will
be used by all contractors on the seabed and in the
marine environment.
The last time such an effort was undertaken was
in 1981 — it is now 2016 — and while the urgency
of exploitation is frequently mentioned, we have yet
to establish the feasibility of deep-seabed mining. At
such a critical juncture, I will once again iterate that it
is essential for all members of the Authority to attend
meetings, in particular the annual regular sessions of
the Authority.
As Secretary-General of the Authority, I have
previously addressed the General Assembly on this
agenda item seven times. This is my eighth time,
and, as I mentioned before, it will be my last. I wish
to express my thanks to each and every Member State
and observer, contractors and the secretariat of the
Authority for the support given to me during my term as
leader of the organization. I have always been reassured
by the support of the General Assembly, encouraged
by its cooperation and blessed by its understanding. I
wish the incoming Secretary-General all the very best.
Finally, to the Government and the people of Jamaica,
the host country for the Authority, I say “big up”.
I wish everyone here a merry Christmas and a
happy new year. I also support the adoption of the draft
resolutions on this agenda item.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 51/204, of 17 December
1996, I now call on Mr. Vladimir Golitsyn, President of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.

16-4233413/20

A/71/PV.55

Mr. Golitsyn (International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea): It is an honour for me to address
the General Assembly on behalf of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea during the Assembly’s
consideration this year of agenda item 73, “Oceans and
the law of the sea”. Before I begin my statement, let me
first convey to the President of the General Assembly
my congratulations on his election and wish him every
success in the discharge of his responsibilities.
In my statement, I will first address matters
concerning the organization of the Tribunal and then
refer to the Tribunal’s recent judicial work.
First of all, I wish to pay tribute to Judge Antonio
Cachapuz de Medeiros of Brazil, who passed away on
15 September 2016. Judge Cachapuz de Medeiros had
become a Member of the Tribunal on 15 January and,
had he not died, his term of office would have ended
on 30 September 2017. I should like to inform the
Assembly that the election to fill the seat that became
vacant after the death of Judge Cachapuz de Medeiros
will be held in June 2017, at the next triennial election
of seven members of the Tribunal whose terms of office
will expire on 30 September 2017. In this regard, a note
verbale was sent by the Registrar of the Tribunal to all
States parties to the Convention on the Law of the Sea
on 4 November 2016. In the coming days, States parties
will also receive a note verbale calling for nominations
for the triennial election of judges of the Tribunal.
With regard to organizational matters, I also wish
to inform the Assembly that on 9 March, the Tribunal
re-elected Mr. Philippe Gautier as Registrar of the
Tribunal for a term of office of five years.
As we are aware, 2016 is a very special year for
the Tribunal because it commemorates the twentieth
anniversary of its establishment. A number of events
were organized to mark the occasion. We are particularly
grateful that the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
honoured the Tribunal by visiting our premises on
7 October 2016 and by meeting the members of the
Tribunal and the staff of the Registry.
The Secretary-General was one of the speakers at a
ceremony that took place on that day at the City Hall of
Hamburg, Germany. On that occasion, statements were
also made by the President of the Federal Republic of
Germany, the First Mayor of the Free and Hanseatic
City of Hamburg and myself. More than 500 guests
attended the event, which was organized with the
support of the Federal Republic of Germany and the
14/20

07/12/2016

Free and Hanseatic Hamburg. To both, I wish to express
our gratitude for their generosity.
The ceremony was preceded by a two-day
international symposium dedicated to the contribution
of the Tribunal to the rule of law. This symposium was
attended by over 150 participants, among them judges
of the Tribunal, the International Court of Justice and
other judicial institutions, academics, lawyers and
counsel who have appeared before international courts
and tribunals. The symposium was made possible by
the financial support of the Government of Japan, to
which I would like to express my appreciation for its
generous contribution.
Earlier this year, the Tribunal arranged another event
in connection with its twentieth anniversary, namely, a
round-table discussion on the role of the Tribunal in the
settlement of law of the sea disputes. This event was
held in New York on 23 June 2016, during the Meeting
of States Parties to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, and was well attended. It was
organized with the financial contribution of the Korea
Maritime Institute (KMI), for whose generosity I also
wish to express our gratitude.
Let me now turn to the judicial activity of the
Tribunal in the past year.
A few days after 17 December 2015, date of my
last statement before the General Assembly (see A/70/
PV.69), a new case was submitted to the Tribunal:
Panama v. Italy, also known as the M/V “Norstar”
case. According to Panama’s application, the dispute
concerned the arrest and detention of the M/V
“Norstar”, a Panamanian-flagged oil tanker. From
1994 to 1998, the vessel was engaged in supplying
gasoline to mega-yachts in an area described by Panama
as “international waters beyond the territorial sea of
Italy, France and Spain” and described by Italy as “off
the coasts of France, Italy and Spain”. In 1998, in the
context of criminal proceedings, the Public Prosecutor
at the Court of Savona, Italy, issued a Decree of Seizure
against the M/V “Norstar” and requested the assistance
of the Spanish authorities for its execution. The vessel
was then seized by Spanish authorities when it was
anchored in the bay of Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
On 11 March 2016, Italy raised preliminary
objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the
admissibility of the application. Pursuant to the Rules
of the Tribunal, proceedings on the merits of the case
were suspended, submissions were filed and oral
16-42334

07/12/2016

proceedings took place on the preliminary objections
raised by Italy. On 4 November 2016, the Tribunal
delivered its judgment on the preliminary objections.
In support of its claim that the Tribunal had no
jurisdiction, Italy invoked the “non-existence of a
dispute concerning the interpretation or application
of the Convention”, the “lack of jurisdiction ratione
personae” and “the failure by Panama to fulfil its
obligations regarding an exchange of views under
article 283 of the Convention”. The Tribunal rejected
each of those objections.
In addressing Italy’s objection based on the
non-existence of a dispute, the Tribunal examined the
communications sent to Italy concerning the detention
of the M/V “Norstar”. It noted that Panama, as the
flag State of the M/V “Norstar” contested the legality
of the detention under the Convention. It also noted
that, except for one response issued by Italy, all other
communications from Panama remained unanswered.
The Tribunal then took the view that a communication
sent to Italy and the absence of a response from Italy
indicate that there is a disagreement between the parties
on points of law and fact, and concluded that a dispute
existed between the parties at the time of the filing of
the application. Examining the question as to whether
the dispute concerned the interpretation or application
of the Convention, the Tribunal found that among the
articles of the Convention invoked by Panama in its
application, article 87, on the freedom of the high seas,
and article 300, on good faith and abuse of rights are
relevant to the case.
With respect to Italy’s objection based on lack of
jurisdiction ratione personae, the Tribunal found that
the dispute before it concerns the rights and obligations
of Italy and that therefore Italy is the proper respondent
to the claim made by Panama in these proceedings. As
regards Italy’s objection, based on the failure by Panama
to fulfil its obligations regarding an exchange of views
under article 283 of the Convention, the Tribunal found
that Panama was justified in assuming that continuing
to attempt to exchange views could not have yielded a
positive result and that it had thus fulfilled its obligation
under article 283 of the Convention.
The Tribunal then turned to Italy’s objections
to the admissibility of Panama’s application. Those
objections, also rejected by the Tribunal, were based on
the nationality of claims, the non-exhaustion of local
remedies, and on acquiescence, estoppel and extinctive

A/71/PV.55

prescription. With respect to the objection based on
the nationality of claims, the Tribunal, relying on its
previous jurisprudence, found that the M/V “Norstar”,
flying the flag of Panama, is to be considered a unit, so
the vessel, its crew and cargo on board, its owner and
every person involved or interested in its operations are
to be treated as an single entity linked to the flag State,
irrespective of their nationalities.
With respect to the objection of Italy based on the
non-exhaustion of local remedies, the Tribunal noted
that the right of Panama to enjoy freedom of navigation
on the high seas is a right that belongs to Panama under
article 87 of the Convention, and that a violation of that
right would amount to a direct injury to that country.
The Tribunal concluded that the claim for damage to
the persons or entities with an interest in the ship and
its cargo arises from the alleged injury to Panama and
concluded, accordingly, that the claims in respect of
such damages are not subject to the rule of exhaustion
of local remedies.
Regarding acquiescence, the Tribunal held that at
no stage has the conduct of Panama given scope to infer
that it has abandoned its claim or acquiesced in the lapse
of its claim. As to estoppel, the Tribunal considered that
the main elements of estoppel have not been fulfilled in
this case, and, with respect to extinctive prescription,
it found that Panama has not failed to pursue its claim
since the time when it first made it, so as to render the
application inadmissible.
Having rejected all of Italy’s objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the admissibility of
the application, the Tribunal, in its judgment, found
that it had jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute and
decided that Panama’s application was admissible. The
judgment of the Tribunal completes the preliminary
objections stage of proceedings in the M/V “Norstar”
case. Proceedings on the merits have resumed, and an
order was issued by the President of the Tribunal on
29 November 2016 to fix the time limits for the filing
of the memorial of Panama and the counter-memorial
of Italy.
Let me briefly recall another case that is currently
on the Tribunal’s docket, namely, Dispute Concerning
Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary between Ghana
and Côte d’Ivoire in the Atlantic Ocean (Ghana/Côte
d’Ivoire). This case is pending before a Special Chamber
of the Tribunal formed to deal with this dispute. Oral
proceedings in this case will be held in February 2017.

16-4233415/20

A/71/PV.55

Those two cases, with their different subject
matter, are a good illustration of the development
that the Tribunal has seen over the years, specifically,
that its case law has not only increased but has also
diversified. In fact, the Tribunal has received a number
of cases dealing with a wide range of matters under the
Convention. The scope of those cases covers maritime
delimitation, requests for the release of detained vessels,
claims for damages arising out of the alleged unlawful
arrest of vessels, issues concerning responsibilities and
liabilities of States in respect of deep seabed mining as
well as illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
Much progress has been achieved in this respect
since the Tribunal’s establishment in 1996. In
particular, in recent years, cases have been brought
before the Tribunal, enabling it to broaden and deepen
its jurisprudence from the viewpoint of both substantial
and procedural law. Therefore, the Tribunal has been
able to further establish itself as a key player in the
dispute-settlement system under the Convention and
to consolidate its position as the central forum for the
peaceful settlement of disputes in the field of the law
of the sea.
I also wish to take this opportunity to briefly
update the Assembly on the Tribunal’s training
activities, in particular, the internship programme
and the Nippon fellowship programme. The Tribunal’s
internship programme is aimed at university students,
and approximately 15 internships of a duration of three
months are available each year. Since the establishment
of the programme in 1997, 326 interns from 94 States
have benefited from this opportunity.
I wish to highlight that the Tribunal’s internship
programme also offers scholarships to participants
from developing countries in order to support them
financially during their stay in Hamburg. For that
purpose, the Tribunal has set up a trust fund. In the
past, grants have been made to this fund by the
Korea Maritime Institute and the China Institute of
International Studies. In 2016, a further grant was made
by KMI, and I wish to express our sincere appreciation
for the Institute’s valued support.
The Nippon fellowship programme is a capacitybuilding and training programme designed to provide
junior to mid-level Government officials and researchers
with advanced legal training in international dispute
settlement in the law of the sea. In 2016, the participants
came from Cameroon, Cambodia, the Democratic
16/20

07/12/2016

Republic of the Congo, Portugal and Thailand. To
sum up, since the establishment of the programme in
2007, 65 fellows from 54 countries have participated in
this programme. I should like to express my gratitude
to the Nippon Foundation for its generous funding of
the programme.
I should also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the concluding part of the statement that I made at the
ceremony marking the twentieth anniversary of the
Tribunal:
“Building on the experience of the last 20 years,
the Tribunal stands ready to meet the challenges
of the future. We, the Judges of the Tribunal, are
ready to serve the international community and the
States parties to the Convention for the settlement
of their disputes related to the implementation and
application of the Convention”.
Let me also express my appreciation to the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of
Legal Affairs for its continued cooperation and support
for the Tribunal. I wish the General Assembly every
success in its important deliberations at the seventyfirst session.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 73
and its sub-items (a) and (b).
Before proceeding further, I would like to remind
members that action on draft resolution A/71/L.26 is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee.
The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/71/L.24, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
16-42334

07/12/2016

A/71/PV.55

that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the draft
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/71/L.24: the Bahamas, Canada, the
Czech Republic, Greece, Indonesia, Jamaica, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Monaco, Nauru, Poland,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine and the United
States of America.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/71/L.24?
Draft resolution A/71/L.24 was adopted (resolution
71/123).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/71/L.27, entitled “World Tuna Day”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/71/L.27: Argentina, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dominica, Ecuador, Greece,
Guatemala, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Portugal, the Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tajikistan and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/71/L.27?
Draft resolution A/71/L.27 was adopted (resolution
71/124).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to delegations that wish to explain their
position on the resolutions just adopted, may I remind
Assembly members that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We take this opportunity
to extend our sincere thanks to the representative of
the Norwegian delegation, Mr. Andreas Motzfeldt
Kravik, for having facilitated the negotiation process
on the text of resolution 71/123, entitled “Sustainable

fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
We also thank the Director of the Division of
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Ms. Gabriele
Goettsche-Wanli, and her team, and United Nations
Legal Counsel Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares for
supporting the delegations through the Office of
Legal Affairs.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its commitment to sustainable fishing, as evidenced
by its implementation of the principles of the Code of
Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, issued by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and chapter 17 of Agenda 21, approved by the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development
in 1992. My country is also party to several
international instruments that call for the preservation
and management of fishing.
It has been Venezuela’s consistent position in
various international forums that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) should not
be considered the only legal framework that governs all
activities carried out in the seas and oceans, as there are
other applicable international instruments — including
the Geneva Conventions — that together with UNCLOS
make up the body of law known as the law of the sea. In
that regard, it has been our consistent and long-standing
position to object to the possibility of the Convention
being invoked as conventional law or customary
international law unless the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela expressly recognizes it as such, in future,
through its incorporation into its national legislation.
The Venezuelan delegation has stated on numerous
occasions that, in the view of the Venezuelan State,
UNCLOS does not, despite its universal nature, enjoy
universal participation. To date, UNCLOS has only
164 States parties, unlike many other multilateral
instruments, such as the Convention on Biological
Diversity, which currently has 193 States parties.
Venezuela is not party to the the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,

16-4233417/20

A/71/PV.55

nor are the norms of those international instruments
applicable to Venezuela under customary international
law, unless it has been explicitly otherwise indicated
by Venezuela. They may be recognized in future
through their incorporation into domestic legislation.
The reasons that have prevented our ratification of
those instruments, UNCLOS in particular, continue to
be pertinent today.
Although our country is not party to the 1995
Agreement on Sustainable Fisheries, the fisheries
and agriculture sectors are a priority in our national
development plans. That is evident in our Programa de la
Patria for 2013-2019. That national programme includes
objectives such as promoting fisheries development
by modernizing our fishing fleets and our maritime
and river fisheries infrastructures. That national
development plan is complemented by a broad set of
regulations through which we have been able to set up
programmes focusing on the conservation, protection
and management of marine biological resources and on
promoting responsible and sustainable management.
We have focused on relevant biological and
economic aspects, as well as on food security and the
relevant social, cultural, environmental and commercial
issues. The Venezuelan law on fisheries prohibits
bottom trawling and establishes a sanctions regime for
the failure to respect conservation and management
measures applicable to fisheries. It includes oversight
measures for those vessels flying the national flag that
engage in fisheries activities, as well an inspection
and monitoring system for operations on the high seas,
which submits the relevant information to the body
tasked with fisheries management. That allows us to
know exactly in which geographical area a fisheries
operation is being carried out and to ensure compliance
with the regulations on the management of resources
established in the law.
It is also important to highlight that Venezuela is
making national contributions to designing a legally
binding instrument on port State control that focuses
on the prevention, deterrence and elimination of illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. We made those
contributions during technical consultations held in the
framework of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.
In the interest of consensus, my delegation did not
stand in the way of the adoption of resolution 71/123, on
sustainable fisheries. Nevertheless, Venezuela wishes
to make explicit its reservations with regard to the
18/20

07/12/2016

content of the resolution, given the fact that it is not a
State party to UNCLOS nor to the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks.
Although the text of the resolution contains some
positive aspects, we would caution that the text also
contains elements that caused Venezuela in the past to
express reservations to the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
in resolution 66/288. Those reservations were in relation
to issues regarding marine biodiversity. In addition, our
country, for the same reasons, expressed reservations
to target 14C of the Sustainable Development Goals in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We believe that future updates to the terms of
UNCLOS should be considered, given that there are new
situations for which the current approach is inadequate
and, in some cases, counterproductive, which therefore
prevents the universal application of the Convention.
That situation has been affecting the development of
a regime that should be addressing the most important
contemporary issues regarding the oceans and seas in a
balanced, equitable and inclusive manner. The reasons
that prevented the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
from becoming party to such instruments in the past
still persist today.
Mr. Erciyes (Turkey): Turkey joined the consensus
on resolution 71/123, on sustainable fisheries, as Turkey
is fully committed to the conservation, management and
sustainable use of marine living resources and attaches
great importance to regional cooperation to that end.
However, Turkey disassociates itself from the references
made in the resolution to international instruments to
which it is not party. Those references should therefore
not be interpreted as a change in the legal position of
Turkey with regards to those instruments.
Mr. Cuéllar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Colombian delegation expresses its sincere thanks
to Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for his tireless work
as the coordinator of resolution 71/123, on sustainable
fisheries, in conducting in-depth and transparent
discussions in a constructive spirit that reflected
the diversity of all the States that participated in
the consultations.
16-42334

07/12/2016

A/71/PV.55

Colombia recognizes the valuable contribution
made by the resolutions on sustainable fisheries. The
constructive spirit that guides Colombia, given the
need to ensure sustainable fishing, is based on its firm
conviction that all nations have a commitment to the
protection of the sea and its resource in the interest of
ensuring a sustainable future, for the world depends on
it. Colombia attaches great institutional significance
to marine-coastal matters and has a unifying vision
in which the sea, the coast and its resources are
fundamental elements of the country’s governance.

However, we wish to inform the Assembly once again
that none of the recommendations included in the
resolution can be interpreted to mean that the provisions
of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and related
instruments can be considered to be binding on
States that have not clearly expressed their consent or
commitment to that Agreement.

Colombia reaffirms its commitment to the
development and sustainable management of fishery
resources in the interest of constructing not only a
sustainable country but also sustainable fisheries on a
global scale and ensuring access to fishing resources
for future generations. It is in fulfilment of those
commitments that Colombia supported the resolution
with determination and joined the consensus for
its adoption.

The resolution that we have just adopted contains
paragraphs concerning the implementation of the
recommendations of the Review Conference on
the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations must be not considered enforceable,
but rather as mere recommendations to States non-parties
to the Agreement. At the same time, Argentina wishes
to note that current international law does not authorize
regional management organizations and arrangements
on fisheries or their member States to take any measure
with respect to vessels whose flag State is not a member
of such an organization or arrangement or that have not
explicitly consented to the application of such measures
to vessels flying the flags of non-members. Nothing in
the resolutions of the General Assembly, including the
one that we have just adopted, can be interpreted to be
contrary to that conclusion.

However, Colombia wishes respectfully to state
that the resolution was formulated on the basis of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
December 10, 1982, and to remind the Assembly that
Colombia has not ratified that legal instrument, and its
provisions should therefore not apply to, and cannot
be enforced in, Colombia, with the exception of those
provisions that Colombia has expressly accepted.
The Republic of Colombia wishes therefore to state
that the resolution, along with Colombia’s participation
in the process of its adoption, should not be considered
or interpreted in a way that implies the express or tacit
acceptance by the Colombian State of the provisions
contained in the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. Colombia does not consider the Convention
to be the only standard framework for regulating
activities in the oceans. My delegation would like to
reiterate that Colombia carries out activities in the
marine environment in strict compliance with the
international commitments that it has expressly adopted
or accepted. For those reasons, Colombia expresses its
reservation regarding any mention of the Convention
within the resolution, as we are not considered parties
to the Convention nor are we bound by its contents. I
request that this explanation of our position be included
in the record of this meeting.
Ms. Gandini (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina joined in the General Assembly’s consensus
in favour of resolution 71/123, on sustainable fisheries.

Moreover, I recall once again that, in the
implementation of conservation measures, the conduct
of scientific research or the undertaking of any other
activity recommended in resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly resolution 61/105 and other
relevant resolutions, and the legal framework provided
by the International Law of the Sea as reflected in the
Convention, including in paragraph 13 of article 77,
must be strictly respected. The implementation of the
resolutions cannot, therefore, be used as a precondition
or justification for ignoring or violating the rights
established by the Convention. Nothing in resolution
61/105 or other related resolutions of the General
Assembly prejudices the sovereign rights of coastal
States over their continental shelf or the exercise of
the jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their
continental shelf under international law.
Paragraph 176 of the resolution adopted today
contains a pertinent reminder of that concept, which
has already been reflected in resolution 64/72 and
subsequent resolutions. In that same vein, paragraph
177 recognizes the adoption by coastal States, including

16-4233419/20

A/71/PV.55

Argentina, of measures to recognize the impact of
bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems on the
entirety of their continental shelves. It also recognizes
their efforts to ensure compliance with those measures.
I would like to request that Argentina’s explanation of
its position be reflected in the record of this meeting.

20/20

07/12/2016

The Acting President (spoke in French): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

16-42334
