S/PV.8293

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8293rd meeting

Monday, 25 June 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin/Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Comprehensive review of the situation in the Middle East and North Africa
Letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/524)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19594 (E)
*1819594*

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Comprehensive review of the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa
Letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the
SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/524)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain,
Cyprus, Egypt, Greece, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer
for the League of Arab States to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/524, which contains a letter dated
1 June 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
2/61

25/06/2018

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation presidency for convening this debate at a
crucial juncture for the people of the Middle East and
North Africa.
The region faces profound divisions, troubling
currents and a tragic shredding of its diverse religious,
ethnic and cultural fabric. Decades-old conflicts,
together with new ones, as well as deep-rooted social
grievances, a shrinking of democratic space and the
emergence of terrorism and new forms of violent
extremism are undermining peace, sustainable
development and human rights. The territorial integrity
of countries like Syria, Yemen and Libya is under
threat. Millions of people have been forcibly displaced
from their homes. The impacts of this instability have
spread to neighbours and beyond.
In addressing these challenges, we would all do
well to recall the series of Arab Human Development
Reports issued by the United Nations Development
Programme, starting in 2002. Those studies identified
significant deficits in education, basic freedoms and
empowerment, especially among the region’s women
and young people. Among the findings of the first
report, in 2002, was:
“Political participation in Arab countries
remains weak, as manifested in the lack of genuine
representative democracy and restrictions on
liberties. At the same time, people’s aspirations
for more freedom and greater participation in
decision-making have grown, fueled by rising
incomes, education, and information flows.
The mismatch between aspirations and their
fulfilment has in some cases led to alienation
and its offspring — apathy and discontent.
Remedying this state of affairs must be a priority
for national leaderships.”
Many such shortfalls continue to bedevil societies
across the region. Let us also recognize that many
of today’s problems are being compounded by the
legacy of the past, including the colonial era and the
consequences of the First World War, notably the
dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The well-known
peace to end all peace did, unfortunately, achieve
that aim.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

It was in this broad context that the Arab Spring
reverberated widely as a call for inclusion, opportunity
and the opening of political space. Here, I would like
to pay tribute to the people of Tunisia, where the call
began. They have achieved considerable progress
in consolidating their young democracy, including
through a new constitution and a peaceful transition
of power.
But the Tunisia promise did not materialize
everywhere in the region. Today, in a region once home
to one of history’s greatest flowerings of culture and
coexistence, we see many fault lines at work, old and new,
crossing each other and generating enormous volatility.
These include the Israeli-Palestinian wound, resurgent
Cold War-like rivalries, the Sunni-Shia divide, ethnic
schisms and other political confrontations. Economic
and social opportunities are also clearly insufficient.
As such difficulties rise, trust in institutions declines.
Societies fracture along ethnic or religious lines, which
are being manipulated for political advantage. At times,
foreign interference has exacerbated this disunity, with
destabilizing effects. And the risk of further downward
spirals is sky high.
Our most pressing peace and security challenges
in the Middle East are a clear reflection of the
rifts, pressures, neglect and long-term trends that
have brought us to today’s crossroads. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict remains central to the Middle
Eastern quagmire. Achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting two-State solution that allows Palestinians
and Israelis to live side-by-side in peace, within secure
and recognized borders, is essential to security and
stability in the entire region. The recent tensions and
violence in Gaza are a reminder of the fragility of the
present situation.
International support is critical to creating an
environment conducive to launching meaningful direct
negotiations between the two parties. I remain deeply
committed to supporting efforts towards this end. Later
today, I will preside over a pledging conference to
address severe funding gaps facing the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.
In Syria, civilians have borne a litany of atrocities
for more than seven years of conflict: sieges, starvation,
indiscriminate attacks, the use of chemical weapons,
exile and forced displacement, sexual violence, torture,
detention and enforced disappearances. Syria has also

S/PV. 8293

become a battleground for proxy wars among regional
and international actors. Violence is entrenched amid a
fractured political landscape and a multiplicity of armed
groups. In the absence of trusted State institutions,
many Syrians have fallen back on religious and tribal
identities. I continue to call on the parties to the
conflict to engage meaningfully with my Special Envoy
for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, in the United Nationsfacilitated political process in Geneva. I urge progress
in the establishment of the constitutional committee.
Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only
internationally agreed avenue for a credible and
sustainable end to the conflict. More than ever, our
aim is to see a united and democratic Syria, to avoid
irreparable sectarianism, to ensure full respect for
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
to enable the Syrian people to freely decide on the
country’s future.
Yemen is suffering a prolonged and devastating
conflict with clear regional dimensions. My Special
Envoy for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, has been actively
engaged in order to avoid an escalation that could have
dramatic humanitarian consequences. One week ago,
he presented to the Council elements of a negotiation
framework that he has been discussing with various
interlocutors inside Yemen and in the region. Our hope
is that this framework would allow for a resumption
of badly needed political negotiations to put an end to
the conflict.
In Gaza, Syria and Yemen, the international
community must remain mobilized in order to ensure
a strong humanitarian response to millions of people
in dire need.
In Libya, the United Nations is committed to
supporting national armed conflicttors to find a peaceful
resolution to the crisis. The national conference process,
organized as part of the United Nations Action Plan, is
delivering a clear message that Libyans are longing for
an end to the conflict and an end to the transition period.
All stakeholders must continue lending their support
to my Special Representative Ghassan Salamé as he
leads the political process. Political success in Libya
will also hopefully allow the country to play its role in
addressing the dramatic plight of migrants and refugees
who have been suffering so much in attempting to cross
the Mediterranean.
In the past few years, we have witnessed numerous
examples of Iraq’s resilience, including overcoming

18-195943/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

the risk of fragmentation and achieving victory over
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Iraq’s
endurance as a stable federal State is a testament
to the enormous sacrifices of Iraqi people from all
communities. I strongly hope that the Iraqi institutions
will be able to ensure an adequate conclusion of the
electoral process in a way that fully respects the will of
the Iraqi people. In this context, the reconstruction of
areas destroyed in the retaking of territory from ISIL is
a priority, as is the safe, dignified and voluntary return
of Iraq’s displaced people to their homes, including
those from religious minorities. It is also important to
complement such efforts by ensuring that those who
committed atrocity crimes are held accountable for their
actions, in accordance with international standards.
Let us remember that what look like religious
conflicts are normally the product of political or
geostrategic manipulation, or proxies for other
antagonisms. There are endless examples of different
religious groups living together peacefully for
centuries, despite their differences. Today’s artificial
divides therefore can and must be overcome, based on
respect for the independence and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned.
In this context, it is important to value the experience
of respect for diversity that Lebanon today represents.
In Lebanon, parliamentary elections — the first since
2009 — were held peacefully in May, underscoring the
country’s democratic tradition. We look forward to the
formation of the new Government to further strengthen
State institutions, promote structural reforms and
implement the dissociation policy. Heightened regional
tensions could threaten Lebanon’s stability, including
at the Blue Line. Steadfast international efforts remain
critical in supporting Lebanon in consolidating State
authority, safeguarding the country from regional
tensions and hosting refugees until durable solutions
are found, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
I remain particularly concerned at the risks of
destabilization around the Gulf. That is why I have
always supported the efforts of the Kuwaiti mediation
to overcome divisions among Arab States in the area.
On the other hand, it is important to preserve the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which should remain a
valuable element of peace and security, independent of
the wider discussion about the role of Iran in the region.
During the Cold War, ideological rivals still found
ways to talk and cooperate despite their deep divides,
4/61

25/06/2018

for example through the Helsinki process. I do not see
why the countries of the region cannot find a similar
platform to come together, drawing experience from
one another and enhancing opportunities for possible
political, environmental, socioeconomic or security
forms of cooperation.
Regional and subregional organizations also have
a key role to play in supporting preventive diplomacy,
mediation and confidence-building. The region needs
to ensure the integrity of the State, its governance
systems and the equal application of the rule of law
protecting all individuals. Majorities should not feel
the existential threat of fragmentation, and minorities
should not feel the threat of oppression and exile. And
everyone, everywhere, should enjoy the right to live in
dignity, freedom and peace. I call on the members of the
Security Council to reach the much-needed consensus
and to act with one strong voice.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
When we convened this meeting, we thought it
very important to come up with united approaches to
the problem of helping to resolve the crises quickly
settling the crises in the vast expanse of the Near and
Middle East and North Africa. We propose that together
we reflect on what can be done today to stop people’s
suffering and avert other tragedies and shocks in one of
the most turbulent parts of the world. We firmly believe,
however, that any decisions we take will be effective
only if two conditions are met. First, they must be truly
collective, and secondly, they must be in keeping with
the norms and principles of international law. Both
analysis and experience have shown that lone attempts
to cut the Gordian knot of these conflicts are doomed to
failure. The flawed practice of unilateral action, when
one State Member of the United Nations declares the
Governments of other States Members to be pariahs,
pursuing a policy of undermining or removing regimes
it does not like, has not only not helped to resolve the
region’s numerous problems, it has created new ones.
It is clear that if we are to reduce the potential for
crisis, we must unite international and regional efforts,
including in effective and inclusive formats and with
the United Nations and its Security Council playing a
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

central role — I repeat, with the United Nations and its
Security Council playing a leading role.
A genuine pooling of the efforts of all States to
counter regional threats requires an honest partnership
dialogue, and that dialogue must be founded on a
rejection of attempts to resolve conflicts through force
and on support for the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, regional organizations and individual Member
States, without politicizing the humanitarian aspects
of the issue and in full respect for obligations under
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
above all.
The Russian Federation advocates developing a
positive and unifying agenda for the entire international
community with a view to resolving the situation in
the Near and Middle East and in North Africa, for
which respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region is a
crucial condition. It will be essential to work to present
a truly broad front against the terrorist threat that still
remains, despite the considerable successes we have
already seen in Iraq and Syria. We must also put an
end to use terrorist groups in the struggle for advantage
in the new balance of Powers in the region. While it is
important to work collectively to repel terrorism’s use
of chemical weapons and weapons of mass destruction,
we should never play into the hands of such outlaws
in their provocations with chemical weapons by using
them as a pretext for acts of aggression.
It is unacceptable for anyone to exploit such
provocations by making accusations about Governments
they do not like, making it all the more difficult for
the experts to establish the real facts. Attempts to
introduce divisions in international organizations such
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in no way contribute to the logic
of a collective search for solutions, and neither did
the unwillingness to support a Security Council draft
resolution on improving the methods of work of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
in Syria or the desire to assign functions to the
OPCW that are not considered under the Convention
on Chemical Weapons and that by their nature come
under the Council’s purview. Unfortunately, at the
special session opening tomorrow of the Conference
of the States Parties to Review the Operation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, we run the risk of
seeing attempts to turn a technical body into an arena
for political battles.

S/PV. 8293

The keystone of our joint efforts in the region should
be creating conditions conducive to strengthening a
general climate of trust. This is crucial with regard to
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. Let
us not forget that in its resolution 598 (1987), adopted
in 1987, the Security Council charged the SecretaryGeneral with working with regional stakeholders
on measures to strengthen the security and stability
of the region. This is obviously a complicated issue
that requires discreet, painstaking discussions and a
sensitive approach. But the work on it must begin, and
we are ready to give all the help in our power by talking
with our partners in Iran, Israel, Palestine, Syria, Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar,
Egypt, Turkey and other countries of the region.
The ultimate aim should be to establish a genuinely
inclusive regional security architecture that would
ensure the participation of every State in this part of the
world. The first step here could be to hold a conference
with the participation of the Gulf States to discuss issues
of regional security. Obviously, that would require
guarantees, above all from the permanent five members
of the Security Council. Eventually such a conference
could be expanded to other Middle Eastern countries.
It will also be important to take immediate steps
to disseminate a culture of peace on an inter-ethnic
and interreligious basis, which would help to prevent
further ethno-religious strife. Depicting the conflicts
in the region as religious clashes, including between
Sunni and Shia, is extremely dangerous. It is clear
that insisting on creating mono-religious societies
not only contradicts modern realities, it is a way
to ensure that the conflicts will drag on for years or
even decades. The Russian Federation has unique
experience in the area of the coexistence of ethnic
and religious groups, and we therefore support the
proposal of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to work with
the United Nations to organize a world conference on
interreligious and ethnic dialogue with the participation
of Heads of State, parliamentarians and representatives
of world religions. We would be prepared to host such a
conference in Russia in 2022.
We are convinced that sending Security Council
missions into conflict areas in the Middle East will help
strengthen the Council’s unity. In those areas and all
others, Russia is ready to work together with interested
partners in an open and impartial manner and without
threats or negative pressure.

18-195945/61

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.8293

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor
Security Council.

to

the

members

of

the

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
presidency for organizing this important debate to allow
us to discuss the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa in a comprehensive manner. We are pleased
to see you, Mr. Deputy Minister, presiding over this
debate. We appreciate the concept paper (S/2018/524,
annex) made available to us to facilitate the Council’s
debate on the topic.
We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his presence here today with us, as well as for his
very useful presentation which helps put matters in
their proper perspective. I want to thank the SecretaryGeneral most earnestly for his very thoughtful and
incisive analysis of the challenges of the region, which
we must expect from the Head of the world body at a
time when such frank analysis is so needed and has
become indispensable.
The region of the Middle East and North Africa is
facing multiple and complex challenges. Long-standing
and unresolved disputes continue to fester, while, as
indicated in the concept paper and highlighted by the
Secretary-General, new conflict and crisis situations are
also plaguing the entire region and causing horrendous
suffering for millions of civilians. The increasing level
of violence has created unprecedented humanitarian
crises, forcing millions of people to be displaced.
With the further weakening of State institutions,
terrorist organizations — including the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Al-Qaeda and
others — criminal gangs and human traffickers have
had the opportunity to exploit the political vacuum,
further undermining State legitimacy. Who can
forget that at one point not too long ago, the terrorist
organization ISIS had managed to control a large area
with a big population and almost assumed the attributes
of a State? Never had the continuing weaknesses of
international cooperation in counter-terrorism been as
glaringly plain as they were at that time. That could
be possible in this day and age was telling and also
helped to underscore the extent to which the challenges
faced by the region are very complex and potentially
extremely dangerous and have the potential to cause
wider and expanding conflict.
6/61

25/06/2018

The repeated use of chemical weapons in the
region is also undermining the global non-proliferation
architecture. The future of the Iran nuclear deal, which
was signed after a long and arduous negotiation, is
under threat, with serious implications for regional
and indeed international peace and security. Of course,
we all know the geostrategic importance of the wider
region. The current dynamics have not helped, but
rather have intensified geopolitical rivalries, further
complicating efforts aimed at finding solutions to
the many challenges and threats facing the region.
The conflict and crisis situations plaguing the region
have also undermined hard-won development gains,
exacerbating socioeconomic challenges, including high
youth unemployment, leading to inequality, a sense
of frustration and alienation. Furthermore, they have
aggravated sectarian divisions and tensions, destroying
centuries-old social fabrics.
All these have been eloquently stressed by the
Secretary-General, and they underscore the need for a
comprehensive and holistic approach to addressing the
political, security, socioeconomic and humanitarian
challenges of the region. That is why we find this
debate very timely and appropriate, as it allows us to
look at the situation from a broader perspective, rather
than considering issues in isolation, and we appreciate,
as already indicated, the concept note shared with us to
guide our discussion in this regard.
We have no illusion that there are any easy solutions
to resolve the long-standing and unresolved disputes,
as well as the new conflict and crisis situations in the
region. However, there is one thing that we believe
is true, and we think it broadly applies to all the
difficult issues in the region, without discounting the
varying nature and context of each conflict situation.
Unless there are genuine and meaningful dialogue and
negotiation among the various parties, which should
be complemented by the constructive engagement
of concerned countries in the region, and indeed, the
major Powers, achieving a peaceful and comprehensive
political settlement will continue to be unachievable.
We know this is easier said than done, but there is no
other sane option than this to resolve conflicts, diffuse
tensions, create trust and address anxieties and fears
among communities and States in the region.
That is why we support all diplomatic efforts being
exerted through the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his special representatives and envoys
operating on the ground. In that regard, it must be
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

stressed that no matter what we do to contribute to peace
and security in that region or elsewhere, unless those
efforts are guided by and anchored in commitment to
the principles of international law governing inter-State
relations, which essentially means adherence to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, it is
definitely unlikely that we would manage to secure
peace and ensure security.
The Council, as the principal organ for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security, has a critical role to play in facilitating
and supporting genuine and comprehensive efforts to
prevent and resolve violence, as well as to build and
sustain durable peace initiatives. Unfortunately, we all
know that the Council has been effectively paralysed,
and its dysfunction has seriously undermined its
credibility. The Council is no longer a place for dialogue
and compromise to find solutions to many threats and
challenges afflicting our world, but a platform for
point-scoring and grandstanding among major Powers,
and the rest of us are being forced to be sandwiched
in between. Nowhere is that more evident than in
the discussion on issues of peace and security in the
Middle East.
In the face of this standoff, we are seeing
attempts being made to export some of the difficult
and contentious issues elsewhere. This in our opinion
will contribute only to widening the existing division
and further undermining the international peace and
security architecture. As far as we are concerned, there
is no other alternative but to restore the credibility of the
Council. The major Powers in the Council have a special
responsibility to revive what one astute observer of the
United Nations has referred to as “the shared sense of
strategic purpose” among them. However, we should not
blame the big five alone; we the elected members have a
responsibility, too, and if we are able to play our role we
have the capacity to contribute to unlocking the logjam
in the Council. We tried to demonstrate that last year,
but we need to do more in fulfilling our obligations to
the wider membership of the United Nations.
Finally, the conflict and crisis situations in the
region require urgent and concerted action. Unless we
do everything possible to reverse the current dangerous
trajectory, we will not be able to avert a looming
disaster down the road. The sooner the Council gets
its act together, the better for peace and security in the
region and indeed the entire world.

S/PV. 8293

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for convening
this well-conceived debate and express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his very thoughtful and
comprehensive analysis of the situation in the Middle
East and North Africa region.
We agree that the frequency and intensity of
individual conflicts in the broader region of the
Middle East and North Africa have increased, with
grave consequences entailing global insecurity and
ramifications. Those violent conflicts, including the
Palestinian-Israel situation, Syria, the Golan Heights
and Yemen, are having an increasingly serious impact
on countries in Africa, South and South-East Asia,
Europe and other regions. The only viable solution
involves greater rapprochement, cooperation and
confidence-building among the United Nations Member
States, Council members and nations in the triangular
configuration of Arab States, Israel and Iran. As my
President wrote in his Manifesto: The World. The
21st Century:
“We should also have learnt from past wars
and conflicts that it is impossible to ensure our
own security by undermining the security of
others. That is why a global coalition of States for
peace, stability, trust and security under the United
Nations auspices should be set up. Our common
task for the next decade should be to end wars
and conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Libya,
and Syria, in eastern Ukraine and the PalestinianIsraeli confrontation.”
Our specific regret is that major humanitarian
crises in the region are overwhelming, thereby
impacting millions of people in several countries with
great shortfalls in funding and supplies. We are also
witnessing the destruction of critical infrastructure that
support human life. My delegation therefore presents
the following observations for consideration, while
bearing in mind the questions raised in the concept note
(S/2018/524, annex).
First, in order to counter the causes of recurring and
potential new conflicts, a thorough and comprehensive
plan of action needs to be implemented by Governments,
the United Nations and international organizations in
strict adherence with international conventions and the
new reforms of the Secretary-General.
Second, the political deterioration of State
authority that is being usurped by non-State actors

18-195947/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

and armed groups calls for further action. Therefore,
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by
preventive diplomacy, mediation and sustainable
peace. The political and diplomatic settlement of
conflicts should prevail over the use of force. There
has to be full engagement of the United Nations, the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Envoys
and Special Representatives, as well as upholding
Council resolutions cooperatively. A united Security
Council is important for sending strong messages to
warring parties, so as, inter alia, to stop the rhetoric
and inflammatory language, as well as the use of force
by all sides, and to uphold human rights.
Third, it is critical to reach agreement among
warring parties, while honouring ceasefires and
allowing unhindered humanitarian access by land, air
and sea to those most in need. Those who perpetrate
horrific brutalities, such as using hospitals and schools
for purposes of war or sexual violence as a weapon of
war, should be brought to justice. We also need to review
the Council’s sanctions regimes and halt unilateral
sanctions and embargoes that hurt innocent civilians.
Fourth, conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa region are like a vortex drawing in neighbouring
countries and even other Powers, thereby resulting in
proxy wars in an attempt to change the balance of power.
A united Security Council is all the more important to
withstand those undesirable trends.
Fifth, now is the time for the entire United Nations
system and Council members, including its five
permanent members, in the first instance, and 10 elected
members, in partnership with other international and
regional stakeholders, to find middle ground in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the investigation into
the use of chemical weapons, among others. We need to
safeguard the credibility of the Council as an apex body
of the United Nations. Investigations into all violations
must be thorough, objective and impartial so that the
international community can fairly identify their
perpetrators in full compliance with international law.
Sixth, Kazakhstan believes that unilateral steps,
especially the use of force, should not be taken for
whatever reason by any country or group of countries
without the approval of the Council. In addition, the
principles of territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty should always be observed under the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, it is
critical in global relations that civilians be protected
8/61

25/06/2018

from all categories of perpetrators — as in the case
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria — who must
be thoroughly investigated and dealt with based on
objective facts and evidence under international law.
As host countries, Governments must also ensure the
security of United Nations personnel and peacekeepers.
Seventh, due to the vacuum of functioning State
institutions, terrorist groups have found a strong
foothold in unstable areas, which has resulted in the
massive exodus of refugees from numerous countries.
The burden is borne by hosting countries like Jordan
and Lebanon that require international support.
Refugees from the Middle East and North Africa
have changed the political, demographic and security
landscape of Europe, thereby demanding a new global
compact on migration.
Eighth, effective strategies to prevent and address
conflicts and related scourges involving terrorism
require, besides political intervention, the three-fold
strategy that Kazakhstan has proposed. That comprises
strengthening the security-development nexus, as
well as deploying a revamped regional and innovative
whole-of-system approach with the United Nations
delivering as one. We also believe that the international
community needs to coalesce in prioritizing further
measures to eliminate international terrorism to ensure
a safer world. Governments must act under international
law and manage shared challenges and opportunities
along the way. We should also work towards the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other types of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East.
In conclusion, we would also like to refer to the first
presidential statement of the year, adopted in January,
which, during its presidency, Kazakhstan introduced
on preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace. The
Council, within its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, accordingly noted
“the importance of continuing to strive towards
sustainable peace and achieving a world free of
violent conflicts by the United Nations Centenary”
(S/PRST/2018/1, p. 1).
It is therefore good that we now have a targeted
time frame since the goal is a dream with a deadline.
We hope that today’s discussion will help us to
move constructively forward, through dialogue,
confidence-building measures and the equal distribution
of resources. Those have been presented in profoundly
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8293

reflective treatises and manifestos on war and peace,
including our own initiatives.

and facilitate an early return of the Yemeni parties to
the track of political dialogue.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Russian Federation for taking the initiative
to convene this open meeting on a comprehensive
assessment of the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, and is confident that the meeting will enhance
understanding and consensus among all parties and
contribute to de-escalating and stabilizing the regional
situation. China welcomes Russian Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs Sergey Vasilievich Vershinin to New
York to preside over this meeting, and thanks SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.

We must support Libyan parties in their effort to
achieve reconciliation and to strengthen their capacity
for integrated national governance and development.
Efforts should be made to ensure the comprehensive and
effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear issue.

At present, the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa is grave. Inter-State differences, sectarian
disputes and ethnic conflicts are interactive. Wars,
conflicts, terrorist threats and humanitarian disasters
are intertwined. The complex hotspot issues, such as
Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Libya, have been going
simmering for years, defying solutions. The ongoing
instability in the Middle East and North Africa is
detrimental to the interests of the peoples of the region,
with ramifications for world peace and development.
The countries of the region and the international
community need to embrace the philosophy of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security and
together build a community of a shared future and find
a path to peace, stability, development and prosperity.
China would like to make the following observations
on how to solve the hot-spot issue in the region.
First, there is a need to pursue dialogue and
consultations in a comprehensive effort to take forward
the political settlement of hot-spot issues in the region.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue — a fundamental issues that bears on
peace in the region. It is imperative to adhere to the
two-State solution and on basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, and to resume peace talks as early
as possible in order to resolve the issues of borders,
settlements, the status of Jerusalem and refugees.
We must support the work of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria and the Astana dialogue
to maintain the momentum of the ceasefire and to
reactivate the Geneva peace talks as soon as possible
in order to reach a political solution acceptable to all
Syrian parties.
It is necessary to support the mediation efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen

Secondly, there is a need to enhance synergy and
to maintain a country-led and -owned process, with the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation. The
future and destiny of the region should be determined
through joint consultations among the countries of
the region. It is imperative to respect the principles
of sovereign equality and non-interference in internal
affairs, as established in the Charter of the United
Nations, respect the will of the countries concerned in
taking forward the country-led and -owned political
process. The United Nations should play its role as
the main channel of mediation, actively promote the
political processes in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq,
and provide support for dialogue among the parties to
the conflict. Regional organizations should promote
mutual trust and solidarity among all parties concerned
and cooperate with the United Nations. Countries
outside the region should play constructive roles in
facilitating peace and providing help, but should not
wilfully interfere in the internal affairs of other States
or impose specific models.
Thirdly, an integrated approach should be followed
in addressing the various drivers of the crises in the
region. Multiple civilizations and religions originate
and converge in this region. It is imperative to respect
cultural and religious diversity, engage and learn from
each other on an equal footing and prevent cultural
differences and religious conflicts from exacerbating
the regional conflicts.
Combating terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations is a shared responsibility of countries
of the region. Those countries and the international
community should strengthen cooperation in their
fight against terrorism, consolidate their achievements
in that fight, prevent the spillover of foreign terrorist
fighters and their returnees, and curb the spread of
terrorist ideology. The parties should work together
to alleviate the humanitarian situation of refugees and
provide greater assistance to countries hosting massive
numbers of refugees.

18-195949/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, there is a need to promote sustainable
development and address the root causes of instability
in the region. War, conflict, terrorism and the refugee
migration crisis can all be traced to the root of poverty
and underdevelopment. Development has been the key
to the solutions to all problems and that also holds true
for this region. It is necessary to support the countries
of the region in exploring appropriate development
paths by themselves, fully implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, building up their
capacity for poverty reduction and development, and
consolidating the material basis for peace.
The Middle East and North Africa have produced
brilliant civilizations and have glorious histories that
have made important contributions to humankind’s
progress. We are confident that the countries and
peoples of those regions have the will, the ability and
the wisdom to find a solution that will restore peace and
tranquillity. As a permanent Member of the Security
Council, China has always maintained an objective and
impartial position, and played a constructive role in
seeking solutions to hot-spot issues in the region. We
have always respected the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the countries of the
region. We stand for solutions reached through dialogue
and consultation, not force, and firmly support the
mediation efforts of the United Nations.
As the largest developing country, China is ready to
strengthen its practical cooperation with the countries
of the region under the framework of the Belt and Road
Initiative, thus contributing to the achievement of
regional development and prosperity.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome and thank the SecretaryGeneral for his personal commitment to resolving the
crises in the Middle East.
I would also like to thank the Russian presidency
for organizing this debate, in which I would like to
explain the great principles that guide France’s action
in the face of the multiplying regional crises. First
is the goal of establishing inclusive and democratic
governance, which is key to the stabilization of the
Middle East. Next is combatting terrorism, which,
today, is one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. Finally, there is a need to promote
the multilateralism of the United Nations and the
international legal framework.
10/61

25/06/2018

Democratic, inclusive and pluralist governance
in the Middle East is a precondition for any longterm stability in the region. There is no alternative to
a political solution for conflicts in the Middle East.
Regional conflicts are often the product of and are
always fed by the lack of the rule of law and political
openness. It is imperative to create the conditions for
inclusive governance based on respect for human rights.
The case of Syria is an unfortunate and perfect
example. The regime’s long years of dictatorship over
its people created and nourished the conflict and fuelled
radicalization. The regime’s choice of repression as
a one-size-fits-all response to any dissent, its polices
of sieges and forced displacement, and its recent legal
expression under Law Number 10, cannot only lead
to diminished stability. Today, the risk of regional
escalation is real.
After seven years of war in Syria, only a political
transition based on an inclusive intra-Syrian transition,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) will allow
for an exit to the crisis and long-term stability. Any
solution ignoring that dimension will not address the
causes of the conflict. Neither France nor any of its
partners will participate in financing the perpetuation
of this unjust and unstable system. In order to achieve
an inclusive political solution, all concerned parties,
particularly small groups and the Astana guarantors,
must band together in support of the mediation of
the United Nations. France is working actively with
its partners to implement a coordination mechanism
between the two forums on the basis of three primary
priorities: allowing the establishment of a constitutional
committee that is balanced and effective; implementing
confidence-building measures leading to conditions
conducive to a political process; and preparing
free and transparent elections in which all Syrians
will participate.
We know that the vacuum left behind by the
destruction of all political spaces favoured the
emergence of terrorism in Syria, just as it did throughout
the region. The fight against terrorism is the priority in
our action in the Middle East. Da’esh, in recent months,
has suffered significant military defeats in the Levant,
thanks primarily to the action of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh, in which France has participated since
its creation. While the group has lost its essential
territorial stronghold, the fight against Da’esh in Syria
and Iraq is not yet over. In order to prevent the creation
of sanctuaries, we most sustainably stabilize the
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8293

regions liberated by the Coalition. The threat posed by
Al-Qaida in the region is also far from over. It remains
clearly present in the Arabian Peninsula.

to put an end to the breeding grounds for recruitment
by ensuring that a lack of prospects does not make a
new generation vulnerable to their rhetoric.

Apart from the military effort, France believes that
we should do better collectively in four areas in which
France spares no effort. The first matter concerns the
overwhelming number of foreign terrorist fighters. The
second issue is combating financing for terrorism. That
is why France organized an international conference
on the topic in Paris from 25 to 26 April, which led
to the international community adopting an ambitious
agenda. The third area is the propagation of the
ideology of terrorist groups, in particular through the
Internet, where there is still progress to be made, in
close partnership with the private sector. The fourth
issue is fighting impunity for crimes committed by
terrorist groups. Reaffirming the prohibition of the use
of chemical weapons is essential, while not only the
Syrian army but also the Islamic State in Syria and the
Levant and in Iraq frequently resort to such weapons.
Preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons
and their spread to non-State actors requires above all
strengthening the means available to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
establishing a new attribution mechanism to succeed the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.

In that regard, the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), among other entities, is
exemplary. Let us bear that in mind a few hours from
a pledging conference that will largely determine the
possibility for UNRWA schools to open for the next
school year. Everyone should very carefully weigh their
responsibilities in that regard. Any space in the region
left vacant by UNRWA will be filled by other actors, in
particular in Gaza, where minors make up more than
half the population.

In Libya, as in the rest of the Middle East, lasting
success against terrorist groups requires not only a
political solution and a stabilization and reconciliation
process but also strengthening and unifying national
civil and security institutions under the control of
civilian authorities. The national conference process
launched by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should make it possible to establish
the conditions necessary for elections and for the main
Libyan actors to commit to respecting the time frame
established in Paris on 29 May, in close cooperation,
of course, with Mr. Ghassan Salamé, who can count
on our full and complete support. The international
community must be unified in its support for the
commitments made.
Terrorists are also fuelled by organized crime, in
particular all kinds of trafficking. In that perspective, the
Security Council adopted individual sanctions against
a number of migrant traffickers in Libya. In order to
dry up the resources of criminal and terrorist groups,
it is necessary to combat the economy of predation
and criminalization in Libya, as well as elsewhere.
Combating terrorist groups ultimately means seeking

I come to my last point. Given all the crises
in the Middle East, it is more crucial than ever to
ensure that our approach focuses on the international
framework for crisis settlement through two pillars:
promoting multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations, on the one hand, and respect for international
law, on the other hand. In that regard, the role of the
Security Council is essential. We demonstrated that
by adopting resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as a result of
the international community’s resolve and pragmatic
and realistic multilateralism. France will continue
to meet its responsibilities for as long as Iran fulfils
its commitments. We also call for a response to our
concerns with regard to the ballistic and regional
activities of Iran. That is necessary for the security of
the region.
However, the silence of the Council with regard
to certain crises will compromise our collective
credibility in the long term. After three conflicts over
the past decade, the Gaza Strip has been on the brink
of collapse and a new escalation for several months.
In that regard, on several occasions we have called
on the Security Council for a clear message that does
not ignore either the responsibilities of Hamas or the
obligations of Israel. We regret the fact that, to date,
we have not been heard. However, we will not give up.
The recent developments cannot be disassociated from
the lack of a political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
question. It is more necessary than ever to reaffirm the
parameters of the two-State solution, to which there
is no viable alternative and which is enshrined in a
Council resolution. The ongoing settlement activity in
all its forms destroys such a prospect on the ground.
I am thinking in particular of the threat to the Khan

18-1959411/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/06/2018

Al-Ahmar community. The Security Council cannot
abandon its responsibility. France stands ready to
contribute to any new development in that regard.

dialogue for the stability of the Middle East. The future
of the Middle East and the credibility of the Security
Council are at stake.

In conflict situations, the role of the Council is
to call on all warring parties to respect the relevant
law. With regard to the situation in Yemen, we should
remind the parties of the need to respect international
humanitarian law and to protect civilians, in particular
women and children. It is imperative that the parties
ensure comprehensive and unimpeded humanitarian
access, in cooperation with the United Nations, and
protect the health infrastructure and personnel, as
resolution 2286 (2016) underscores.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Russian Federation for the opportunity to discuss
holistically the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa. I think that we all agree that many of the conflicts
in the region share root causes and complex linkages.
We agree that an approach to resolving such conflicts
that needs to consider each conflict in isolation will not
succeed. They need to be looked at in the round. I think
that we are also aware that there are some existentialist
struggles between some Member States in the region,
but not all are aggressive towards their neighbours or
commit unfriendly acts towards them.

With regard to United Nations mediation, the
Security Council has expressed its unanimous support
for the work of Special Envoy for Yemen Martin
Griffiths and for his efforts to relaunch the peace
negotiations. We remain convinced that the only lasting
resolution of the crisis in Yemen is a political solution.
That is why we should contribute and continue to call
on the parties to engage in good-faith negotiations,
facilitated by the United Nations, with a view to an
inclusive political agreement.
France is convinced that respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law is an essential
precondition for lasting peace in the Middle East.
Impunity for crimes should not and cannot be an
exception regionally. All victims of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
deserve justice. The international community must
work to that end, in particular through mechanisms
to combat impunity that it has set up created or
implemented adopted whether they be international
criminal jurisdiction, such as the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon or the International Criminal Court in the case
of Libya, or to collect evidence in order to prepare legal
proceedings, such as in the cases of Syria and Iraq, in
support of the competent national authorities or as a
substitute for them if such authorities cannot or are not
willing to do so.
In conclusion, Sir, you may rest assured of the
resolute engagement of France in that region of the
world in respect of its principles and in commitment
to its tireless efforts to address the crisis in the Middle
East. We would like to see the Security Council fully
shoulder its responsibilities. France also intends to
contribute to all efforts to establish regional dialogue
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
12/61

People have been saying that the people of the Middle
East and North Africa region should perhaps have their
own Helsinki Final Act moment. I do not want to be
prescriptive. However, I think something that brings
the region together would be very worthwhile in that
regard. We would be happy to join any consideration
of that issue. Overall our understanding of any conflict
should be shaped by an analysis that looks at the
full breadth of root causes, the role of regional and
international actors and the individual history and
circumstances of the country concerned. In turn, the
response of the Security Council and of the United
Nations as a whole to such conflicts must be holistic.
Before I turn to the Russian concept note
(S/2018/524, annex) and our own views, I would like
to start by fully endorsing the French Ambassador’s
remarks about Iran. We will have another opportunity
to talk about Iran later this week, at which time I will
expand upon my remarks. For now I would just like
to pledge the support of the United Kingdom to what
he said.
There were many points in the Russian concept note
with which we agreed. We agree that the humanitarian
consequences of the various conflicts in the Middle East
region are devastating and that the statistics released by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) are truly staggering. A total of 22 million
people are in need of assistance in Yemen, 13 million in
Syria, 1.9 million in the occupied Palestinian territories
and 1 million in Libya. The humanitarian relief efforts
of all Member States, international actors and ordinary
citizens have indeed helped to avert some suffering
but it is not enough, and, according to OCHA’s own
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

statistics, 66 per cent of humanitarian appeals are yet to
be fulfilled. We recently wrote as the United Kingdom
to the Secretary General to set our own humanitarian
contribution to the crises in the Middle East.
We continue to see examples of States restricting
access to humanitarian agencies and attacks by armed
groups on humanitarian workers. What justification
can there be for such attacks? We agree with you,
Mr. President, that humanitarian assistance should not
be politicized but, as long as such attacks continue,
it will be. Conflict has affected religious and ethnic
minorities in particular, for example, the Yazidi in
Syria and Iraq and the Baha’i in Iran and Yemen.
Terrorist actors and State institutions in the region have
been responsible for some of the worst persecutions in
history. Like you, Sir, we hope that the Security Council
can unite behind efforts to resolve conflicts peacefully.
We should do all we can as the Security Council to
support efforts made by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representatives to bring peace to the region,
make serious progress in Syria, Yemen and Libya, use
our collective and bilateral efforts to put pressure on
those who oppose or undermine such efforts and ensure
that peacekeeping missions are fit for purpose. With
regard to the Middle East peace process, which has
been mentioned by a number of speakers, we reiterate
our support for the two-State solution and look forward
to the American proposals, which we hope will be
issued soon.
There are some areas where we do not share your
views, Mr. President, as set out in the concept note. I
would like to begin this part of my statement by saying
that I have just come from the General Assembly debate
on the issue of the responsibility to protect. It strikes me
that issue goes to the heart of many of our disagreements
about how to handle conflicts. Today’s concept note calls
for a commitment to the supremacy of international law
and the need for a collective approach to the problems
of the region — and we can endorse that fully. However,
when populations are injured or persecuted because
of the actions of their own Governments, it not only
flouts international human rights law and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which every country in
the Chamber has pledged to uphold, it could also be a
precursor to a wider conflict. If the Security Council
and the international community do not take an interest
at that early stage, there is a much greater likelihood
that the situation will spiral out of control and that there
will eventually be conflict, including cross-border

S/PV. 8293

conflict, whether armed incursions or sending refugees
across borders. Ultimately there is therefore also a much
greater likelihood not just that the Security Council will
ask to take action, but that it will need to take action in
order to address the root causes. I therefore invite all
countries that do not believe that the Security Council
should review situations of human rights persecutions
in individual countries to see the logical train of where
ignoring such events is likely to lead.
If I may, I would like to quote from the preamble
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
celebrates its seventieth anniversary this year:
“... it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law”.
That is the reason why we in the United Kingdom
believe that human rights is properly relevant to Security
Council discussions on any given international peace
and security situation.
You say, Mr. President, that unilateral action is
doomed to failure. Like all of the speakers so far, we
in the United Kingdom would like to see the Security
Council take collective action, but it is blocked. And
where it is not blocked, it is subsequently disregarded.
International action cannot solely be a matter of the lowest
common denominator. Several speakers have already
mentioned Syria. We are all aware of the circumstances
in that country. The Security Council has been blocked
from holding to account those responsible for violating
international law. A draft resolution (S/2014/348) to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court was vetoed in 2014 (see S/PV.7180). This year a
draft resolution (S/2018/321) that would have allowed
the Joint Investigative Mechanism to continue its vital
work was vetoed (see S/PV.8228). The use of chemical
weapons, whether by terrorists or State actors, must be
investigated. Those responsible must be held to account,
and we would assert that much greater danger lies in
letting it be thought that chemical weapons can ever
be used as a weapon of war and that the international
prohibition on their use can be disregarded.
Furthermore, there have been reports over the
weekend of air and artillery attacks against the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria. Such
reports are deeply concerning and appear to point to
the Syrian Government. A military offensive by the
Syrian Government would be a flagrant violation

18-1959413/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the ceasefire and the de-escalation agreement in
which Russia has been involved. We urge everyone
with influence on the situation to help uphold the
commitment and to encourage restraint.
Sanctions are a vital part of the Security Council’s
arsenal. As Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations makes clear, they give very real effect to
our decisions and turn our words in the Chamber
into tangible consequences for those who threaten
international peace and security. Sanctions are not
our first resort — they are not a measure we ever take
lightly — but we know that they work. They have helped
bring peace and security to Liberia and Sierra Leone.
They helped bring Iran and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the negotiating table. And they
continue to play a vital role in the fight against Da’esh
and Al-Qaida in Iraq, Syria and beyond.
We believe that there are additional issues that would
merit discussion by the Council that are not covered in
today’s concept note, but which could underpin future
discussions by the Council on this important subject.
We agree with the Secretary-General that political
participation in the region remains weak and that we
must strengthen democratic institutions. I would like
to echo his tribute to Tunisia and endorse his words
about the problems caused by retarding economic
opportunity. A genuine holistic approach to conflict in
the region cannot ignore the issue of good governance.
Good governance from strong, stable State institutions
is the best way to maintain peace and security.
Bad governance can be devastating, and we have
seen that in a number of countries in the region. As
I was saying earlier, when Governments violate their
citizens’ human rights we know that the risk of conflict
and suffering increases. It is the Council’s responsibility
to consider and be informed on all these issues, owing to
their impact on international peace and security. As an
international community, we must support institutions
that uphold the values that the United Nations was set
up to protect and that work for the benefit of all citizens.
Lastly, I would like to say a word about postconflict reconstruction. Failure to stabilize and
reconcile communities after a prolonged conflict will
fail to restore peace and security in the long term.
It is not a trade-off between peace and justice. The
task of the Council is to help the United Nations and
countries themselves find the right way to have both
peace and justice. I think we all know that the role of
14/61

25/06/2018

women can be vital in that endeavour. International
actors, including the Security Council, play a vital
role in ensuring that limited resources are distributed
effectively in support of institutions that address the
root causes of previous conflicts.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Russian Federation for holding
today’s important meeting on situations that constitute
threats to international peace and security in the
Middle East and North Africa. We welcome Mr. Sergey
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and thank him for presiding over
today’s meeting. We also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing.
My delegation hopes that today’s debate will
provide an opportunity for the members of the Security
Council to hold a constructive dialogue on the root
causes and dynamics that fuel the conflicts that these
regions are facing. These exchanges should also enable
the Council to consider collective actions that would
bring these conflicts to an end in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. The
situations in the Middle East and North Africa continue
to be marked both by the persistence of old conflicts and
the emergence of new ones, whose asymmetrical and
complex nature requires concerted action by the United
Nations and regional organizations, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly Chapter VIII.
In addition to the decades-long Israeli-Palestinian
crisis, there are conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen.
My delegation notes with regret the lack of political
prospects for resolving the various conflicts, the
shortage of democratic governance, the stalemate in
peace processes, the high geopolitical and religious
tensions and the humanitarian tragedies that the people
of the region are enduring. The emergence of peripheral
and non-State actors, including armed groups and such
terrorist organizations as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front
and the Islamic State, presents threats to security and
stability, not only in the Middle East and North Africa,
but worldwide.
My delegation would like to emphasize that it is
through unity that the Security Council could be in a
position to play a leading role in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa, and indeed anywhere else in the world. In this
regard, my country deplores the lack of unity in the
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council, particularly on the problem of Syria, the Iranian
nuclear issue and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, my
delegation is of the view that the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, adopted on 14 July 2015, constitutes a
solid guarantee for the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and for
regional and global peace and security. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore urges all the parties to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action to resolve any disagreements with
respect to the implementation of its provisions through
negotiations within the joint commission provided for in
the agreeement’s annex IV. In this regard, we welcome
all initiatives aimed at finding a peaceful, lasting and
satisfactory solution for all concerned with the Iranian
nuclear issue.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its position in support of a twoState solution, in which Israel and Palestine coexist in
peace and security on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We therefore call on Israelis and
Palestinians to renounce violence and unilateral action,
which only make the prospects increasingly remote of
resuming political dialogue with a view to reaching a
peaceful solution to a conflict that has lasted too long.
My country also urges the Council to play its role to the
full, in order to stimulate a new dynamic in the search
for a negotiated solution to this crisis.
The conflict in Syria continues to crystallize tensions
and polarize the Security Council, particularly with the
recurrent allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by the warring parties. The absence of an independent
mechanism for accountability and the fight against
impunity remains a major challenge for the Council. It
is vital that we overcome our differences with a view to
establishing an independent international mechanism
for investigating the use of chemical weapons, in Syria
and throughout the world. My country also reiterates
its support for the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura aimed at resuming a political dialogue on
the basis of the Geneva process, as prescribed by the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
With regard to the situation in Yemen, my
delegation deplores the dire humanitarian situation
in the country and the military escalation around the
port city of Hudaydah. We remain convinced that
there can be no alternative to a political solution in
Yemen. We therefore urge the various parties to end

S/PV. 8293

hostilities and engage meaningfully so as to achieve a
political settlement of the crisis as part of the efforts
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths.
With regard to Libya, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates
its support for the Action Plan of the Special
Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We urge the
international community to give it its full support in
order to advance the national reconciliation process and
lay the foundations for lasting stability and peace in
Libya through an inclusive democratic process.
We believe that the persistence of these crises
reflects the limitations of the international community in
providing appropriate responses to these various armed
conflicts, which are factors of instability at the regional
and international levels. This situation undermines the
confidence of international public opinion in the ability
of the Security Council to restore peace and stability
in those regions, whose peoples have been affected by
years and even decades of conflict. From Afghanistan
to Yemen, Syria, Palestine and Libya, the Council is
struggling to meet its responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security because of the
numerous blockages to which it is often subjected, even
though civilian populations are dealing with extreme
humanitarian situations where violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are a daily
reality for them.
In the face of those blockages, which have rendered
joint action ineffective and promoted unilateral
initiatives, my delegation reaffirms its commitment
to multilateralism, which is the most effective way to
achieve lasting peace and development that benefits
everyone. In this regard, we particularly recommend
five areas to focus on: first, respect for the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including the
peaceful settlement of conflicts; secondly, the use of
dialogue and political solutions as the preferred means
of resolving crises; thirdly, collaboration with regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations; fourthly, identification
of the root causes of conflicts and a holistic approach
to their resolution that integrates regional actors and
strategies for development and combating poverty; and
lastly, a coordinated fight against terrorism and violent
extremism and the prevention of the spread of weapons
of mass destruction.

18-1959415/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

The current situation of conflicts in the world could
give rise to scepticism with respect to the Security
Council’s ability to provide lasting responses to the
conflicts that the world is mourning.
Côte d’Ivoire, which in the recent past has been
a focus of the Security Council’s attention, remains
convinced that wherever the Council has been able
to demonstrate unity and act with firmness, it has
been able to effectively rise to security and stability
challenges and put an end to the suffering of thousands
of people.
We would say in conclusion that the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
play a leading role in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa. In
that regard, regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the African Union must be fully
involved in the prevention and peaceful settlement of
disputes through the establishment and strengthening
of a strategic partnership between the United Nations
and such organizations.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
the Secretary-General for his important briefing
this morning.
We are grateful to our Russian colleagues for this
opportunity to explore the root causes of conflict in
the Middle East. This meeting is timely because today
Russia has the ability to stop the military escalation
that is happening in the region as we speak. As noted
by the representative of the United Kingdom, in Syria
the Al-Assad regime has launched an offensive in the
south-west de-escalation zone negotiated by Jordan,
Russia and the United States. Yet again we are seeing
the Syrian regime launch airstrikes and artillery,
barrel-bomb and rocket attacks that are displacing tens
of thousands of people. Russia itself launched airstrikes
in that zone over the weekend, in clear violation of an
agreement that was meant to save lives and promote a
political solution in Syria.
The ceasefire reflects a commitment between
President Trump and President Putin, and the United
States remains determined to uphold our commitment.
On a day when Russia has asked us to talk about the
root causes of conflict in the Middle East, we expect
Russia to do its part to uphold the ceasefire that it
helped establish.
16/61

25/06/2018

Before going further, it is worth noting the
enormous positive contributions that the peoples of the
Middle East have made to the world. It is a region of
ancient civilizations that has given us all so much. In
the arts, in language, in science and in philosophy, in
religion, the world owes a great deal to the people of the
Middle East.
Conflict has many roots, and in the Middle East, for
too many decades, brutal dictatorships and authoritarian
Governments have denied basic human rights to their
people. That has inevitably caused conflict. Violent
religious fanaticism from non-governmental groups,
as well as from some Governments, has also caused
conflict. Lack of economic development and economic
opportunity is a source of conflict.
This is, of course, not a new topic for the Security
Council, though it is my first chance to participate in
this debate. Each month the Council has a meeting on
the Middle East, at which the United States tries to
drill down on precisely this question of root causes.
In these debates, the United States has raised the issue
of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the suffering
of the people there. What is at the root of this crisis?
Hamas, a terrorist group that took power in 2007, has
since served as the de facto authority in Gaza. In the
11 years that followed, Hamas has demonstrated far
more interest in initiating violence than in caring for
the Palestinian people.
The United States has also taken the opportunity
in these debates to talk about the widespread and
unacceptable use of civilians, including women and
children, as human shields in conflicts throughout the
Middle East.
At the root of these conflicts are groups such as
Hamas and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
which are willing to make a ruthless, bloodthirsty
tradeoff: they sacrifice innocent civilians in order to
accomplish their political objectives. Children and
families are either used to provide cover for their
military infrastructure or become victims of attacks
intended to rally the international media to their
overlords’ cause, either way ensuring that emotions
harden and conflicts continue.
The United States has also used this monthly
meeting to talk about the key missing ingredient for
peace in the Middle East. That ingredient is leaders
with the will to do what is needed to achieve peace. The
Middle East needs more leaders like Egypt’s President
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Anwar Sadat — leaders who are willing to step forward,
acknowledge hard truths and make compromises. The
Middle East needs more leaders like Jordan’s King
Hussein, who in 1994 created a peace that survives to
this day.
We have raised another major cause of conflict
in the Middle East, namely, the role of Iran and its
partner militia Hizbullah. In war zone after war zone
and terrorist act after terrorist act, we find Iran and
Hizbullah at the root of violence in the Middle East. We
have talked about the arsenal of war being amassed in
Lebanon. Its source is Iran and Hizbullah.
We have talked about Bashar Al-Assad’s and
the Syrian regime’s war against the Syrian people.
These were people who protested peacefully in 2011
for economic opportunity, political rights and basic
human dignity. Their noble pursuit, however, was met
with brutal violence in the form of torture, starvation,
barrel bombs, chemical weapons and the denial of
humanitarian and medical assistance. Standing behind
Al-Assad, and fighting alongside his troops, are
Hizbullah, Iran and Russia.
The United States has also used these monthly
meetings on conflict in the Middle East to highlight
Iran’s repeated and blatant violations of resolution 2231
(2015) and others. The Security Council unanimously
prohibited Iran from transferring weapons to other
countries, and yet Iran is the source of weapons in
conflicts across the region, from Yemen to Syria to
Lebanon. The Security Council unanimously called on
Hizbullah to disarm, but the leaders of Hizbullah talk
openly about the continuing support they receive from
Iran. In the words of one Hizballah leader,
“Everything Hizbullah eats and drinks, its weapons
and rockets, comes from the Islamic Republic
of Iran”.
Later this week, the Council will meet to talk
about the Secretary-General’s latest report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The findings
of the report provide even more evidence of Iran
fuelling conflicts with the supply of banned weapons.
These are the root causes of conflict in the Middle
East: leadership that is unwilling to compromise; Hamas
terrorists who sacrifice the well-being of civilians for
their own militant objectives; Hizbullah terrorists who
roam the Middle East like a rogue, mercenary army;
and a regime in Iran that seeks political, military and

S/PV. 8293

territorial advantage through the spread of violence and
human misery. What ties it all together is the people’s
lack of voice in their own governance. The people who
pay the price of conflict have little or no say in when or
if it ends. And those who stand to gain from conflict,
such as the regime in Tehran, pay no penalty for the
suffering they cause.
And when the people of Syria and Iran have
risen up to demand that their Governments respect
their rights, they have been met with arrest, torture
and murder. It is this oppression — these violations
of human rights — that are the ultimate root of the
conflicts. And yet there is reason to hope. The desire
for human dignity and fundamental human rights is a
powerful force.
As the sponsor of today’s meeting, the Russian
Federation itself a testament to this phenomenon. Its
predecessor State, the Soviet Union, was among the
most oppressive and brutal Governments in the world.
After more than 70 years of being denied their basic
human rights and human dignity, the Russian people,
as well as the Ukrainian people, the people of the Baltic
States and the people of the Central Asian republics,
finally had their say.
The
great
American
columnist
Charles
Krauthammer, who, tragically, passed away a few days
ago, once wrote that discussions of root causes can lead
to despair, because root causes are difficult to change,
if they can be changed at all. While I appreciate this
analysis, I urge that we not walk away from today’s
meeting in despair, but instead that we go with a
broadened understanding of the sources of conflict
in the Middle East and a renewed determination to
change them.
The United States believes peace is possible
because we believe in the right of people to govern
themselves. We will continue to pursue the causes of
peace, freedom and human rights in the Middle East,
and, with these, an end to the conflicts that have for too
long plagued the people of this great region.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like at the
outset to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and the Russian presidency for having convened today’s
very important debate.
We are gathered this morning at a time of roiling
tensions across the globe, especially in the Middle East

18-1959417/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

and North Africa. Many conflicts exist that represent
a threat not just to the region but also to international
peace and security. We are speaking here of the
situations in Syria, Libya, Yemen, Iraq and Palestine,
as well as of cross-cutting issues such as the threat of
terrorism, the alarming number of displaced persons
and refugees and the trafficking and smuggling of
persons, among others.
In the case of Syria, the conflict has been going on
for eight years, and we are not seeing any letup in the
constant siege and violence against the Syrian people,
mainly children, who, in addition to living with the
psychological consequences of that situation, are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. The crisis has
generated more than 500,000 deaths since its inception.
In the case of Libya, we are facing a conflict
where violations of international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed. It should be noted that this reality continues
to have repercussions on the situation of instability in
the Sahel region, which is the cause of many challenges
in that part of Africa.
The Palestinian question is without a doubt, as some
of our colleagues have mentioned, at the heart of the
conflicts in the Middle East, and not only because of its
long history, which dates back more than 70 years, but
rather because as long as that issue is not resolved, there
can be no truly sustainable peace in the region. The
core issue that runs through the Palestinian question is
the occupation by Israel of territories that do not belong
to it, including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. That
poses a threat to the lives of Palestinian and Israeli
civilians and threatens the security of the entire region.
We are convinced that the only long-term way to put
an end to the situation of occupation in which Palestine
lives is the two-State solution in which a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State is finally established
with the pre-1967 international borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
I turn now to the consequences of conflicts, chief
among them are the humanitarian crises, as is the
case in Yemen, where more than 8 million people are
at risk of famine and 60 per cent of the population is
experiencing food insecurity and where a cholera
outbreak has affected more than 1 million people.
These conflicts have also created millions of displaced
persons and refugees who, while fleeing violence
18/61

25/06/2018

in search of safety, often become victims of human
trafficking. That is the case in Libya, where there has
been evidence of cases of slavery.
Another consequence of this situation is the
proliferation of terrorist groups, who, by taking
advantage of Government vacuums, the weakness
and lack of capacity of law enforcement and security
forces, and the lack of border control have found spaces
to impose their violent ideology, commit crimes and
perpetrate serious violations of human rights, which
could constitute crimes against humanity.
We also believe that it is important to talk about
the root causes of these conflicts. If we analyse all
those conflicts, we can find a common denominator.
The policies of regime change, interventionism and
interference in the internal affairs of States have been
some of the main causes, as we already mentioned
with regard to the spread of terrorism, of governance
vacuums and have weakened the forces of law and order
and security and resulted in a lack of border control,
which has enabled chaos to emerge.
We reiterate that the use of unilateral actions is
contrary to international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitutes a flagrant violation of multilateralism and
a serious threat to the international order. Unilateral
actions are illegal measures that extend the domestic
jurisdiction and legislation of one State over another, in
violation of the principles of equality, sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of States. In other words, there
cannot be a double standard, and one cannot claim to
uphold international law by violating it.
In essence, one of the reasons for the use of
unilateral actions and regime change policies in the
region is the search for control and ownership of natural
resources and geopolitical control. Sovereign control
and management of natural resources is paramount to
the cessation of hostilities and economic development.
When a country maintains effective control over its
resources and there is political will, it is possible to
achieve structural change leading to stabilization and
the strengthening of the rule of law.
Finally, Bolivia, as advocate of respect for
international law and the culture and the right to peace,
supports the use of peaceful means for the settlement of
disputes, including good offices, preventive diplomacy,
multilateralism, non-interference and respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

States. Those are universal principles recognized by
the international community and constitute effective
tools to prevent the scourge, not only of war and its
consequences, but also of the various conflicts resulting
from the root causes I described here.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
welcoming this opportunity to exchange views on this
important topic. We thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
We align ourselves with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later in the debate.
The people of the Middle East and North Africa
region continue to suffer the dire consequences of
cycles of conflict. That not only affects the countries
in the region individually, but also collectively, as
the conflicts are often intertwined. Moreover, what
happens in the region has a profound and immediate
impact on the rest of the world.
With so much at stake, our collective ambition in
addressing these conflicts should be consistently high.
The focus should not be on extinguishing fires when
they occur, but on preventing the fires before they
ignite. That means looking closely at both the spark and
the combustible elements. It also means addressing the
root causes of conflicts.
In that regard, I will touch upon three aspects: first,
the universality of human rights; secondly, integrated
conflict prevention; and, thirdly, ending impunity.
My first point concerns the universality of human
rights and the importance of inclusive societies. Human
rights are universal for a reason, as is our collective
responsibility to promote and protect them. If human
rights are denied, they affect our individual dignity,
fuelling discontent and conflict. But if human rights
are respected, they ground democratic and inclusive
societies, nurturing harmony and stability. That holds
true for all regions of the world.
The people in the Middle East and North Africa
know what helps to stabilize their societies: the rule of
law, accountable governance and respect for minorities.
Historically many countries in the region are places
where religious and other minorities prospered living
together. The current turbulence is an extra reason to
seek practical ways to re-engage communities and to
promote mutual tolerance. A good example is intra- and
interfaith dialogue.

S/PV. 8293

My second point concerns integrated conflict
prevention by addressing political and socioeconomic
grievances. The conflicts in the region are
interconnected. That is why it is important that the
United Nations and the international community have
an integrated approach to prevention. Regional tensions
should be tackled more structurally through dialogue
and mediation. Within his good-offices mandate the
Secretary-General can play an enhanced role, but the
responsibility to improve relations and strengthen
dialogue lies primarily with the region itself.
Work also needs to continue on addressing a
wide range of political and socioeconomic grievances
in each country, in line with 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Such grievances catalyse
radicalization and conflict, and they are not new.
Since 2002, Arab scholars have challenged the
Governments in their region in successive editions
of the Arab Human Development Report to overcome
three deficits: first, the freedom deficit; secondly, the
deficit in the empowerment of women; and, thirdly,
the knowledge deficit. Governments and international
organizations should pay particular attention to women
and girls, and there should be enough space for civil
society to play its important role. Integrated conflict
prevention also means looking at broader issues, such
as climate change and water scarcity. They too can be
drivers of conflict in the region.
My third point concerns ending impunity by
strengthening accountability. There can be no
sustainable peace without justice. The question is how
to get there, in a region mired in ongoing conflict and
impunity. In countries where there is progress, attention
often shifts quickly to reconstruction, but in our view
transitional justice is just as important, especially in
achieving sustainable peace. We very much welcome
all Government and civil-society initiatives to that
end. Some of the crimes committed in the region
are particularly grave. We need to ensure that those
responsible for atrocity crimes are prosecuted and
brought to justice. That applies to all parties to the
armed conflict, including fighters from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant suspected of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The perpetrators of
crimes must be held to account, irrespective of which
side they are on in any particular conflict. Fair and
independent investigations and prosecutions are key.
Unfortunately, we have to conclude that at the moment
serious violations of international law in the region,

18-1959419/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

which include a consistent disregard for international
humanitarian law and the horrific use of chemical
weapons, continue to go unpunished. The Security
Council should not allow that to happen, and we regret
the use of the veto that has blocked the Council’s
effective action in that regard.
In conclusion, in addressing the root causes of
conflict in the region, we have to be ambitious. It will
require all of us to make a steadfast and long-term
commitment to protecting human rights, ensuring
stronger conflict prevention and ending impunity. Only
through collective perseverance will sustainable peace
in the region prevail.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Russian presidency for convening today’s meeting and
for the concept note (S/2018/524, annex), which calls on
us to consider the root causes of conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa with a view to addressing them
in a more comprehensive and effective way and in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In
particular, we would like to acknowledge your presence,
Mr. Deputy Minister, and to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his important briefing.
As a country steeped in its Hispanic heritage, Peru
maintains historical ties with the countries of the Middle
East and North Africa. We recognize the continuum,
from Morocco to the Persian Gulf, of a rich cultural,
religious and ethnic diversity and we want to highlight
the continuing desire for peace and prosperity of the
region’s peoples. Any society or region can always
achieve sustainable peace with the firm support of the
international community, especially in the case of the
various communities of the Middle East and North
Africa region, which have always demonstrated a great
capacity for resilience. The work of the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, must begin with a
comprehensive analysis of the root causes of conflicts,
which, in many cases, are aggravated by political
instability, lack of development, intra-regional rivalries
and the presence of violent extremism. In that regard,
Peru underscores the importance of ensuring that our
Organization can achieve greater coherence, efficiency
and effectiveness in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. To that end, we propose what we consider
three priority areas for action.
The first is about ensuring the validity of
multilateralism and international law. Peru believes
that with regard to the maintenance of international
20/61

25/06/2018

peace and security, the Council must always live up to
the important responsibilities that the Charter of the
United Nations confers on it as well as ensure that its
mandated decisions are implemented. We emphasize
the binding character of international humanitarian
law in any conflict, as well as the need to preserve the
regimes for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and to strengthen international cooperation
so as to effectively combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
We also want to emphasize the Council’s
responsibility for protecting civilian populations
from atrocity crimes when national Governments lack
the capacity or will to fulfil the basic responsibility
of protecting their own people. In accordance with
the Charter, we also emphasize the importance of
preventive diplomacy, the prerogatives conferred on
the Secretary-General and the mechanisms for the
peaceful settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter
VI, including recourse to the International Court of
Justice. Peru believes that in a world characterized
by an increasing level of interdependence, timely and
predictable action on the part of the United Nations is
essential to ensuring the effectiveness of a rules-based
collective security system that in turn is essential to
sustaining peace in any given country or region.
Our second point concerns the building and
strengthening of peaceful and inclusive societies
administered by transparent and accountable
institutions. The concept of sustainable peace is
based on building a common vision for a society
while ensuring that the needs of all sectors of the
population are considered, which entails establishing
inclusive institutions capable of preventing and
resolving the conflicts that naturally arise in any
society. It also entails having the capacities to meet the
people’s expectations, acknowledging their legitimate
aspirations and protecting and promoting their human
rights — especially those of minorities — as well as
promoting development centred on the individual
and human dignity. We underscore the importance
of involving women and young people in building a
common vision for a future that is able to break the
vicious cycles of present and past conflicts as well as
the need to redouble efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as adopted by the Organization.
Lastly, our third point concerns the promotion of
new regional dynamics. Peru acknowledges that the
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries of the Middle East and North Africa face
significant challenges in achieving sustainable peace
that can lead to serious threats to international peace
and security, in particular with regard to those posed by
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. However,
far from condemning those regions to an endless
recurrence of their conflicts, history shows us that in
many periods and contexts, the peoples of the Middle
East and North Africa have been able to prosper in
peace and harmony while preserving their rich cultural,
ethnic and religious diversity.
In conclusion, I want to point out how important it
is to ensure that those countries, in line with Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, can depend on regional
mechanisms capable of fostering the dialogue and
confidence required to peacefully resolve their disputes
and, ultimately, ensure their peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join
other delegations in thanking the Russian Federation
for providing us with the opportunity to discuss this
timely and important topic. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, for presiding over
today’s meeting. And we appreciate the insightful
briefing by the Secretary-General and his and his
staff’s commitment to advancing peace and security in
the Middle East.
I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.
The crucial importance of the Middle East dates
back to ancient times. Several major religions have their
origins in the Middle East, including the three main
monotheistic ones — Christianity, Judaism and Islam.
Unfortunately, the region has also experienced tension
and conflict for many years and today we still face
on-going turmoil in various parts of the Middle East.
That is why it is so crucial — not just for the
Security Council, but for the whole United Nations
community — to address challenges facing the region
and their root causes. In that context, let me underline
that, while tackling the ongoing conflicts in the region,
we must remember the nexus between the three pillars of
the United Nations — peace and security, development
and human rights. They are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. In the longer term, there can be no longterm peace in the Middle East without development and
the protection of human rights.

S/PV. 8293

We believe that, in order to bring us closer to
peace and to stimulate development, we should focus
on the education of future generations, those who will
be responsible for the future of the region. It can be
an important conflict prevention tool for deterring
extremism and radicalization, particularly among
youth. In that context, we would also like to underline
the need for women’s empowerment as a crucial element
for advancing the development of the whole society.
Another factor that should be taken into consideration
is institution building and the strengthening of good
governance. Those elements play a crucial role in the
effective implementation of policies aimed at economic
and social development and the full enjoyment of
human rights, including social and economic rights in
the Middle East.
Like many times before in the Chamber, we
also stress a need for full respect for international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians.
The full implementation of the humanitarian imperative
is needed to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. Therefore, allow me to underscore that peace
can scarcely be achieved without justice, including
ending impunity and ensuring accountability. All
perpetrators of grave international crimes committed
in the course of the conflicts in the region should be
identified and held accountable.
We are also deeply concerned that the members
of religious minorities in the Middle East, such as
Yazidis and Christians, are particularly vulnerable and
are far too often targeted victims of conflicts in the
region. Poland strongly condemns violence targeting
members of religious minorities in the Middle East.
Such violence must stop and its perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We deplore the misuse of religion for
political purposes.
Furthermore, we call for the development and
strengthening of regional political, economic and
cultural cooperation, which would benefit all engaged
countries. In our opinion, it would create a win-win
situation where all disputed matters could be resolved
in a peaceful manner through dialogue.
Let me now focus on more specific parts of the
region. In Syria, in order to reach an appropriate
solution to the conflict, it is necessary to understand the
root causes that led to the outbreak of peaceful protests
that turned into armed hostilities back in 2011. In our
view, the main causes of the conflict were the lack of

18-1959421/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

significant improvement of living conditions in Syria,
inequality, poverty, the lack of individual security,
nepotism and the denial of basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Those causes led to widespread
protests that turned into armed struggle.
What should the solution be? We believe that what
is needed in order to stop the armed struggle and to
put Syria back on the road of sustainable development
is national consensus concerning political transition.
That can be achieved only through direct talks between
representatives of the Syrian opposition and the
authorities in Damascus that could lead to a mutually
acceptable agreement on political transformation.
While supporting direct involvement by the United
Nations in bringing the war in Syria to an end, we
also see its role as a facilitator of a process that would
result in the adoption of a new Syrian constitution.
Reaching a political agreement on a democratic,
pluralistic and open-to-all-citizens State could create
adequate conditions for the return of Syrian refugees
and their participation in elections and the rebuilding
of the country.
Last but not least, let us not forget that the key to
an effective and inclusive reconciliation process in
Syria is delivering justice for the victims. Holding the
perpetrators of the grave crimes committed accountable
remains the sine qua non condition for achieving
lasting peace.
With regard to Libya, Poland underscores the
important role of the United Nations in facilitating
a Libyan-led political solution to the challenges the
country is facing. Therefore, we fully support the
comprehensive and thoughtful engagement of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to facilitate the process of national
reconciliation in Libya.
I would like to underline that Poland has always
strongly supported all initiatives aimed at stabilization
and strengthening peace and security in the Middle
East. For that reason, we have kept the Middle East
peace process high on our agenda.
On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we believe
that the revitalization of the Middle East Quartet and
increased United Nations involvement are steps in the
right direction. A negotiated two-State solution and
resolving final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the Palestinian refugees, borders and
22/61

25/06/2018

security arrangements, still remain a realistic way to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieve long-term peace.
We condemn all acts of terror and incitement
to violence, including rocket-firing into Israel, and
we call on all parties to meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including protecting
civilians and the proportionate use of force.
We reiterate once again that both the Israelis and
the Palestinians have a right to live in peace and safety.
We should strive to strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region, especially Egypt and Jordan,
which have a real impact on the de-escalation of
tensions in Israeli-Palestinian relations.
With regard to Iraq, we have always been supportive
of the reconstruction and development efforts undertaken
by the Iraqi Government and international partners,
which range from humanitarian assistance, investment
and private sector development, military cooperation
and cultural heritage conservation. We strongly believe
that those efforts should be accompanied by promoting
inclusiveness and reconciliation among all components
of Iraqi society, based on justice and accountability,
the rule of law, respect for human rights, tolerance and
peaceful coexistence among all religious and ethnic
communities in Iraq.
We welcome the progress made in relations between
Baghdad and Erbil and in the holding of parliamentary
elections in May. We call on all political actors to
resolve electoral disputes through the established legal
channels and to cooperate constructively in the swift
formation of a new, inclusive Government that would
work towards political, economic and social reforms
and further advance stabilization and reconstruction.
We would also like to congratulate all Iraqi citizens
who took responsibility for determining the future of
their country by casting their votes.
With regard to Yemen, we are deeply alarmed by
the continued deterioration of the humanitarian and
security situation in the country. We emphatically
stress the importance of the full and sustained opening
of all Yemen’s ports, including Hudeidah and Saleef
ports, to all commercial and humanitarian imports,
including food, fuel and medical supplies. We urge all
parties to fully respect the principles of international
humanitarian law and to ensure the protection
of civilians.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

There is no military solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We call for the resumption of the United
Nations-facilitated intra-Yemeni inclusive political
process, while reaffirming our strong support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths. We call on all parties to engage
constructively with his efforts. We reiterate the
necessity of the full implementation of all aspects of the
arms embargo, as required under the Security Council
resolutions. We condemn the ballistic missile attacks
by the Houthis against Saudi Arabia.
On Iran, we believe that it is in our common
interests to stabilize the situation in the Middle East,
reduce tensions in the region and, most important,
prevent further proliferation of nuclear weapons. In
our view, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) is an important step towards achieving one
such objective — nuclear non-proliferation. Moreover,
it has become an important element of the global
non-proliferation architecture. The JCPOA does not
explicitly prohibit the development of delivery systems
or address the question of Iranian influence in the
region, which some countries perceive as negative.
In that connection, Iran should refrain from actions
that are not in the spirit of the JCPOA and that could
undermine the implementation of the commitments
under the Plan of Action. That is why Poland shares the
concerns about Iranian activities undertaken contrary
to the provisions of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
as meticulously reported by the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of peace and security in the Middle East. We believe
that more needs to be done by all of us, in particular
regional actors, to find lasting peaceful solutions to all
regional conflicts and challenges.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence of Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. We
also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General.
Equatorial Guinea very much appreciates the convening
of this meeting by the Russian Federation because it
allows us to analyse the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa impartially.
The overall situation in the Middle East and North
Africa greatly influences the stability and security
in other regions of the world. Achieving peace and

S/PV. 8293

stability in those regions should therefore become
the foremost priority of the international community.
The complexity of the situation lies in the fact that
it involves political, religious, ethnic and economic
aspects. The most direct repercussions are seen in
human tragedies, terrorist threats, migration crises and
so on, which, moreover, also transcend the borders of
the areas directly affected.
The importance of meetings such as today’s lies in
the fact that they give us an opportunity to at least recall
that such problems exist and that the Security Council,
which is mandated to find viable and common solutions
to issues, is expected to do its utmost to find lasting
solutions wherever peace and security in the world
are threatened. I believe that I am right in saying that
the peoples of the Middle East and North Africa pin
their hopes for peace, security and stability on action
by the Security Council. Implementing and achieving
a lasting and satisfactory resolution of conflicts may
be complex. However, the Security Council is the most
appropriate body to undertake that complex task.
The continuation of many of the ongoing conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa is today fuelled
not only by the differences of the parties to the conflict
but also by the lack of a common position on the part
of the international actors with influence in the region.
My delegation therefore urges the members of the
Security Council to come closer together and to seek
common ground so that the Council can facilitate and
promote work towards a lasting resolution of such
issues. The situation in the Middle East, specifically
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, has continued for
more than 70 years, with all its ups and downs and
complexities. We have seen many victims, destruction
and so on. So much violence has not led to anything
positive. However, the only viable solution is for the
parties to sit at the negotiating table and seek a political
solution to their differences. That solution means the
establishment of two States — one Palestinian and
the other Israeli — living side by side in peace. Both
parties must respect each other’s right to exist. The
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the legal instruments that support
such proposals.
The Libyan crisis, which has already had a negative
impact on the southern part of its territory, since its
repercussions have further exacerbated the ongoing
problems in those areas. There has also been a negative
impact on the northern part of the country in the form

18-1959423/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

of migration crises that European countries face today.
The worst aspect is the human trafficking that we are
seeing. It is positive to note that the Libyan political
actors are now seeking to resolve such problems through
a political process, which, we hope, will be successful.
The Syrian crisis has also lasted for a number of
years, with all its complexities. The suffering must
come to an end. The Syrians themselves must be able
to find and decide upon the best solution for their
country, clearly with the support of the international
community, by which I mean the Security Council.
As the Secretary-General underscored this morning,
everyone’s wish is to see a democratic and strong Syria
that can fulfil its clear potential in peace.
The numbers of people fleeing from such conflicts
are becoming increasingly problematic. Today we see
how Syrian refugees flee to neighbouring countries and
beyond. It is impossible to contain the humanitarian
consequences as a result of the lack of political solutions.
What is needed is a political solution that puts an end
to that human suffering. The neighbouring countries
hosting millions of Syrians deserve our praise. We
would also urge the Syrian stakeholders to continue the
dialogue, however difficult it may be.
Long-term conflicts, such as that of Yemen,
Lebanon and Iraq, where the use of weapons has
claimed numerous human lives, as well as causing
great material damage and forced displacement, must
be dealt with under international human rights law.
The adoption of local measures of partial and limited
scope is not the answer. The solution is consistent and
coordinated international efforts. We believe that all
such conflicts should be resolved through direct and
frank negotiations.
Terrorism has been a common denominator of
all the crises, both in North Africa and in the Middle
East. In that regard, the international community must
remain united and combat that scourge, which has only
aggravated the human tragedy in that region. As the
Ambassador of Ethiopia emphasized this morning,
it is pleasing to note that the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the region has
significantly decreased.
The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is not a coincidence but the result of history and
reflects structural problems that cannot be explained
only by internal situations. Many such problems have
been inherited from the past. Resolving the problems
24/61

25/06/2018

facing us requires establishing a more democratic
global structure where there are no double standards
in the pursuit of solutions. The search for solutions
should never be confused with interference in the
internal affairs of countries. The sovereignty of the
States in question must always be respected. A poor
analysis of foreign situations and wrong decisions have
unnecessarily complicated many conflicts facing us
today. None of those conflicts has a military solution.
We continue to believe that the United Nations must
play a fundamental role through all its mechanisms to
seek lasting solutions to such issues. Bias and groups
have no place in the various conflicts.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, we would like to welcome the
fact that you are presiding over this meeting. We would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General and thank
him for his participation and for his valuable briefing.
We thank you, Sir, for selecting the topic of today’s
debate and for the concept note (S/2018/524, annex),
which highlights many aspects of the conflicts from
which several countries suffer in the Middle East and
North Africa. Throughout history, the region has made
great and valuable contributions to human civilization.
It continues to hold geographic and historic significance
and is rich in natural resources and waterways. It has
strategic and vital significance to international security
and the global economy.
Since the beginning of the year, issues related to the
Middle East and North Africa have accounted for 46 per
cent of the Security Council’s programme of work.
We discuss those issues monthly and, at times, daily
or weekly, as needed. The number of formal meetings
and informal consultations held about them since the
beginning of the year has reached 120. We have heard
detailed briefings on the activities of peacekeeping
operations and political missions.
The State of Kuwait supports the content of the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex) with regard to the
issue of the Palestinian question as a chronic crisis at the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The fact that the issue
remains unresolved will have negative repercussions
on the security and stability of the region as a whole.
We would like to recall that this month marked half
a century of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories.
Our position with regard to the Palestinian
question and the Israeli occupation is principled and
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

constant. We need a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to the
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab territories
and to establish two States to live side by side in peace
along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine, while stressing
the importance of a solution to the refugee issue, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The solution to conflicts must be based on
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular non-interference in
the internal affairs of countries and respect for their
sovereignty. Dialogue and peaceful ways and means
should be the best way to conflict resolution.
We would like to express our deep regret about the
security, political and economic challenges in various
countries of the region, which have undermined
security and stability in the region and the world, in
particular in Syria, Yemen and Libya. The State of
Kuwait supports political solutions as outlined in
Security Council resolutions and resolutions adopted
by regional organizations, such as the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as a means to ending the suffering of the peoples and
bolstering security and stability in those countries.
The State of Kuwait knows that such conflicts and
disputes have remained unresolved and exacerbated
feelings of disappointment and frustration among
the peoples of the region. Therefore, efforts must be
redoubled to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
to those conflicts and achieve national reconciliation,
in line with the aspirations of the peoples of the region
pertaining to security, development and a free and
dignified life.
We stress the importance of following up on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions. If they
remain unimplemented, conflicts will continue and
become increasingly complex. That will also undermine
the efficiency of the Security Council and its ability
to carry out its responsibilities in accordance with
the Charter. We believe the Security Council must go
beyond its differences and remain united in its position
and implement its resolutions so that it can carry out
its historic and legal responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security.

S/PV. 8293

We recall paragraph 8 of resolution 598 (1987),
which calls on the Secretary-General to consult with
the countries of the region to put in place measures to
enhance peace and stability in the region. We believe
those measures should be based on the principles of
international law governing relations among countries,
including respect for good neighbourly relations,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
respect for the sovereignty of countries and peaceful
coexistence in order to achieve security and prosperity
for the peoples of the region.
We believe that political, security, economic
and social repercussions resulting from tensions and
security instability were limited not only to the Middle
East and North Africa, but they had also an impact on the
world’s continents in varying proportions. We see that
in the spread of several phenomena, such as terrorism,
displacement, migration and human trafficking. They
are all matters of concern to the Council and other
United Nations entities, such as the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council.
Building and sustaining peace is a main goal of
sustainable development. The State of Kuwait believes
in the importance of the culture of peace and works
to enhance respect for religious, sectarian, cultural and
civilizational diversity. According to the Global Peace
Index 2018, Kuwait ranked first in the Middle East
and North Africa. That encourages us to continue our
efforts and endeavours to operationalize the principles
of the culture of peace, in particular our commitment
to engaging in dialogue to resolve conflicts, respecting
human rights and the rule of law, eradicating poverty
and unemployment and raising awareness among
peoples of their responsibilities in combating the root
causes of terrorism and radicalization.
Despite our achievements and those of the rest of
the international community to combat terrorism, it
remains a challenge to international peace and security.
We must therefore redouble our efforts in order to rid
humankind of the evil that is terrorism. Terrorism
has no religion. It targets civilians for the purpose of
harming them and their property anywhere and anytime.
Regardless of its motives, terrorism is despicable and
is at variance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The State of Kuwait is
part of the international coalition to combat terrorism
and the so-called Da’esh. In addition to our efforts to
combat terrorism and radicalization and cut off the
sources of terrorism financing, we are working to

18-1959425/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

coordinate the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism and strengthen commitment to
international treaties and relevant Security Council
resolutions. Over the past two years Kuwait hosted
five meetings in the context of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh, and in November we will host a highlevel international conference to review the Madrid
principles, for we are committed to implementing
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2396 (2017).
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s broader debate on a region that
unfortunately makes up a very large portion of the
agenda of the Security Council and on which members
of the Council have been divided far too often.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his thought-provoking intervention earlier today on the
situation in the Middle East and North Africa.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.
Throughout history, the Middle East and North
Africa have acted as a confluence for many of the
world’s peoples and religions and as a conduit for trade
and human interaction for the benefit and advancement
of the region and beyond. In the process, the region has
gifted us an unrivalled wealth of history and culture.
Today the Middle East and North Africa region is home
to a vibrant young population, striving to be active
citizens in inclusive open societies and to build better
futures for themselves and their fellow citizens, which
brings great hope.
Yet many aspirations are still held back. Intensifying
internal conflict and sectarian violence polarize
countries across the region. Increasingly, conflicts in
the Middle East are interlinked and there is a risk of
regionalization, which could have global consequences.
The goal to create a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the region, which has been supported
by the Security Council, has not materialized. There
have been setbacks in diplomatic efforts in that area.
Sweden, together with the rest of the European Union,
will continue to fully support the nuclear agreement
with Iran and its implementation.
The challenges in the Middle East and North Africa
are taking up an increasing portion of the Council’s
agenda. At the same time, it could be argued that in
no other region has the Security Council been more
26/61

25/06/2018

divided or more flagrantly failed to live up to its
responsibilities. During our time as an elected member,
we have tried to bridge the divides and contribute to
constructive, results-oriented discussions aimed at
making a real difference on the ground. It was in that
spirit that we hosted the Secretary-General’s retreat in
Sweden in April. We came away with a renewed sense
of purpose and commitment to collective efforts. It
is only by working together that we can shoulder the
great responsibility that the Charter entrusts to the
Council. The permanent members of the Council have
a particular responsibility in this regard.
We must enhance our efforts for the millions of
civilians affected by conflict who depend on us to
uphold international law and ensure protection and
humanitarian assistance for those most in need. The
region is currently the scene of some of the worst
humanitarian disasters in modern times. Every day,
courageous humanitarian workers risk their lives
to provide assistance to people in need. For that we
are grateful, and we need to support them. The very
system that we have built over decades to protect the
most vulnerable in times of armed conflict is under
threat. The principles and rules of international
humanitarian law are frequently violated, including
through indiscriminate attacks on civilians, civilian
infrastructure and humanitarian workers, the inhuman
and degrading treatment of detained persons and
refusals to grant humanitarian access to people in need
of assistance. Even the international prohibition against
the use of chemical weapons has been violated. So far
this has been allowed to happen with impunity, but that
must change. We have a responsibility to ensure that
the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice
and held accountable.
Military strategies will not deliver sustainable
peace. Only inclusive political solutions and peaceful
settlements can end conflicts once and for all. The
brutal war in Syria is well into its eighth year. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has gone unresolved for
seven decades. The protracted conflict in Yemen has
just escalated even further. The United Nations is the
only international institution with the legitimacy and
credibility to facilitate the political processes needed
to end these conflicts. The leadership of the SecretaryGeneral and the use of his good offices is essential. We
in the Security Council must do all we can to provide
him with the support, unity and backing that he and his
Special Representatives need.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Regional and international dialogue and cooperation
must be the primary means for peacefully resolving
disputes. There is a need for a common framework in the
Middle East for discussion and cooperation on issues of
mutual interest and challenges, including security. The
experience of other regional security arrangements,
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, including with the Paris Charter, could serve
as a model, as several speakers have mentioned this
morning. Such a framework should seek to establish
common norms and a comprehensive and collaborative
concept of security. More than anything, it could help
build well-needed confidence and trust between all
the countries in the region. Such a framework could
also serve as an effective counterpart and partner for
the United Nations in its efforts to prevent conflict
and promote peace, much like in Africa, where the
close cooperation of the United Nations with the
continent’s regional organization, the African Union,
has proved essential.
The interconnected nature of the challenges we
face make international and regional cooperation not
only desirable but essential. Terrorism and violent
extremism affect us all, and we must continue our
joint efforts to fight them. That is an integral part of
the Security Council’s responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. For the fight against
terrorism to have any chance of succeeding, it must
always be conducted with full respect for international
law, including humanitarian law and human rights,
and can never be used as an excuse for indiscriminate
warfare or the inhumane treatment of detainees.
As we continue to work to end the current crises,
we must improve our ability to prevent new conflicts
from developing, which means identifying and
addressing conflict risks and drivers early, so that
we can take early action to sustain peace and prevent
conflict before emerges. These drivers include youth
unemployment — more than half the population of the
region is under 25 years old — chronic underdevelopment
and the lack of economic opportunities. However, as
we agreed when we adopted resolution 2419 (2018),
on youth, peace and security, earlier this month (see
S/PV.8277), young people can be a powerful force for
peace and prosperity. And women also have a powerful
role to play in building the region’s future. There are
established links between gender inequality, political
instability and underdevelopment. The full and effective

S/PV. 8293

participation of women at all levels is necessary to
achieve stability and sustainable development.
Indeed, we know all too well the drivers of
conflict, but that means we also know how to prevent
them. It includes building strong, unified, tolerant,
open and free societies, where respect for human rights
and legitimate and credible governance institutions
prevail. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
represents a framework for addressing the root causes
of conflict and is one of the most powerful tools we
have for economic and social development in the
Middle East and North Africa, as in every other region.
I started my remarks today recalling the cultural and
historical legacy that the Middle East and North African
region has given to the world. Today’s challenges may
be testing the resolve of the international community
and the strength of our system for collective security,
but they are not insurmountable. Meeting them will
require a determined effort on the part of the countries
of the region, as well as a willingness to compromise
and an unwavering commitment to the principle on
which our international system is built. It is a shared
responsibility, not least for the Security Council, and
we have to shoulder it too. In the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, “only he
deserves power who every day justifies it”.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would now like
to make some concluding remarks in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.
In his most recent report (S/2018/614) on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Secretary-General rightly points out that regional
conflicts are interconnected, something that many
other speakers have talked about today. He also says
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is iconic, and its
persistence helps to fuel the extremist agenda. I fully
agree with Mr. Guterres when he says that is precisely
why it is critically important to create conditions that
will enable us to bring the parties back to substantive
negotiations. In that regard, I would once again like
to recall our initiative to hold an Israeli-Palestinian
summit in Russia and our proposal to send a Security
Council mission to the region.
The effort to mobilize the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators is becoming ever more
pertinent. We firmly believe that the starting point for
our collective work should be through ensuring strict
adherence by all to the international legal foundations

18-1959427/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

formulated by the Security Council for resolving this
issue, refraining from taking unilateral steps, including
building settlements in the occupied territories, and
ending the violence. That is the only way we will be
able to open up the prospects for a two-State solution
by negotiating a package of final status issues. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza must be improved
and under the control of a legitimate Palestinian
Government. The efforts to unite Palestinians must
also be intensified.
The conflicts in Syria and Yemen are also awaiting
lasting settlements of their own. Russia and the other
guarantors of the Astana process have made a genuine
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Syria and
ensuring that it will not fall to terrorists. We now have
an opportunity to focus on the political process under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva, for which
we need constructive efforts on the part of all the
external stakeholders. At the same time, as stipulated
in the decisions of the Security Council and various
international formats, we must continue to relentlessly
combat terrorism until it is completely stamped out
in Syria.
I have listened carefully and respectfully to all
of those who have spoken so far, including to the
representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States, who expressed particular concern about what
is happening in the south-western de-escalation area
in Syria. In fact, active peace negotiations are under
way there with the opposition groups that have rejected
the terrorists, while the fight against the terrorists
themselves continues. I want to emphasize that the
Russian Federation is firmly committed to meeting
its obligations, including those related to the ceasefire
regime. No one has done more than Russia and its
co-guarantors of the Astana process to bring about a
ceasefire and reduce the level of violence, and certainly
none of the countries whose money and weapons give
aid to illegal armed groups.
I would like to point out that the de-escalation
areas, including the one in south-western Syria, which
Russia set up in coordination with the United States and
Jordan, were certainly not created in order to break up
a State Member of the United Nations or perpetuate the
presence of terrorists there. However, I regret to say that
we have been compelled to conclude that at the moment
more than 40 per cent of the south-western area’s
territory continues to be controlled by Jabhat Al-Nusra
and the Islamic State in the Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
28/61

25/06/2018

which, as we are all well aware, have been designated
terrorist groups by the Organization. There can be no
ceasefire between us and them. At the same time, we
have to once again regretfully point out that in the
year that has passed since the establishment of the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria, the United
States, in spite of the commitments it undertook, has
done nothing to support the fight against the terrorists
there.
On the Yemen crisis, I reiterate that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. We can reach a longterm settlement only by taking into account the opinions
of all of its participants. Russia is maintaining contact
with all the opposing sides and assisting the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths. There is no question that special attention
needs to be paid to resolving the severe humanitarian
and food crisis there.
Significant international efforts are required
to get the political process in Libya moving so as
to unite the country, create unified governmental
institutions and put an end to internecine clashes. Much
more also remains to be done to help Iraq overcome
the consequences of the war with ISIL and achieve
sustainable national reconciliation.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that today’s debate will contribute to finding ways to
strengthen peace and stability in the Middle East and
North Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let start by thanking the
Russian presidency for convening this important debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
and frank briefing on the situation in the Middle East.
As our Swedish colleague reminded us just a short
while ago, the region has historically been the cradle of
civilization. But today the Middle East is in deep turmoil.
The geostrategic landscape of the region is dominated
by a complex interplay of multiple and intersecting
fault lines. Competing interests and divergences among
major regional Powers have further fuelled instability
and pushed the region into a vortex of turmoil and
violence. Reconciliation among the major regional
Powers is necessary to address the growing tensions
and turmoil. Already, a combustible mix has been
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

exacerbated by big-Power rivalries, raising the danger
of wider conflict, with far-reaching consequences.
As rightly noted in the concept note (S/2018/524,
annex), the situation necessitates a comprehensive
approach
to
effectively
address
the
many
challenges — an approach that takes into account
the underlying regional and historical contexts of
each conflict and that is consistent with the norms of
international law. Anything less would not work, for
we know all too well that unilateral measures driven
by narrow interests and false assumptions have brought
only greater suffering to the people of the region.
Worryingly, instead of abandoning those flawed
policies, attempts are still being made by some external
actors to shape the region according to their own
political preferences. Nowhere is that unfortunate
spectacle more apparent than in Palestine. The twoState solution is tragically being dismantled in full
sight of the international community. The latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/614) also attests to a
familiar pattern of systematic abuse of Palestinians at
the hands of the illegal Israeli occupation.
Inaction by the Security Council is also continuing
to worsen the situation in Palestine. As the Palestinians
observed their Great Return March, the killing fields
of Gaza were drenched in the blood of over 130
innocent Palestinians. Yet the Security Council stood
as a bystander to the plight of those long-suffering
Palestinian people. That represented a dereliction by
the Council of its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. For the Palestinian
issue is not a by-product of conflict in the Middle East,
it is the primary source of instability in the region.
On 13 June, the General Assembly was called upon to
reaffirm to the Palestinians their right to safety and
protection — a right expressly recognized by several
Security Council resolutions — which the Council had
failed to endorse on 1 June.
Our discussion on the protection of civilians is not
taking place in isolation; it is a fundamental tenet of
the prevention-centric and rights-oriented work that
we carry out at the United Nations. It is therefore no
coincidence that the General Assembly is, at this very
moment, also holding a formal plenary meeting on
the responsibility to protect (see A/72/PV.100). Our
words during this debate will be weighed against the
actions that we take for the protection needs of all
civilian populations, including the people of Palestine.

S/PV. 8293

We must not allow the plight of the Palestinian people
to be betrayed at the altar of narrow and myopic
political interests.
The raging fires of conflict across the region show
no signs of abating. Amid this pervasive gloom, the
successful conduct of the parliamentary elections in
Iraq last month marks a new chapter in Iraqi democracy.
It also serves as a successful model of inclusive and
representative political participation.
As the conflict in Syria enters its eighth year, the
need for an intra-Syrian process of political engagement
is as urgent and important as ever. As much as progress
may be slow, every step forward on that path is a gain
for peace in the country.
The grim situation in Yemen also necessitates a
political outcome. The search for a political solution
must be accelerated. Over 22 million people in
the country are in need of immediate and urgent
humanitarian assistance. That fact alone reinforces the
need for such a political settlement.
The edifice of peace cannot be built without the
foundation of justice. We cannot expect some to
reap the dividends of peace when others are forcibly
deprived of the fruits of justice. As self-evident as it is,
that fallacy remains at the core of the instability in the
region, for peace is surely not a zero-sum game. We are
all insecure if some of us are vulnerable. The road to
peace in the Middle East lies in a just and fair settlement
of the Palestinian issue. That is an objective reality, not
a partisan assessment. The test of our commitment to
peace in the region lies in that acknowledgment and our
ability to act on it. It is time to stand up and be counted.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Russian presidency for organizing this debate.
A regular, comprehensive review of the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa — a region with truly
remarkable potential and a unique cultural heritage
that must be protected and preserved, but which is
marred by persistent instability — is a welcome and
necessary initiative.
As a Mediterranean country, Italy is directly
affected by such instability. For that reason, the security
challenge in the Mediterranean was a centrepiece of
our Security Council presidency last November.

18-1959429/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Our objective must be to chart a common way
forward that emphasizes the pressing need for stability
as a strategic imperative and that opens the door to
building a positive agenda of shared peace, pluralism
and prosperity and inclusion.
In Libya, our foremost priority is to assist and
support the advancement of the Libyan-owned political
and reconciliation process, with the goal of ending the
transition through the electoral process. In that context,
it is of the utmost importance that all the relevant
stakeholders remain fully aligned and unified in their
support to Special Representative Ghassan Salamé and
his action plan.
We strongly support the aspirations of the
Libyan people for stability, democracy and national
reconciliation. While there has been good progress
towards those goals, the road ahead is still challenging,
and it is clear that there are no shortcuts. The threat
of terrorism remains a key concern, as we saw from
the heinous attacks against the High National Electoral
Commission in Tripoli last month and, most recently, in
Benghazi, which we strongly condemn.
We are following with extreme concern the
evolution of the security environment on the ground in
Sebha, a crucial area in our collective effort to address
the issue of the trafficking in human beings, and in
the oil crescent, where clashes may put at risk many
important oil facilities. We are particularly worried
about the situation in Derna. We join the United
Nations in calling for an immediate ceasefire, in order
to provide humanitarian support to the population.
Preparations for elections should be advanced by
following a step-by-step and inclusive approach, first
and foremost by putting in place the necessary political,
technical and legislative measures for success. We
encourage all Libyan political actors to converge on
a shared vision for the future, based on a common
understanding of the constitutional framework,
electoral reform and a pledge to respect the legitimacy
of electoral outcomes.
We also continue to work in close partnership with
the Libyan authorities to tackle the scourge of illicit
human trafficking and disrupt its business model. Italy
has been largely alone, together with Libya, in bearing
the burden of those flows and saving countless lives
30/61

25/06/2018

at sea. That is why we are tirelessly advocating for a
truly collective response to the security challenges in
the Mediterranean, starting with illegal migration. That
is not a temporary emergency or a matter for coastal
countries alone; it is a strategic imperative, first and
foremost for the European Union and its member States,
to finally join together, with true unity of purpose and a
sense of shared responsibility.
Advancing the collective fight against traffickers
also requires working together to strengthen the
capacity of Governments in countries of origin and
transit to control their territory and borders. The United
Nations system has a key role to play in that regard.
We have been consistently working in partnership with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration to enhance their role on the ground, ensure
protection and direct assistance to migrants and
refugees, improve conditions in centres and increase
assisted voluntary returns and resettlements.
Turning to the greater Middle East, in Lebanon the
holding of parliamentary elections is an important step
to reinforcing Lebanese democratic institutions. But the
path towards stability is still long. In addition to our role
within the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we
promote the International Support Group for Lebanon
road map to support the country’s institutions and
security forces and, in that spirit, we hosted the second
Rome ministerial conference last March.
In neighbouring Syria, we continue to encourage
a genuine commitment by the Syrian partners and
international stakeholders to meaningfully engage in the
framework of the United Nations-led Geneva process.
We are also strongly committed to keeping the goal
of a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East high on
the international agenda, and we underline the pressing
need for direct negotiations between the parties, leading
to a two-State solution. The current situation in Gaza is
deeply alarming, both from a humanitarian perspective
and because of its detrimental impact on the prospects
for peace.
In Yemen, where the situation is rapidly and
alarmingly deteriorating, we remain diplomatically
engaged in promoting regional dialogue as a tool to
advance the prospects for de-escalation, and we support
the United Nations Special Envoy’s efforts to revitalize
the political process.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Lastly, we reiterate our conviction that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action represents an important
element of the global non-proliferation architecture and
a pillar of regional security. We remain committed to
the full and effective implementation of the agreement
and encourage Iran to do the same.
The challenges before us are daunting and complex,
but that should not deter us. Charting a successful path
towards enduring peace and security in the Middle
East and North Africa will have the potential to project
stability and prosperity across the three continents.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): We thank
the Russian presidency for convening this timely
debate to address the root causes of the conflicts and
serious challenges facing us in the Middle East and
North Africa region, where the Palestine question
remains at the core of our instability and is the crux
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Multilateral efforts are
urgently needed in the region to promote the realization
of a just, comprehensive and lasting solution, firmly
rooted in international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The tragedy inflicted on the Palestinian people
remains a source of intense anger, despair, mistrust and
fear, particularly across the Arab and Muslim world;
it impairs perceptions about the international system’s
fairness and fuels toxic narratives of double standards,
constituting a formidable force to be reckoned with.
Seventy years since Al-Nakba and 51 years since
the Israeli occupation began, in 1967, the sense of
injustice has only intensified, deepening with every
veto that absolves Israel, the occupying Power, of its
crimes, as again happened on 1 June (see S/PV.8274).
That has been matched by an equivalent decrease in
confidence in the Security Council’s authority, as
attempts to de-escalate violent eruptions and uphold
human rights and humanitarian principles, including
to protect civilians and advance peace efforts, are
repeatedly obstructed.
The conflict’s protraction, chiefly due to a
systemic lack of accountability for Israel’s violations
across decades, has entrenched a destructive culture
of impunity in the region, which has weakened
international norms and fuelled cyclical crises,
ensuring an environment ripe for further proliferation

S/PV. 8293

of conflict, with far-reaching political, social, economic
and security impacts.
The human cost has been immense, with profound
insecurity, suffering and humanitarian disasters
affecting the region and beyond, including as a result of
the forced displacement of millions of civilians, among
them over 5.5 million Palestine refugees. Increased
poverty and the mutation of conflicts has allowed for
the spread of extremism and terror, incited religious
conflict and undermined the potential of religion as a
force for social good. Those who deny or dismiss those
facts further fuel those phenomena and impede the
efforts to stabilize our region and find lasting solutions
that can ensure peace and security for all.
The Security Council has the duty and the capacity
to remedy this situation and launch a new reality in
the Middle East, benefiting all countries of the region,
neighbouring countries and the goal of global peace.
That must begin with action to address the crises
before us, including in the besieged Gaza Strip, and
justly resolve the Palestine question as a whole. The
parameters of that solution are well known and are
enshrined in Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. On that basis, there remains a solid
international consensus and responsibility to act. In
that connection, we recall the most recent resolution
on that issue, resolution 2334 (2016), and the Council’s
clear call for collective action as it, inter alia, urged
“the intensification and acceleration of international
and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed
at achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map and an end to the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 ” (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 9).
The Security Council’s continued failure to
advance such demands is a direct result of both Israel’s
intransigence and disrespect and the paralysis caused
in the Council by the use of the veto by one permanent
member. However, that cannot be accepted as the
norm. The Security Council must uphold the primacy
of international law and implement its resolutions. Only
within the law and through multilateralism can a just
and lasting solution for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
be found.

18-1959431/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

We condemn all unilateral measures, whether
colonial or otherwise, rejecting schemes to illegally
impose facts on the ground and forcibly impose unjust
solutions. Moreover, there is no military solution to
our conflict or any of the region’s conflicts. We reject
the politicization of humanitarian work, as has been
egregiously done to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We call for the empowerment of women and youth in
any peace initiative, and we reject attempts to falsely
equate the just cause of Palestine with terrorism. We
have publicly aligned ourselves with the global front
against terrorism.
We have never sought to force a solution, as the
occupying Power and its supporters do; we have
simply sought the law’s application to peacefully end
the conflict and achieve our rights. That is all we have
asked for at every juncture: what we are entitled to as a
people, as per the law and not beyond what is legislated
in United Nations resolutions.
For 30 years, since agreeing to the two-State
framework, we have made historic and painful
compromises and engaged in good faith in every
peace initiative and endless negotiations, adhering to a
peaceful, political and non-violent path. Despite many
setbacks, we remain firmly convinced that the Charter
of the United Nations, the law and United Nations
resolutions will be the guarantors of a just solution that
resolves all final-status issues.
Any viable peace agreement must ensure the
realization of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights
and the independence of a sovereign, contiguous State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace with the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders and
based on the pre-1967 lines, as well as a just solution
for the Palestine refugees, as per resolution 194 (III)
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We reiterate our call for a multilateral, political
process to achieve those objectives, once again
reaffirming in this Chamber our readiness to engage,
including in an international peace conference. We urge
the Security Council, based on its Council mandate, to
call on the Quartet members — the Russian Federation,
the United States, the European Union and the United
Nations as a whole — to uphold their obligations and
exert every possible effort to that end, in cooperation
with, and supported by, all regional partners concerned,
32/61

25/06/2018

the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and all peace-loving nations, with the vital good offices
of the Secretary-General.
Only through such a collective drive for peace
can we end the Israeli occupation and the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, fulfil the decades-long promise of
freedom, independence and justice for the Palestinian
people and truly contribute to peace and security in the
Middle East and North Africa and to the establishment
of a more just, stable and peaceful world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for convening this important debate. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
We have carefully listened to the statements made
during this important debate, which comes at an
exceptional time, considering the dangerous historical
juncture at which the Middle East has arrived since
many wears. This turning point is characterized by an
unprecedented threat to the security, stability, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region. The
situation is further worsened by the attempts of some
parties to undermine the concept of the nation State
as recognized by international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, including through efforts to
establish sectarian allegiances on doctrinal, racial or
tribal grounds to create zones of influence that serve
the narrow interests of some parties from within and
outside the region.
There is no doubt that the selective manner in which
the Security Council has addressed the key issues of the
Middle East, as well as its evident double standards, has
significantly contributed to the degree of deterioration
and instability that the region has reached.
It is not my intention here to separately address
each one of the multitude of crises in the region, since
they are well known to all and are being discussed in
a great amount of detail at the relevant meetings of the
Security Council. In fact, it might be better to utilize
this meeting to assess the situation holistically and
attempt to adopt a comprehensive approach.
Everybody knows that reaching a just and
sustainable solution to the Palestinian question, on the
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and past agreements, remains the utmost priority and a
necessary condition for achieving peace and security
in the region. The continued occupation and the
persistent unilateral measures that violate international
legitimacy are the most prominent reasons for terrorism
and chaos. Moreover, ignoring the Palestinian question
is helping some parties to exploit it in order to achieve
internal political gains and cover up negative regional
policies. Furthermore, the major international Powers’
blind eye to Israel’s refusal to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons makes the
region vulnerable to conflicts, arms races and pretexts
for foreign intervention.
In that context, I would like to highlight an
outstanding model that was set by Egypt after reaching
a peace treaty with Israel, about 40 years ago following
five consecutive wars. Perhaps the first lesson to be
taken from that experience is that peace would not have
been possible without Egypt regaining all of its lands
and the reciprocation of specific political and security
guarantees. That proves that the roots of conflict in the
Middle East are neither religious nor ethnic and that
the Arab-Israeli conflict is, in its essence, a political
one. A sustainable settlement is therefore possible
through just and balanced solutions. In fact, dealing
with this conflict as if it were an inevitable religious
confrontation will only perpetuate it.
The second lesson is that reaching a peace treaty
will not prevent Egypt from continuously striving to
restore the rights of the Palestinian people and support
the liberation of the various occupied Arab territories.
Achieving peace between Egypt and Israel alone is not
enough to establish comprehensive and sustainable
peace. The rest of the occupied Arab territories must
be liberated and the Palestinian people’s suffering and
the apartheid that they are facing, which represents
a shameful stain upon the face of humankind, must
be put to an end. The international community and
its institutions have failed for decades to implement
numerous resolutions, whether those related to
Palestine and other occupied Arab territories, or those
on the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.
The region is witnessing a persistent attack on the
concept of the modern nation State, particularly since
the historic invasion of Iraq in 2003. Furthermore, some
parties are intensifying their systematic efforts to build
networks of doctrinal and ethnic allegiances. Some

S/PV. 8293

States have even engaged in supplying terrorists and
illegal groups with weapons to undermine the authority
of certain Governments and threaten neighbouring
countries, which constitutes a recipe for spreading
chaos, further instability and more conflicts, as well as
a serious threat to security and stability at the regional
and international levels.
The continuation of those policies will definitely
change the current proxy wars, which are exacerbated
by fierce competition among some international and
regional parties over creating zones of influence,
into direct, protracted military confrontations. That
may haunt the future of entire generations of the
region, worsen economic and social crises and the
waves of refugees and displaced people and risk
the sudden turning of some regional conflicts into
global confrontations.
Egypt therefore calls upon all parties to take serious
action to immediately amend those policies and return
to the principles of international law and the Charter,
without any double standards. Egypt is proud of its
honourable track record and its commitment to avoid
initiating aggression or resorting to the use of force,
except in self-defence, or engaging in supporting,
funding or arming terrorist groups, illegal organizations
and secessionist entities with the aim of undermining
the sovereignty of its neighbours or achieving shortterm interests at the expense of stability and security
in the long term.
Furthermore, Egypt demands that other parties
commit to those same principles, in order to
preserve the future of the peoples of the region and
avoid bloodshed. In this regard, the President of Egypt
has on numerous occasions, foremost among which was
that of his statement at the beginning of the seventysecond session of the General Assembly last September
(see A/72/PV.5), presented Egypt’s vision for reaching
a comprehensive and integrated solution to the crises in
the region on the basis of these principles.
There is no doubt that the United Nations remains
the forum most capable of launching effective
international cooperation. In that respect, Egypt
expresses its readiness in principle to consider the
establishment of a mechanism similar to that referred
to in the proposal contained in the concept note
(S/2018/524, annex), submitted by Russia, at this
meeting regarding the launching of a regional and
institutional dialogue similar to the Helsinki Process,

18-1959433/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

which contributed to creating a stable and sustainable
security architecture in Europe. There is in fact no
alternative to the engagement of the countries of the
region in direct dialogue and negotiations under United
Nations auspices.
As a first step, we propose that the SecretaryGeneral, given his authority and impartiality, invite the
States of the region to a conference, with the participation
of the permanent members of the Security Council, to
negotiate the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which
could pave the way for the design of a specific work plan
to establish a sustained system of political and security
arrangements that could achieve equal security for all
States in the region without discrimination. This would
in turn allow for all issues in the region to be addressed
in the framework of an integrated package, thereby
creating a climate conducive to confidence-building
and the resolution of existing crises.
Parallel to this negotiating track, there is an urgent
need for all effective regional and international parties
to unconditionally commit themselves to the principles
and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations
and of international law, specifically the following
principles: first, full respect for the sovereignty of
States, refraining from interference in their domestic
affairs under any pretext and refraining from the threat
or use of force; secondly, denouncing and condemning
all forms of terrorism and committing to combating it
by supporting the efforts of the Governments of the
relevant States upon their request; thirdly, denouncing
all sectarian policies, prohibiting any form of support
for illegal groups or organizations and the supply
of weapons to non-State actors without official
authorizations from authorities of the recipient State,
while recognizing the exclusive right of legitimate
Governments to use force in order to enforcing law and
order on their territories; and, fourthly, upholding the
principles of citizenship, equality, the rule of law and
human rights.
The commitment of all parties to those principles
and their engagement in serious negotiations on the
establishment of an integrated system on the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction, together with sustainable
and balanced arms-control arrangements, would put an
end to the arms race and address all non-proliferation
concerns in a comprehensive manner. The continued
imbalance in military capabilities does not allow for
an environment conducive to confidence-building and
34/61

25/06/2018

negotiations on other regional conflicts, in isolation
from this issue, which represents an existential threat
and puts the region at risk of an escalating arms race
and external military intervention.
Finally, we certainly look forward to the
constructive engagement of all parties in a negotiation
process under the auspices of the United Nations,
thereby sparing future generations from the scourge
of wars and destruction. I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s agenda issued few weeks ago on disarmament,
while expressing his commitment to establishing a
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. This calls for
a clear plan of action to establish such a zone within
a specific time frame, in accordance with the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
which is an integral part of the Treaty’s indefinite
extension package.
Many regions of the world have managed to
overcome decades-long wars and conflicts and to
establish sustained peace and cooperation. This would
not have been achievable in the absence of clear rules
for coexistence, cooperation and respect for diversity
and differences. We are confident that the States of the
Middle East can set such rules, and we hope that our
discussion today will set the stage for concrete, practical
and serious steps to be taken in the right direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this timely debate
on the Middle East and North Africa. The future of
the Middle East should remain a major part of our
discussions on the maintenance of peace and security
globally. Events in this region have ramifications
worldwide, and Turkey’s own future is bound to this
region not only by the forces of economics and security,
as is the case for several Member States, but also by
geography and a long common history and culture.
Addressing the root causes of the conflict is an
essential ingredient of achieving long-term stability
and prosperity in the Middle East. The countries of
the region consist of multi-ethnic, multi-religious and
multi-sectarian societies. We all must denounce divisive
politics along ethnic, religious and sectarian fault lines
and embrace multiculturalism and inclusivity. We need
to strengthen the culture of peaceful coexistence and to
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

hear the legitimate aspirations of the young and dynamic
populations of the region. This is our best chance for
the long-term settlement of existing conflicts, at the
heart of which lie the issue of Palestine.
The latest developments in Palestine remind us
once again of the urgency of revitalizing the peace
process. We reiterate once again that the status quo is
not sustainable. A two-State solution remains the only
way towards a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
The establishment of an independent State of Palestine
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is long overdue. Respecting the established
parameters is the only way in which we can ensure
security for both sides. Efforts in the opposite direction
tarnish the credibility of any peace plan or initiative.
The lack of a viable peace process continues
to inflame tensions and to give rise to new cycles of
violence. The international community, in particular
the Council, cannot turn a blind eye to such blatant
disregard of international law. It must take action and
ensure the implementation of its own resolutions.
The situation in Gaza, which is on the brink of
collapse after the decade-long blockade, continues to
be deeply worrying. This tragedy is compounded by
an acute financial-resource gap in the budget of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It is our collective
moral duty to support the Agency. Turkey announced
an additional $10 million for UNRWA’s programme
budget and increased its in-kind donation. I hope that
this afternoon’s pledging conference will provide an
avenue to discuss concrete ways to address the Agency’s
dramatic financial situation.
While our assistance to alleviate the suffering
of the Palestinians will continue, we should spare
no effort to achieve a just and lasting solution to the
conflict. We are also continuing our efforts to calm
the situation on the ground in Syria and to advance the
political process. Turkey has been actively contributing
to the counter-terrorism and stabilization efforts in
that respect. The operations that we have carried out,
namely, Euphrates Shield and Olive Branch, cleared
more than 4,000 square kilometres of terrorists. So far
more than 160,000 Syrians have voluntarily returned
to their homeland. In the same spirit, we have stepped
up our humanitarian efforts, particularly in Afrin. We
have been providing continuous humanitarian aid and

S/PV. 8293

fundamental health services to the region in order to
prevent civilian suffering.
In Syria, a viable and credible political solution
based on United Nations parameters remains the
only way to eventually build a democratic, pluralist
and non-sectarian country, maintaining its political
unity and territorial integrity. We will continue to do
our utmost towards that end. Despite the significant
military gains achieved in the field against Da’esh,
the socioeconomic destruction across Syria and Iraq
still needs to be addressed. This is crucial to eliminate
fertile ground for new generations of extremists and
their activities.
The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance in response to the humanitarian
crises in the region, at least until these countries get
back on their feet.
We must acknowledge that a strategy based solely
on the narrow pursuit of national interests has not
succeeded in the Middle East and never will. A strategy
that fails to speak to the broader aspirations of ordinary
people will only feed the suspicion that has festered for
years that the foreign Powers pursue their interests at
the expense of local populations.
The support of the international community
for the reconstruction and development of conflictriddled countries remains a tool essential to avoiding
this perception and preventing a relapse into new
conflicts. The safe and sustainable return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, as well as the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of basic infrastructure
in areas liberated from terrorist organizations such as
Da’esh and the Kurdish Workers Party/Partiya Yekitiya
Demokrat-People’s Protection Units (PKK/PYD-YPG)
are important priorities in this endeavour. The Turkish
experience in this context is particularly instructive.
Syrians have voluntarily started to return to their
homes in areas that we liberated from Da’esh. Lately,
we are also seeing thousands return to Afrin, which we
cleared from PKK/PYD-YPG through Operation Olive
Branch. Turkey has been exerting every effort to restore
normalcy in these territories by rebuilding essential
infrastructure and providing basic utilities, food and
medicine, as well as security, while at the same time
establishing local governance.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Turkey
will continue to deploy all efforts towards de-escalation
on the ground and will advance the political processes

18-1959435/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

to find solutions to the protracted conflicts in the
region and to address the aspirations of the people of
the Middle East for a better future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Allow me at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
since the plethora of crises and ever-increasing
challenges in the Middle East and North Africa are of
great interest to and effect, directly or indirectly, all
of us.
We would like to align ourselves with the statement
of the European Union, to be delivered later, and to
make some additional remarks.
In recent years, the Middle East and North Africa
region has turned into a zone of endemic conflict, with
severe repercussions for its security and economic
development. Terrorism, as well as phenomena such
as the radicalization of individuals and the resurgence
of criminal networks, have had a significant impact on
the region’s stability and the welfare of its inhabitants.
The stalemate in the Middle East peace process poses
another serious challenge, which needs to be addressed
on the basis of the two-State solution. The Syrian, Libyan
and Yemeni conflicts affect the broader region through
possible spillover, with unimaginable humanitarian
consequences for the population: unprecedented
refugee and migration flows, human smuggling and
trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, and asymmetric
threats undermining security in the Middle East and
North Africa and the broader Mediterranean region.
In this regard, we would like to make a special
reference to the Syrian crisis and its tangible impact
on our country, owing to Greece’s geographic location,
following unprecedented refugee flows. The challenges
posed by this situation are just one of the imperative
reasons for which the crisis needs to come to an
end. In our view, there is no alternative to a political
solution reached through an inclusive dialogue, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). This will allow for
the refugee issue to be addressed in a comprehensive and
efficient manner, paving the way for refugees to return
to an ordinary life. Any action that could undermine
this possibility or aggravate the humanitarian situation
within the country should be avoided.
36/61

25/06/2018

It is our firm belief that in order to restore stability
and peace the region, it is essential to abide by certain
principles. First of all, there must be a political solution
to end this crisis. In this respect, the United Nations
has a fundamental role to play, which needs to be
strongly supported by the international community and
the parties to the conflict. At the same time, respect
for international law, relevant treaties and United
Nations resolutions remains the cornerstone of our
efforts to maintain peace and security. In this context,
it is important to refrain from actions that undermine
the principle of territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Accountability is another crucial element that needs
to be safeguarded in order to put an end to impunity.
Last but not least, it is essential to promote a positive,
broader and manifold agenda of cooperation focusing
on developing synergies and joint activities, especially
through constructive topics, such as the economy,
trade, energy, education and research, taking into
account the emergence of viable gas hubs, as well as
the promotion of religious coexistence and pluralism
and the untapped potential of culture as one of the main
drivers of soft power.
In the light of all this and in an effort to promote
security in its neighbourhood and the broader region
of the eastern Mediterranean, but also to contribute
to enhancing a positive agenda of cooperation among
actors that have a special interest in the Middle East,
Greece has launched targeted initiatives, including
the Rhodes Conference for Security and Stability
and the Athens Conference on Religious and Cultural
Pluralism and Peaceful Coexistence in the Middle East.
Furthermore, along with Cyprus, we have established
trilateral teams of cooperation, which have acquired an
institutionalized character, with Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon and Palestine.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset, I wish to
commend the Russian presidency for organizing this
timely debate, and to thank you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to participate.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. I wish to make the following remarks
in my national capacity.
As you, Mr. President, rightly mention in the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex), the Middle East is
among the regions in the world most afflicted with old
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and new persisting crises. Unfortunately, too often we
have seen the law of the jungle prevail over the principles
of international law. The international community must
collectively uphold its responsibility to reverse this
course by adhering to the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. These principles serve
as a benchmark for what we accomplish in our efforts
to uphold international law. They are the barometer of
what we generally perceive as just and viable.
Allow me to refer briefly to my own country,
Cyprus, which is a test case in that region. We have
stated time and again that, if the rules of international
law had not been violated, the Cyprus problem would
not have arisen, and if these rules were applied today,
the problem would be solved in the interest of all parties
concerned. There is no other option but to continue
our efforts to reach a negotiated solution under United
Nations auspices. In this context, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s intention to send a senior official
to conduct in-depth consultations with a view to a
meaningful resumption of the political process. Let me
also echo the Secretary-General’s call on the Security
Council to increase its support and encouragement.
We should not forget that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security under the Charter
of the United Nations. It should therefore be clear
that anachronistic mechanisms of guarantees and the
presence of foreign troops in a post-settlement Cyprus
are inconsistent with our efforts to reunite our country
and become a normal State, as the Secretary-General
eloquently put it.
Cyprus straddles Europe, the Middle East and
North Africa, and has close historical and cultural ties
with the countries of the region. Cyprus, along with
Greece, as mentioned by the Permanent Representative
of Greece, have established trilateral partnerships with
our neighbouring countries: Israel, Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon and Palestine. This cooperation is founded
upon our adherence to international law and a rulesbased international order as the bedrocks for peace and
prosperity for all countries and peoples in the region.
We look forward to embracing our neighbours who
support these principles.
In the same context, we have concluded agreements
on the delimitation of our maritime zones with Egypt,
Israel and Lebanon. This has allowed us to develop a
programme of hydrocarbon exploration in our exclusive

S/PV. 8293

economic zone. Once again, the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international law
show the way forward and not unilateral actions that
endanger international peace and security.
We have followed closely the developments in the
Middle East and North Africa region — a region that
has been shaken by unprecedented unrest, turmoil and
conflict. The tide of upheaval has now begun to recede,
but serious challenges remain, notably in Yemen and
Syria. The coming months will be defined by post-war
transitions, peace talks, ballot boxes and reconstruction.
In any case, a military solution is not an option and
adherence to international humanitarian law and respect
for the need to protect civilians are indispensable.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has been defeated, but it remains a threat. We have
to strengthen our efforts aimed at stability and
reconciliation and not allow ISIL or other radical groups
to exploit political instability once again. A solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian question will have an undeniably
positive ripple effect on other regional crises and in the
battle to combat the threat of violent extremism and
terrorism. We maintain our principled position and
support for a just and comprehensive settlement based
on a two-State solution under international law and
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Regarding Syria, we fully support the efforts of
Staffan de Mistura, which are aimed at driving the
political process forward. We remain committed to a
unified, sovereign and independent Syria without any
foreign occupying forces. At the same time, it is of the
utmost importance to address the serious challenges
faced by Syrian refugees and the neighbouring
countries hosting them. We also deplore all efforts
to eliminate ethnic, Christian and other religious
minorities in the Middle East. Cyprus, with a longstanding history of peaceful coexistence of various
religious groups, stands ready to contribute to the
promotion of inter-faith dialogue.
Lastly, we condemn the deliberate destruction of
cultural heritage in Syria and Iraq and across the region.
The cultural heritage originating from the cradle of our
civilization should be protected. Cyprus is therefore at
the forefront of efforts to that end.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

18-1959437/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
country’s gratitude to the Russian Federation for
its outstanding presidency of the Security Council
this month. My country’s delegation commends the
convening of this important meeting presided over by
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation. We also congratulate your friendly country,
Mr. President, on hosting and organizing the FIFA
World Cup with distinction.
My country’s delegation has considered the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex) for this meeting, and
we highly appreciate the principled policy adopted by
the friendly Russian Federation and other significant
States Members of this international Organization,
based on seeking basic solutions to crises and conflicts
according to international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Such crises, which have ravaged the
globe for decades, are the result of the Government
policies of certain countries with major military,
economic and financial power that believe that they
can use the work of the international Organization to
serve their own interests and determine the destinies
of the peoples of the world. Those countries — some
of which are permanent members of the Security
Council — monopolize and steal the riches of others,
fabricate crises and wars and control them indirectly
and directly to serve their own interests and agendas,
which represent a fundamental threat to international
peace and security.
Consequently, those Powers are currently defying
the collective will of the international community, while
rejecting the multilateral system, and stop at nothing
to serve their own interests, including by distorting
the Charter of the United Nations and manipulating
the provisions of international law to justify their
policies. Those Powers carry out direct acts of military
aggression and occupy other countries’ territories
by force, characterizing their acts of aggression and
occupation as wars against terrorism. Those Powers
support the continued Israeli occupation of Arab lands,
claiming that it is based on a historical right even though
that is a falsification of history. They support terrorism
by claiming that it is a moderate bloody revolution and
a rainbow spring.
At the same time, those Powers deny the right of
peoples to resist occupation and aggression, and say that
those people’s right to defend themselves is a form of
terrorism. They align themselves with the most powerful
38/61

25/06/2018

Wahhabi dictatorships, which are the underlying cause
of international terrorism in the world together with
the Israeli Zionism. Such alliances are characterized
by strategic partnerships. In addition, those Powers
impose economic, commercial and financial sanctions
against many peoples throughout the world, which is a
flagrant violation of the provisions of the Charter, while
using the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as
a pretext to claim that no one must be left behind. In
that regard, we must not forget that one of those Powers
withdrew from UNESCO, the Human Rights Council
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Who
knows — perhaps Power may also withdraw tomorrow
from this international Organization.
My country, Syria, believes that any serious and
balanced approach to the underlying causes of the
crises in the Middle East — the cradle of civilization,
as all colleagues have said before me — must be based
first and foremost on acknowledging that the main
cause continues to be the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands, including the Syrian Golan, rather than the
propaganda disseminated by some claiming that the
cause of the crises is the result of ethnic and religious
conflicts. The international community has not been
able to end the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab
lands or ensure the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital. Any attempt to fabricate
regional and national crises to save Israel and deprive
Arab countries, including Palestine, of their rights, and
any proposed deal characterized by theft violates the
relevant international resolutions and will only lead to
more crises, the pursuit of conflicts and the escalation of
threats to international and regional peace and security.
For the past eight years, Syria has suffered from
one of the most bitter crises that the world has known
in decades. It is a violent terrorist war that certain
Governments have supported, financed and fuelled.
They have earmarked millions of dollars to militarize
the Syrian crisis. Those Governments have established
and funded armed terrorist groups that have adopted
extremist religious slogans that are totally foreign to
Syrian society. Those same Governments have focused
their efforts on recruiting young people throughout
the world, brainwashing them into becoming foreign
terrorist fighters, and sending them to Syria and
Iraq. Governments and intelligence agencies in Arab
countries and the region have facilitated travel for
thousands of those extremists through their territories,
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

in particular Turkey. Meanwhile, other States have
turned a blind eye to terrorists travelling to Syria.
Those thousands of terrorist fighters therefore now
represent an international crisis whereby their countries
of origin fear their return. Nevertheless, the United
States continues to train terrorists and armed fighters
in 19 areas it occupies in the heart of Syria, including
the Al-Tanf area and the Rukban camp on the border
shared by Syria, Jordan and Iraq. The United States is
providing them with rations, weapons, ammunition,
fuel and support from 22 American bases outside of
Syria. It provides the terrorist Da’esh organization with
the facilities necessaryto carry out its attacks against
the Syrian Arab Army.
Even worse, those Governments have politicized
the issue of providing humanitarian assistance in Syria.
They attempt to control the work of the United Nations
by falsifying information, fabricating evidence and
manipulating the reports on the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, which are based exclusively on
false information from the White Helmets, one of the
deceptive branches of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front.
The group was established by British intelligence and
recently received $6.7 million from the United States to
enable it to distort facts about the Syrian Government,
blackmail it along with its allies and end their war on
terrorism for the entire world.
I am affirming once again that the Syrian
Government has not used toxic chemical weapons.
It has no chemical weapons. They were destroyed
on an American ship in the Mediterranean Sea. The
Council knows that, and so does the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. I also want to
stress that it was armed terrorist groups that used those
chemical weapons, producing them with cutting-edge
technology provided by some western States, and we
will provide the United Nations specialized agencies
with proof of that in the near future, evidence that we
will present in addition to the 147 letters that we have
submitted to the members of the United Nations on the
use of chemical weapons by terrorist groups in Syria.
Unfortunately, the opportunity that the Russian
Federation has provided in holding today’s meeting to
address these crises conscientiously and hear new ideas
aimed at helping the peoples concerned deal with their
problems has not been seized by certain States that have
failed to uphold their ethical and political principles.
We have heard the statements from Britain, France and

S/PV. 8293

the United States, repeating the inappropriate political
language that we have been hearing for decades in
the halls of this Organization and whose purpose is to
try to blind people to their aggressive policies, which
have destroyed dozens of Member States and resulted
in the looting of their riches. Needless to say, those
same States are the main cause of the problems in
the region thanks to their old colonialist policies and
their support for the extremist, aggressive policies of
Israel. They interfere in the internal affairs of countries
in the region and give direct or indirect support to
foreign terrorist groups, which they refuse to put on the
Security Council sanctions list. They are attempting
to overthrow certain Governments in the region with
the fallacious arguments that we have heard in their
political statements.
The Syrians who believe in their country and their
independence have fought terrorism and defeated it in
large areas of the country. They will continue their efforts
to achieve that goal in order to put an end to terrorism
and liberate the whole of Syria from occupation.
Finally, I would like to address my colleague the
representative of Turkey’s reference to his country
fighting terrorism in northern Syria and liberating
4,000 square kilometres. I want to remind him that
the basic principles of international law oblige his
Government to coordinate and cooperate with Syria.
First, if his Government had good intentions,
it should have first cooperated with the Syrian
Government to fight terrorism. Under international
law, a State is prohibited from any incursion into the
territory of another State, especially a neighbour with
which it has historical ties. It is prohibited from any
incursion into the territory of another State without
that State’s request, and that request was never made.
Secondly, Turkey’s military forces entered our territory
without a request or authorization from the Syrian
Government. Thirdly, the Government of Turkey is the
main source of the terrorism that spread to many parts
of my country, particularly northern Syria, because it
facilitated the training and financing of terrorists and
extremists and allowed them to enter Syria from all
over the world, something that Turkey’s Government
and intelligence services knew about. Fourthly, Turkey
is part of the crisis that represents a threat to regional
peace and security due to its policies, much like those of
Israel. Fifthly, Syria has a right to liberate the entirety
of its occupied territories, whether they are occupied

18-1959439/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

by Israel or Turkey. We have the right to fight terrorism
and those who support it on any part of our land.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): For
the sake of brevity, I will read a shortened version
of my statement. I would like to thank the Russian
presidency for organizing today’s debate and inviting
my delegation to participate in it. I would also like
to warmly welcome Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
and to applaud his important role in the Astana process,
one of the most effective processes in the establishment
of peace and security in the Syrian Arab Republic, with
the participation of the Russian Federation, Turkey and
my own country.
A comprehensive review of the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa requires, above all,
consideration of its root causes. That analysis should
also consider the actions of the Security Council in
maintaining peace and security in the region. In-depth
analysis of all the causes of conflict and war in the
region over the past few decades shows that in most
cases, a common denominator emerges — foreign
intervention, foreign interference, foreign occupation
or a combination of the three. Even in the rare cases
where a conflict has internal causes, it is manipulated,
escalated and prolonged by the illicit interference of
Powers in the region or various countries outside it.
The Israeli occupation of Palestine is at the centre
of all the conflicts in the Middle East. That injustice
has continued for more than 70 years and has been
intensified by Israel’s aggressive expansionist and
apartheid policies towards the Palestinians and the
region generally. The Israeli regime and its incremental,
aggressive and expansionist policies, along with its
behaviour towards its neighbours, continues to be the
main threat to regional peace and security. While the
Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan Heights
have remained under illegal occupation by Israel, the
regime has launched more than 100 strikes in Syria
and Lebanon. Israel’s recent mass killings of unarmed
civilians in Gaza are the most recent expression of an
old pattern that the Israeli regime has followed for the
past 70 years.
The illegal announcement regarding Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the transfer of the United States Embassy
40/61

25/06/2018

to that city is another example of a policy that serves
only to exacerbate the problems in the Middle East and
North Africa and throughout the Islamic world. The
impunity that the regime there has enjoyed for so long
would not have been possible without the support of the
United States.
There are other major contributing factors. All of
these foreign interventions and occupations, and all the
efforts to manipulate the people of the Middle East and
North Africa, have resulted in a climate of instability
that is a breeding ground for terrorists and extremists.
Groups that initially received support from certain
States and parties within and outside the region to fight
for them eventually turned into monsters, threatening
their supporters and creators. As a result, terrorism
and extremism are much stronger and more widespread
in the Middle East and North Africa region today
following the many invasions by the United States and
its allies.
Other crises in the region, such as those in Libya,
Iraq, Syria and Yemen, are all examples of crises being
stoked through invasion, illegal foreign intervention,
terror, extremism and violence. Such problems have
persisted and deepened due to the failure of the
international community to carry out its responsibilities
by addressing the root causes and the erroneous actions
of outsiders.
The situation in Yemen represents a very serious
threat to regional and international security and is
another breeding ground for terrorist groups. The war
of aggression of the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen and
the numerous war crimes committed by it directly
threaten peace and security. Acts such as deliberate
attacks on residential areas and civilian targets,
imposing a humanitarian blockade, using famine as a
war tactic and denying access to international relief
agencies are all war crimes and are punishable under
international humanitarian law. The international
community and the Security Council should hold the
Saudi regime accountable for those criminal acts.
It should intervene effectively to end the senseless
military operation, including the ongoing attack against
Al-Hudaydah — the lifeline of basic humanitarian aid
to millions of needy people in Yemen — establish a
ceasefire, ensure the delivery of humanitarian and
medical assistance and restore peace and stability in the
country through an intra-Yemeni dialogue on national
reconciliation without preconditions.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Since the beginning of the ongoing tragedy in
the Syrian Arab Republic, Iran has always called for
a peaceful solution to the conflict based on respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
as well as the right of the Syrian people to determine
their own political future. Time and again, Iran has
reiterated that there can be no military solution to the
situation in Syria. As such, we have always adhered to a
genuine Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process in order
to achieve peace and national reconciliation. While the
United States and its regional allies continue to pursue
their narrow and short-sighted goals in the region, Iran
and Russia have made great sacrifices to combat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
groups throughout the region.
As our participation in the Astana and International
Syria Support Group meetings shows, we support
any initiative that can help to achieve an end to that
conflict. The Astana format, of which Russia, Turkey
and Iran are guarantors, has developed into an effective
instrument for a joint platform to fight terrorism and to
contribute to peace and stability in Syria. The hostile
statements of certain States that we hear these days,
including today, are actively perpetuated by those that
desperately need to create an imaginary enemy in order
to sell their arms and embark on an arms race in the
region. They have nothing to do with peace and security
in the Middle East.
The Islamic Republic of Iran views the establishment
of a regional dialogue forum in the Persian Gulf as
the best way to resolve regional crises and to create
a stronger region. The objective of a strong region, as
opposed to the quest for hegemony and the exclusion
of other actors, is rooted in recognizing the need to
respect the interests of all stakeholders. Any dominant
effort by one country is not only inappropriate but also
essentially impossible. Indeed, those that insist on
following such a path create instability.
As inheritors of the richest civilizations, the
countries in the Middle East and North Africa region
should stand tall. We can solve our own problems
among ourselves and secure a better future for all our
children without outside interference and patronage,
both of which come at a heavy price to our collective
dignity, as well as our future development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.

S/PV. 8293

Mrs. Furman (Israel): This debate comes at a
crucial time for the Middle East, as conflicts from Syria
and Yemen to Gaza and Lebanon continue to escalate.
The current trend is growing instability and cruelty.
When we consider the challenges of the Middle East,
we cannot ignore the one common denominator — Iran,
which plays a central role in destabilizing the region.
Its threat rests on three unholy pillars: nuclear military
ambitions, the promotion of regional instability
through proxy terrorist groups, and its ballistic missile
programme. Those dangers begin in our region, but
they do not end there. They are global and place all of
us at risk.
The
Iranian
nuclear
and
nuclear-related
activities — the first pillar — remain the most dangerous
threat to international peace and security. We cannot
turn a blind eye to the combination of Iran’s quest for
nuclear capabilities and its well-known intentions. As
Israel’s Prime Minister revealed on 30 April, Iran has
sought to acquire a nuclear weapon for decades and has
continued its covert project to pursue a nuclear-weapon
capability. Even after signing the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) in 2015, Iran’s ambitions did
not change. Iran preserved its enrichment capabilities
for future military use and never stopped developing
the means of delivery.
The JCPOA failed to indefinitely block all paths
to an Iranian nuclear weapon. In practice, by easing
sanctions, the JCPOA allowed for a malicious regime
to take advantage of the goodwill of the international
community and to exploit it for aggression in the region
and at home. Iran’s behaviour has not improved. In
fact, it has continued to deteriorate. It is incumbent
upon us to act together to prevent Iran from acquiring a
nuclear weapon, including through economic pressure
and sanctions.
Iran is a violent and extremist regime with violent
and extremist intentions. No civilian, no community
and no country in the Middle East can be spared from
Iran’s hegemonic ambitions to devour its neighbours,
its neighbourhood and beyond. Iran’s regional ambition
is the second pillar. It comprises two main dimensions.
First is its radical ideology, reflected in the countless
statements of Iran’s Supreme Leader Khamenei and
other senior regime officials with regard to Iran’s
ultimate plan to export the revolution across the world.
Second is its strategy of direct and proxy terrorism
and spreading subversion from within. By operating
terrorist organizations from afar, as well as tens of

18-1959441/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

thousands of militia fighters under the command of
the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iran tries to
avoid the spotlight of liability and seeks to increase its
economic and political influence and to consolidate its
grip over the countries upon which it preys.
If one looks at a map of the Middle East, Iran’s plan
is clear. It has strategically deployed proxies throughout
the region with the aim of forming a land bridge that
links Tehran to the Mediterranean Sea through Iraq,
Syria and Lebanon. Iran has increased its control over
the strategic Bab al-Mandab strait, which is invaluable
to commercial trade between Asia and Europe, and over
the Strait of Hormuz, through which 20 per cent of the
world’s oil supply passes. No one that values economic
growth, prosperity and freedom of navigation would
be willing to trade the invisible hand of Adam Smith
for the fingers of Ayatollah Khamenei. We witnessed
that danger when the Houthis, Iran’s proxy in Yemen,
attacked ships in the Red Sea.
Iran trains, funds, directs and supplies State-grade
weaponry to non-State terrorist actors. It proliferates
its knowledge to those terrorist groups, allowing them
to establish independent capabilities. Take Syria,
for example. Iran has solidified a long-term military
presence across the country, maintaining at least 1,500
Quds Force fighters that command the Shiite militias.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard also directs tens of
thousands of foreign fighters stationed in Syria and tens
of thousands of Syrian militias. Iran is taking control
of Syrian natural resources and infrastructure and is
building military bases across the country to solidify
its long-term presence in Syria.
In Yemen, Iran has accelerated its efforts to
smuggle sophisticated weapons and technological
know-how to the Houthis. According to the most recent
report by the United Nations panel of experts, Iran
is not in compliance with resolution 2216 (2015). In
addition, the latest United Nations report (S/2018/602)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) has also
reached the same conclusion, which is that the Houthis
are using Iranian missiles. And in Iraq the situation is
no different. Iran funds, arms and trains its associated
militias stationed there.
There is no better example of Middle Eastern
conflicts beginning and ending with Iran than Hizbullah
in Lebanon. Aside from accumulating tens of thousands
of rockets and missiles, largely in the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
42/61

25/06/2018

among civilians, as well as increasing Hizbullah’s grip
on the Lebanese political system, Iran’s latest ploy
is to turn Lebanon into a factory of precision-guided
missiles. Israel will not allow Hizbullah to acquire those
capabilities. Iran has also made its presence known in
southern Israel. Yahya Sinwar, the head of Hamas in
Gaza, confirmed again on 18 May that Iran provided
the Al-Qassam Brigades and other terrorist groups in
Gaza with money, military equipment and expertise.
Iran spends approximately $7 billion each year
funding its proxies and terrorist organizations, all at
the expense of its own citizens. Allow me to break that
down for the Council. In Iran, a doctor working in a
Government hospital with five or six years of experience
is paid $600 per month, but an Iranian proxy terrorist
earns $800 per month and a Hizbullah terrorist can
make as much as $1,800 per month. A nation’s spending
offers clear insights into its priorities. Iran’s financial
priorities are death and destruction rather than the wellbeing of its own people. Only the twisted minds of the
ayatollahs can invest in heavy-water reactors instead of
fresh, clean water for the Iranian people.
The third pillar of Iran’s regional and global
threat is its vast missile programme, including short-,
medium- and long-range missiles capable of carrying
nuclear warheads. Iran’s ballistic capabilities and
their proliferation throughout the region are welldocumented in numerous United Nations reports. Since
the initial implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Iran has conducted dozens of ballistic-missile tests.
It is ironic that Iran claims the need for self-defence
when it is the rest of the world that is threatened by
Iran’s ballistic missiles. For example, as the Deputy
Commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
Hossein Salami, has said,
“Today over 100,000 rockets are ready to be
launched towards Israel and additional tens of
thousands of long-range missiles are ready in
various places around the Muslim world to wipe
Israel once and for all off the geopolitical map.”
The international community must prevent Iran from
acquiring, developing, testing and stockpiling ballistic
capabilities and spreading them around the world.
The world is facing a regime that cannot be trusted.
Iran remains the foremost State sponsor of terrorism in
the world. The Iranian regime is oppressive — preforming
hundreds of executions every year, jailing journalists,
suppressing ethnic minorities, destroying the prayer
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

sanctuaries of religious minorities and discriminating
on the basis of ethnicity, sexuality and gender. At
times, it seems that the ayatollahs have taken it upon
themselves to create the ultimate combination of Tolstoy
and Dostoevsky’s worst nightmare. Iran’s Government
is indeed an association of men who do violence to the
rest of us, and they should be judged by the people they
jail and hang, among others.
When it comes to Israel, Iran’s end goal is
undeniable. The Supreme Leader of Iran himself set a
timetable of 25 years for the destruction of Israel. Not
only does Iran call for Israel’s annihilation, it is taking
decisive action towards that end. Iran funds, supports
and arms Hizbullah and Hamas. It has carried out
terror attacks against Israeli targets worldwide. In the
past few months alone, Iran sent an unmanned aerial
vehicle armed with explosives and launched a barrage
of missiles from Syria into Israeli territory. Iran’s
actions place our citizens directly in harm’s way. We
must not tolerate its continued hostility and aggression
any longer. It is not too late to stop Iran from pursuing
its malicious policies throughout the region. Israel will
always know how to protect itself, but the international
community has an obligation to stand up and face
this radical and dangerous regime. Doing so now will
pave the way for a better future for our region and for
the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin, Mr. President,
by expressing the gratitude of the League of Arab
States for inviting us to today’s high-level debate and
congratulating the delegation of the Russian Federation
on its preparation of today’s distinctive concept note
(S/2018/524, annex). We would also like to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, who has
been presiding over this important meeting.
As most speakers have said today, the Middle East
is the cradle of civilization. But since the founding of
the United Nations, it has witnessed several devastating
wars in which international foreign Powers have
participated. The wars in 1948, 1956, 1967 and 1973
opened the way for Arab countries to seriously seek a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. That
endeavour began with the initiative of the late President
Anwar Sadat, who visited Israel, the signing in 1978
of two Camp David framework agreements for peace

S/PV. 8293

between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Palestine,
the two peace treaties between Egypt and Israel and
Jordan and Israel, followed by the Oslo negotiations,
the Madrid Peace Conference and the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. All of those endorsed a two-State solution
as the basis for a fair and comprehensive settlement
of the conflict. A road map was adopted with the five
final status issues, which continue to be the elements
for a genuine peace process. In parallel, the Quartet
was established to directly oversee the implementation
process. The United Nations took part in order to ensure
that all of its organs, particularly the Security Council,
participated in the peaceful settlement of the dispute.
That is the backdrop to the current situation.
A fair examination by the United Nations of the
causes for the start and continuation of the wars in
the Middle East and for the Organization’s failure to
establish international peace and security in our region
might highlight certain fundamental elements that can
be summarized as follows. First, there is a lack of a
clear political end to the peace process in the Middle
East that would take into account the plan submitted by
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to the Security
Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183), as well as
various Arab League summit- and ministerial-level
resolutions, particularly in the light of the United States
Administration’s decision to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel, defying the international
legitimacy, all previous agreements and conventions
and contradicting all the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. The media is also
reporting that the United States will no longer pursue
negotiations on the five final status issues as a basis for
peace. Such negotiations will be replaced by an attempt
to launch major economic projects in the West Bank
and Gaza financed and supported by Arab countries
and others. There is no doubt that the situation will not
be helped by excluding Jerusalem from the final status
negotiations, seeking a unilateral decision, averting the
issue of refugees by failing to fund the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, or failing to fund the activities of the
Palestinian Authority. There are also the attempts to
stand in the way of Palestinians protecting themselves
from Israeli military aggression. Some 13,000 have
been injured and more than 130 have been martyrs,
all of which shows that there need to be an exhaustive
attempt to bring the peace process back on track to
where it should be.

18-1959443/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, the absence of a political horizon also
relates to the ambiguity posed by an arms build-up in
the region, namely, nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction, and the absence of any efforts on
the part of the three countries signatories of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or
of the Secretary-General to implement the fourth plan
of action adopted by the NPT Review Conference in
2010 by holding an international conference for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, which did not take place. The deplorable result
is that Israel continues to maintain its nuclear capacity,
about which we do not know anything and which is not
subject to the safeguards guarantees of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Furthermore, we see chemical
weapons being used in Syria, and the United Nations
is not even able to investigate and determine who is
responsible. All of that indicates that the Middle East
region could move into a new phase of an arms race for
conventional, and perhaps nuclear, weapons in order to
try to strike a certain strategic balance when it comes to
armaments, particularly with the growing international
concern about Iran’s nuclear capability.
Thirdly, some international and regional Powers
wrongly interpret Arab trends towards change and
development, particularly in countries that have
experienced popular revolutions or societal movements
since 2011 or in countries that have seen changes in
their attempts to develop and modernize themselves.
We see this very clearly in the increase in the number of
flagrant violations and acts of interference in the internal
affairs of Arab countries that support certain religious
and ethnic movements, in order to defend restricted
interests that have nothing to do with the aspirations
of the Arab peoples for change. There are many clear
examples of that. There are those that support the
Kurds and incite them to declare their independence.
Some support Hizbullah, Hamas or Islamic Jihad in
order to impose their power and to stir up tensions
between Israel and Palestine, rather than resolving the
crisis. Others support the Muslim Brotherhood in order
to revitalize the failed visions of previous empires.
Some support the Shiites to destabilize the Sunni
countries and give support to extremist terrorist groups
such as Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and others in Arab
countries, in order to show that Governments are weak
and rejected by the people.
44/61

25/06/2018

Fourthly, the Security Council and the international
community wrongly interpret differences among
Arabs, which contradicts its position in other parts of
the world where there are different political groupings
and where we see that the Council and the international
community support the settlement of disputes. They
put the common interests over and above individual
interests without foreign intervention. What exacerbates
the situation is the plethora of foreign mediators who
have opinions differing from those of the Arab peoples
and from those of the Arab States themselves. That
clearly shows that we need positive efforts in order to
resolve the differences between Arab countries and
to strengthen common Arab action, particularly since
the Arab countries have all the necessary human and
material resources to do so.
Fifthly, the Middle East region, in particular the
conflict areas, has become a battleground between
the major Powers. We have seen the use of the veto by
the major Powers in the Security Council, particularly
when it comes to issues relating to Palestine and Syria
and other urgent Arab issues. That is clear proof
that the major Powers use the destiny of our peoples
and countries to strengthen their areas of influence
and power in order to forge regional alliances, while
ignoring the great human and material suffering that
this imposes on the peoples of the Arab world. We see
that Arab conflicts have become proxy wars for the
major Powers, which limit our capacity as Arabs to do
away with the conflicts once and for all and to develop
ourselves. That is not really what these major Powers
should be doing in terms of their responsibilities at the
international level, especially when they are permanent
members of the Security Council.
We do not have enough time to delve into an
in-depth analysis of the root causes of the conflicts
in Middle East. It is a complicated issue where
everything is interconnected that would require many
meetings. But I would like to conclude with a final
point. With regard to your proposal, Mr. President,
to launch a regional dialogue similar to the Helsinki
process that was launched in Europe in the 1970s, with
the participation of foreign partners, such a process
should be based on the Arab Peace Initiative and on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian
nuclear programme, in order to foster trust among Arab
countries and Israel and Iran. Such a proposal is not
being made for the first time. The main thing that we
need to ask ourselves here is what sort of trust we are
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

talking about. Israel continues to occupy territories
in Syria, Palestine and Lebanon and obstructs the
establishment of a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and is supported in its positions by
foreign Powers. How can we speak about trust when
Israel and Iran continue to develop their undisclosed
nuclear capacities and when Iran flagrantly interferes
in the internal affairs of Arab countries by providing
support to organizations that are opposed to the Arab
Governments on ideological and religious bases?
The League of Arab States believes that a regional
dialogue based on a format similar to Helsinki could
be a positive development, but only if it were based on
practical processes that could bring about a just and
comprehensive peace, and provided that the territorial
sovereignty of Arab countries were respected, that all
parties undertook not to interfere in internal Arab affairs
and committed to respecting States’ regional unity and
respecting international legitimacy, international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They should commit themselves to the Charter of the
United Nations and to Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, in particular when it comes to
the creation of an independent Palestinian State within
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to
making the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. They should
also stop trying to impose hegemony on the Arab
region or any part of it. In that regard, the League of
Arab States would like the Secretary-General to play a
more effective and pivotal role in the political sphere,
through his good offices, in re-establishing peace and
stability in the region and ridding the Middle East of
weapons of mass destruction. We are sure that the Arab
world is able to overcome its current crisis and move
towards achieving peace, development and progress.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to welcome the presence here of the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Vershinin, and to thank the
Russian Federation for having organized this important
meeting and invited us to participate. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, for his statement
this morning.
At the outset, it must be noted that although there
is international consensus about the importance of
the Middle East and North Africa in achieving and

S/PV. 8293

sustaining international peace and security, there is still
an urgent need for greater regional and international
cooperation in order to resolve the crises in this region
and put an end to the suffering of the peoples involved.
Jordan believes that the region needs a genuine
political commitment to peace. It is up to the
international community to maintain stability and
security in the region, and the international community
has a joint responsibility to help the peoples of the
region to overcome the challenges that they face, in
keeping with the resolutions of international legitimacy,
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We cannot achieve peace and security as long as the
root causes of the conflicts exist.
Peace and stability in the Middle East require a just
and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis on the basis of the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We need to
hold serious negotiations with a set timetable in order
to address all final-status issues and bring about the
two-State solution. This is the only solution that
will create an independent, viable State of Palestine
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, which can live in peace and security
alongside Israel.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan would warn
against Israeli attempts to change the identity and
character of Jerusalem and to make changes to
the historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa Holy
Mosque, because this would affect millions of Muslims
throughout the world. The Kingdom will continue
to defend Jerusalem and its holy sites, Muslim and
Christian, in accordance with the historical Hashemite
custodianship thereof, which is incumbent on King
Abdullah II of Jordan. We underscore here that
Jerusalem is one of the final-status issues that must be
addressed through negotiations. As for East Jerusalem,
it is an integral part of territories occupied in 1967.
There must be an effective international response to
the needs of countries that are suffering from conflict,
and help must be offered to the countries of the region
that are hosting refugees. Jordan has been dealing with
various waves of refugees, the latest of which is that of
Syrian refugees, which puts a strain on various parts
of our society, as Jordan hosts more than 1.3 million
Syrian refugees. We ask the international community
to take responsibility and help Jordan to deal with
them, because we cannot take the strain alone. We must

18-1959445/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

also make every effort to strengthen the humanitarian
and ethical role of the international community to assist
the Palestinian refugees and provide financial support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) through
long-term funding. This would send an important
political message to the effect that the international
community has not forgotten Palestinian refugees and
will not deprive 1.5 million Palestinian students of
their right to education in the five areas of operation
of UNRWA. That work needs to continue until such
time as the Palestinian question has been resolved in a
just manner.
My country reiterates that international efforts to
politically resolve the Syrian crisis must continue by
guaranteeing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria in the context of a solution that is accepted by
the Syrians in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Jordan has attempted to reduce the level of violence and
to bring about stability in Syria. This can be seen in
the de-escalation agreements in the south of Syria, and
this is a very important step in stopping violence and
creating the conditions necessary for a lasting political
solution in Syria and for the return of refugees. We
are very concerned at what is taking place in southern
Syria, and we reiterate the importance of respecting the
de-escalation agreements. We call on the international
community to put an end to the military escalation in
southern Syria.
We also reiterate that the Hashemite Kingdom
will continue to assist our Syrian brothers and sisters
and help to meet the needs of Syrian refugees. Jordan
will play its part in helping refugees, and so must
the international community. Jordan is bearing full
responsibility for those refugees. The international
community has to bear its responsibility too, and the
United Nations must address any new displacement in
southern Syria. Jordan will assist to the extent possible
all efforts to support our Syrian brothers and sisters
within and outside of Syria.
Jordan reiterates that the only solution to the
Yemeni situation is a political one that is agreed upon
by all the Yemeni people in order to ensure the country’s
unity and territorial integrity. Jordan also underscores
the importance of implementing resolution 2216
(2015), which represents a comprehensive and balanced
road map for resolving the crisis. We underline the
importance of continuing work on the political track on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
46/61

25/06/2018

the Arab Gulf Initiative and the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference.
We also stress the need to fight terrorism in all
its forms. Jordan will continue to cooperate with the
international community in fighting terrorism and
eradicating its threat. We must also focus on achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals that are based on
the national interests of the countries of the region,
so as to include all sectors of society and ensure the
empowerment of women and youth in order for them
to participate at all levels. We must also strengthen the
interconnection between security, peace, human rights
and development.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
important central role played by the United Nations in
supporting the countries of the region in order to bring
about security, peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you on having assumed the
presidency of the Council. We appreciate your initiative
to hold this debate and to enable us to participate. We
agree with you on the importance of holding this debate
in an objective manner, free of political considerations,
and of thinking outside the box in order to prevent
and resolve crises and promote international peace
and security.
For decades our region has been marred by crises
and conflicts, with serious ramifications not only
for its security and stability but also in terms of the
unimaginable humanitarian consequences suffered
by its peoples. This poses a continuous threat to
international peace and security, and therefore the
Security Council has devoted efforts to addressing
these challenges. A holistic vision is required in order
to address these conflicts and crises, their causes and
the elements that could lead to their resolution.
We reiterated many times that addressing these
crises, both new and old, requires that we tackle their
root causes, meet the economic and development needs
of the peoples of the region, promote the rule of law
and good governance and respect human rights, as well
as kindle hope for the peoples of the region for a better
future, especially young people, so as to shield them
against extremism and violence.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Turning to the mandate of the Security Council,
it is extremely important to promote international and
regional collective-security mechanisms to resolve
conflicts in a peaceful way, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The maintenance of international peace and
security requires respect for international law and
a commitment to the Charter, respect for human
rights and a commitment to refraining from the use
of any policies that would exacerbate instability and
undermine international peace and security. In this
respect, the contrived crisis imposed on Qatar as
well as the unjust blockade and unilateral, illegal and
unjust measures against it represent the epitome of
irresponsible policies that contravene international
law and the provisions of the Charter, run counter to
good-neighbourliness and undermine relations among
countries and fraternal peoples, and do not safeguard
important regional organizations such as the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
This crisis, which is alien to the values of our
peoples and undermines their historical cohesion,
represents a threat to the security and stability of
this vital region which is so important to the world
and has costly ramifications for international peace
and security. This contrived crisis has highlighted
new challenges to international peace and security,
such as the hacking crime against the State of Qatar
and the consequent lies upon which the contrived crisis
was built. It has demonstrated the seriousness of the
cyberspace threat to the security and sovereignty of
States. We must call attention to the threats that States
and societies are subjected to in this area, and how to
safeguard the cybersecurity. We welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General is focusing attention on this.
Through its foreign policy, the State of Qatar seeks
to maintain international peace and security and resolve
conflicts and disputes by peaceful means and dialogue,
while maintaining constructive collective work and
good neighbourliness. We therefore continue to call for
dialogue to resolve the Gulf crisis, and we appreciate
the efforts of friendly and fraternal countries, led by
His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, to resolve it.
The settlement of crises in the region must be
based on respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, resolutions of international
legitimacy, friendly relations among the States, good

S/PV. 8293

neighbourliness and abstaining from the threat or use
of force, in addition to addressing the root causes.
Collective efforts must be made to combat
terrorism and extremism, while taking measures to
eliminate terrorist groups, uproot them and ensure
that they do not re-emerge in different forms. That
calls for not only military and security action, but also
for a holistic developmental approach that addresses
the ideology and narratives of those groups and their
means of recruiting young people. That is the approach
that the State of Qatar is pursuing in our international
initiatives for education and youth employment.
The State of Qatar has launched initiatives to
support the efforts of the United Nations in various
areas, including support for the mandate of the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security.
We are determined to continue our efforts to put an end
to conflicts and crises and to resolve them peacefully
and to work in accordance with the letter and spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We address the looming threats in our region and
our people’s need for security, stability and prosperity
while also respecting the rule of law. At the recent
Munich Security summit, His Highness Sheikh Tamim
Ben Hamad Al Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar, called
for the establishment of a regional regime to contribute
to maintaining peace and security. He stated,
“It is time for broader regional security in the
Middle East. It is time for all nations of the region
to agree on basic security principles and rules
of governance, and at least a minimum level of
security to allow for peace and prosperity.”
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will do its utmost
to contribute to all efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. We will also continue
our policy of supporting and cooperating with the
United Nations and our partners in the international
community in order to achieve our shared objectives,
as we have always done.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Almanzlawiy (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, allow me to welcome the Russian Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I congratulate the Russian
Federation on its able presidency of the Security Council
this month and I thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East.

18-1959447/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Palestinian people have long suffered from
unjust occupation, oppressive and racist policies and
illegitimate settlement incursion. We would like to pay
tribute to the Palestinian people for their resistance
and their fight to defend their territory, children and
holy sites.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has always supported
the Palestinian cause and the brotherly Palestinian
people in every way possible. The most recent example
of this was our $50 million contribution to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which we presented during
the twenty-ninth Summit of the League of Arab
States — the so called Jerusalem Summit — which was
held in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on States to not
recognize any alterations made by Israel, the occupying
Power, beyond the 4 June 1967 borders. We call on the
Security Council to assume its responsibility and ensure
that Israel complies with the Council’s resolutions and
international law aimed at putting an end to Israeli
occupation; the full withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan
and the Lebanese territory; and the release of all
Palestinian prisoners.
My country reiterates that achieving peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, in accordance with the
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is a strategic choice for a comprehensive and
just solution to the Palestinian question, and to putting
an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and all the tragedies
and human suffering that it engenders.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly of resolution ES10/20, on the protection of Palestinian civilians, and we
deplore the fact that the Security Council has not been
able to adopt a similar resolution.
In cooperation with our allies — a coalition
countries — my country is carrying out a military
operation to restore legitimacy in Yemen, save the
Yemeni people from obscurantists who are leading
them to their doom and retake certain regions that
are now being controlled by terrorist militias that
are supported by Iran. We are taking very calculated
measures to reduce the number of casualties on both
sides, especially among civilians. That military
operation was initiated at the request of the legitimate
Yemeni Government and in accordance with resolution
48/61

25/06/2018

2216 (2015), which calls for the withdrawal of Houthi
rebels from all Yemeni cities, among other things. That
is in line with the coalition’s approach to assisting
the Yemeni Government. Coalition forces are acting
with the utmost restraint to ensure the best protection
for civilians, while, regrettably, the Houthis are
using women and children as human shields, thereby
demonstrating their cruelty and lack of respect for the
norms of international law.
Iran continues to support the Houthi rebels in
Yemen and to supply them with weapons and missiles,
which from time to time target cities in my country. In
fact, there have been 155 cruel missile attacks against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The most recent, carried
out on Sunday, 24 June, targeted my country’s capital,
with missile debris falling on residential neighborhoods.
Independent reports by the United Nations confirm that
those missiles were manufactured in Iran and that Iran
supplied them to Houthi rebels. The most recent of such
reports, the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), published on
12 June, states that
“The Secretariat has carefully reviewed all
information and material available regarding the
allegations of the transfer of ballistic missiles,
parts thereof or related technology by the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the Houthis in Yemen that may
have been used in ballistic missile launches aimed
at the territory of Saudi Arabia. On the basis of
the information and material analysed, it is the
assessment of the Secretariat that the debris of five
missiles launched at Yanbu‘ and Riyadh since July
2017 share key design features with a known type
of missile manufactured by the Islamic Republic
of Iran. It is also the assessment of the Secretariat
that some component parts of the debris were
manufactured in the Islamic Republic of Iran.”
(S/2018/602, para.10)
The report also mentions nine additional launches
of ballistic missiles against my country, which were
Iranian Qiam-1 ballistic missiles. Those are flagrant
violations of resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2016).
The Security Council must take a firm stand against
Iran to show that the international community
is not powerless in the face of those aggressive
terrorist practices that are destabilizing regional and
international peace and security.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the random
laying of thousands of mines by the Houthis — in Yemen
generally and in Al-Hudaydah specifically — which
poses a serious threat tocivilians. That is why we today
we launched the Saudi Project for Landmine Clearance,
a $40 million programme in partnership on the ground
with Yemen’s national demining programme.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also strongly
condemns Houthi attacks against United Nations aid
agencies and other humanitarian personnel since 2015.
The Houthis have seized 19 humanitarian assistance
ships carrying 200,000 tons of fuel, while also looting
and destroying another 65 ships and numerous trucks
carrying humanitarian assistance. The Houthis have
also been planting mines and imposing fees in order to
earn money for their military activities.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia highlights that the
most severe deterioration of the humanitarian situation
is to be found in the areas controlled by the Houthis,
in particular in the vicinity of Al-Hudaydah, where,
despite its proximity to the port, the people are being
deprived of their most basic humanitarian rights. The
Houthi militias have impeded access to humanitarian
assistance so as to achieve their own political goals,
to the detriment of the most vulnerable members of
society. They are hampering humanitarian work and
targeting populated areas, including humanitarian
workers, while using children as human shields — an
internationally prohibited crime. They are also using
anti-aircraft weapons in civilian areas and targeting
cities in the Kingdom of Saudi with ballistic missiles.
With regard to Syria, we pledged $100 million
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people at the
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria
and the Region, held last April. We also contributed
approximately $1 billion to support refugees in Syria
and neighbouring countries. Moreover, we have hosted
approximately 2.5 million Syrian citizens since the
conflict began.
The report issued on 13 June by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons confirmed the use of a toxic
chemical as a weapon on 24 March 2017. My country
strongly condemns that act, which is a heinous crime
that requires a firm and clear response from the
international community, led by the Security Council,
so as to hold accountable those responsible.

S/PV. 8293

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
once again underscores the importance of ending the
tragic situation to which the Syrian people have been
subjected. We will pursue our efforts to resolve the
issue peaceably based on the first Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015). The settlement of the crisis must be based on a
Syrian consensus so as to realize the aspirations of the
Syrian people, with the support of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on a productive presidency this
month and on the holding of this timely debate. In your
concept note (S/2018/524, annex), Mr. President, you
correctly invited us to consider the historical context
of conflicts. I fully agree with you, as well as with
Antonio’s utterance in Shakespeare’s The Tempest that
what is past is prologue. I will explain.
One hundred years ago around this time in 1918,
the Arabs put all their hopes in the Allied Forces,
which were occupying one Arab city after another,
from Jerusalem to Damascus, Aleppo to Beirut, while
dismembering and carving up the Ottoman empire.
The Arabs’ hopes were for independence, freedom and
unity. As we now know, promises were not kept, hopes
were dashed, the Arabs felt betrayed, and their land was
divided and distributed like an abandoned cake. Today,
100 years later, we are looking at history in the mirror
and finding out that the wounds of the past 100 years
have never healed. They just were added to the new
wounds of a people who seem to be destined to live that
history and cope with the seeds of conflicts that were
planted a century ago.
Look at the Security Council’s schedule for every
month of the year. The Middle East, its people and their
hopes and pains are in members’ note books every
month. Look at the news coming from the Middle East,
which includes the occupation in Palestine and the fact
that millions of Syrians, Yemenis, Iraqis and Libyans
have become refugees or displaced in their own
countries or scattered around the world. The Palestinian
issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict remain for the Arabs
the most important and protracted problem that has
defied any solution. Following years of negotiations,
dozens of United Nations resolutions, agreements and
initiatives, and countless concessions on the Palestinian
side, there is no horizon for peace today. Confidence

18-1959449/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

among the parties is at its lowest point ever, and the
very cornerstone of a political solution — ending the
occupation, international legitimacy and an independent
state of Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital — is being eroded or completely
abandoned. The Palestinians seem to have lost hope, but
they continue to insist on their legitimate political and
historic rights in Palestine, while stressing that those
rights are the prerequisite for any peace in the region.
Lebanon is committed to the Arab Peace Initiative
and to East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine because it knows that, only through a
comprehensive and just settlement, can the region know
real peace. With regard to other issues in the region,
Lebanon is committed to preserving its stability, and
there is consensus in the country on the importance of
distancing Lebanon from Arab States’ conflicts. The
Lebanese Government upholds that dissociation as a
cardinal tenet of its policy. The situation in southern
Lebanon remains governed by relative stability and
quiet thanks to the presence and vigilance of the
Lebanese Armed Forces, but the quiet and Lebanese
sovereignty are violated by Israel on a daily basis
by land, air and sea. I repeat what we have said here
before and in the numerous letters that we have sent
to the Secretary-General and the Council: those Israeli
violations are not conducive to peace. On the contrary
they are inviting conflict.
Time and again, Lebanon has reaffirmed its
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and the need for
a permanent ceasefire, as well as its commitment to
prevention and mediation to avoid any miscalculation
or escalation that could lead to conflict. That is why
Lebanon has called on the Secretary-General and the
United Nations good offices and reiterates its firm belief
that the tripartite mechanism is the appropriate forum
in which to discuss and solve any issue and de-escalate
any tension along the Blue Line in the south. Lebanon
has also been at the forefront of combatting terrorism,
and it is one of the few countries in the region that
defeated Da’esh through the determined will of its
armed forces and the help of its friends. But Lebanon
also knows that defeating terrorism cannot happen only
on the battlefield. It has to be done through providing
young people with an education, job opportunities
and hope.
It is high time that the major Powers see our region
with different eyes from those of the past 100 years.
The Middle East should not be seen mainly as an arena
50/61

25/06/2018

for competition over spheres of influence. It is time to
view the people of the region as people with hopes and
aspirations for a better and alternative future. To do so,
the Council can take lessons from the past and address
the problems of today differently. If the political will
of the Council is coupled with collective leadership
and armed with a new vision, then there is hope for the
Middle East. The Security Council represents the will
of the international community, and the whole array
of tools at the United Nations disposal should be used.
It can implement its resolutions to end occupation and
oppression and fulfil the role with which it was entrusted
upon its founding. The United Nations can use its
international authority to usher in a new season to the
Middle East — one of peace, reconciliation, healing,
progress and development. The region has tremendous
potential, if given the chance, not as a battlefield, but
as a source of ideas, creativity and a place where peace
can be born to circle the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to thank you for organizing
this important debate on maintaining international
peace and security, in particular in the Middle East and
North Africa.
With the regard to the Middle East, the Palestinian
question remains the core issue for the peoples of the
Arab and Islamic world, and the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories is the source of all crises in the
Arab region. We believe that the only solution to the
Palestinian question is the two-State one, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We should also eliminate the
settler plague, whose spread undermines the prospects
for such a solution. The status of Jerusalem is important
as well and should remain one of the final-status issues.
It is important to refrain from any policies of fait
accompli, such as the opening of embassies in Jerusalem,
that violates the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Reinvigorating the Quartet is now an imperative.
Regarding the questions raised in the concept
note (S/2018/524, annex) on the causes of conflicts
in the region, we believe that there are internal and
external factors.
First, with respect to internal factors, there is a
lack of a genuine development vision for the region
that would meet the aspirations of its peoples and help
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

them emerge from the cycle of poverty. We should also
reconsider the educational and cultural systems in the
region, in line with the realities and the situation on
the ground. Greater attention should be paid to the role
of youth and women by engaging them at all stages
of political and economic development, starting with
planning and ending with implementation.
Secondly, external factors include interference
in the internal affairs of sovereign States and the
exploitation of a political vacuum in order to impose
policies and visions aimed at reshaping the region in
accordance with an opaque political narrative. There
are also conflicting interests on the part of the major
Powers as well as the imposition of certain perspectives
on governance, the rule of law and human rights. There
has also been a transfer of the domestic crises of major
Powers to the region, such as illegal migration and
financial crises.
Why does the policy of taking unilateral steps
prevail over that of collective measures approved by the
United Nations? We believe that the concept of a unified
vision on the part of the international Community is a
double-edged sword, as some are calling for a reshaping
of the concept of nation States on the basis of flawed
logic. These efforts are doomed to failure.
Terrorism and the combat against its financing
relate to the first question. I spoke earlier about
reshaping and revisiting the educational and cultural
system, as we all know that the scourge of terrorism
starts with an ideology propagated by certain political
or religious leaders, as well as media that is financed to
that end. Of course, such ideas belong to those who put
them forward, but some States may provide funding,
training, political cover and political justification in
order to exploit such ideologies and groups.
Regarding the issue of peaceful coexistence, we
believe that there are two reasons for the failure to
achieve it. First, internal reasons: there has been no
genuine political vision that would enable the countries
of the region to integrate all socioeconomic issues.
There is, of course, some coexistence, but at the same
time narrow interests are being pursued at the expense
of national identities. The second reason is an external
one. Marginalization and non-integration are being
exploited, and some are fuelling tribal strife in order to
tear apart the nation to serve their own ends.
We must avoid any escalation of the conflicts in the
region on a religious or political basis. The exploitation

S/PV. 8293

of religions and its use by political parties is very
dangerous, and history is witness to the seriousness
of such an undertaking. When a politician wages war,
he knows full well the danger. If we enter an era of
religious wars, we will not be spared the consequences.
All parties think that they have a divine mandate and
that killing the other will bring them closer to God. No
one will be able to stop such bloodshed and insanity
except those who propagated such ideas.
The concept note also addresses the issue of
the Security Council sanctions regime and the need
to review it comprehensively. In this respect, the
sanctions imposed on Libya in terms of an asset
freeze was not a punishment but aimed at protecting
the funds in question. We have called on the Security
Council more than once to revisit this regime in order
to enable State institutions to manage these assets,
which are now being dissipated, for many reasons. But
the Security Council has not taken any serious steps to
address this issue. We call for support for our appeal
to carry out a comprehensive review of the sanctions
regime, especially given the fact that from time to time
we witness attempts by some States, under various
pretexts, to control frozen Libyan assets. I wish to put
on record here our rejection of any attempt by any State
to control Libyan assets.
In closing, despite of the fact that the concept note
addresses the situation and the crises in the Middle
East and North Africa, we would have hoped to see
two other elements put forward: the role of the media in
fuelling conflict and that of civil-society organizations
that are funded and play a role in covering and
supporting terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
thanks the presidency of the Russian Federation for
having convened this debate on the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa, which are witnessing an
unprecedented series of conflicts and crises, bringing
death to thousands and inflicting untold suffering on
millions of civilians, as well as provoking a cascade of
challenges and crises beyond the region.
The Holy See wishes to avail itself of this occasion
above all to urge the Security Council to throw the
full weight of the authority and powers that the United
Nations Charter has vested in it to find and agree

18-1959451/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

on enduring political solutions to the conflicts in
the region.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a prime example
in which decisive action by the Security Council and the
international community is needed to prevent further
degeneration of the situation. The Holy See continues
to support a two-State solution that would achieve
peaceful coexistence between a viable Palestinian State
and Israel, with secure and recognized borders. The
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
the only viable peace plan that would allow both nations
to live side by side in peace. Yet the facts on the ground
seem to indicate that there is more determination to
tear apart peace plans than to foster them. Leaders on
both sides bear the heaviest responsibility in guiding
their people in the direction of peace and not of
deeper conflict.
The Council must act to protect the two-State
solution, thereby decisively supporting the birth of an
independent Palestinian State and assuring the State of
Israel of its full right to peace and security. The Holy
See calls on both Israel and Palestine to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and the political will needed to
reach a historic peace agreement that would meet the
legitimate aspirations of both peoples.
With regard to the Holy City of Jerusalem, which
unquestionably holds a very special place not only in
the hearts of its inhabitants but also in those of the
followers of the three monotheistic religions all over
the world, my delegation wishes to recall the obligation
of all nations to respect the historical status quo of
the Holy City in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions. The Holy See also reiterates
its belief that the safeguarding of the identity and
significance of the Holy City can be ensured by way of
an internationally guaranteed statute aimed at a future
of peace and reconciliation for the entire region.
We are witnessing a deteriorating humanitarian
crisis in the Middle East and North Africa and a failure
to achieve any political progress. Similarly, the exodus
of refugees from Syria, Libya and other troubled areas in
the region has brought political problems and provoked
populist sentiments and outbursts of xenophobia in
many host countries around the world. The rule of law is
fundamental to any political solution of these conflicts
and to the achievement and maintenance of harmonious
coexistence among individuals, communities and
nations in the region. It necessarily includes respect for
52/61

25/06/2018

religious freedom and equality before the law based on
the principle of citizenship, regardless of race, ethnic
origin or religion. The countries concerned must play
their part in fostering a culture of the rule of law in
the region.
The Holy See believes that there is an evident and
inherent link between respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, on the one hand, and
the maintenance of international peace and security,
on the other. Respecting and protecting human rights,
especially those of minority populations, contributes
to our efforts to address the root causes and drivers
of instability, thereby helping to prevent and resolve
conflicts and sustain peace and favour development.
An early response to violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as to violations and abuses of
human rights, can effectively prevent conflicts before
they become a threat to regional and international
peace and security. When conflicts do occur,
accountability for such violations is vital for both
justice and reconciliation.
In the past, the Council has shown unity in the face
of threats to international peace and security. It needs
to show once again that same determination and unity
in the face of today’s very grave threats. The world
awaits its leadership and wants it to succeed in putting
an end to the conflicts in the Middle East, North Africa
and beyond.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for inviting
my country to take part in this very important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
very instructive briefing this morning. The subject of
today’s debate has become a source of growing concern
for the international community, given the impasse
in the Middle East peace process and the outbreak of
new conflicts, which are proving very difficult for the
international community to resolve. Overcoming these
multidimensional challenges demands coordinated
and resolute action by the international community,
particularly the Security Council, at regional and
global levels.
The quest for a solution to the Palestinian issue,
which remains a core issue for the Middle East, must be
a priority for the international community, which has to
uphold its full responsibilities in the area. Nevertheless,
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

it must be acknowledged that the halt in negotiations
since 2014, along with the ongoing colonizing
settlement policy, the confiscation of land, the closing
of border crossing points, blockades and the judaization
of the Holy City, in disregard for international law and
Security Council resolutions, as well as the increasing
relapses into violence, as testified to in the recent
escalation of violence at the cost of the lives of innocent
civilians, are not helping to bring about a two-State
solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by
side in peace and security within the 1967 borders.
In his capacity as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI is making every effort
to defend the Palestinian issue in general and that
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in particular. He continues to
underscore that settling the Palestinian issue requires
preserving the legal, historic and geographic nature of
that Holy City, which is part of the Palestinian territory
occupied in 1967, in accordance with international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). The Kingdom
of Morocco supports a two-State solution with East
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State, within
the borders of 4 June 1967 and in accordance with
international agreements, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Quartet road map and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Kingdom of Morocco attaches great importance
to the situation in Libya, a brother country with which
it shares historic links and a common destiny as part
of the Arab Maghreb Union, which was established
under the Marrakesh Treaty in 1989. The Treaty calls
for effective solidarity among the members of the
Maghreb Union and encourages them to contribute to
international peace and security. In accordance with
its policies of good offices and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Kingdom of Morocco organized peace
talks in Skhirat between the Libyan factions and parties,
under the auspices of the United Nations. That led to
the Libyan Political Agreement on 17 December 2015,
which is considered the basis for a peaceful settlement
of the Libyan crisis and has received major support
from the Security Council. Morocco has repeatedly
supported the efforts of the United Nations and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya Ghassan
Salamé to find a negotiated consensus political solution

S/PV. 8293

among the Libyan parties, a position that was reaffirmed
during Mr. Salamé’s most recent visit to Morocco.
Morocco continues to play an active role
internationally and regionally in contributing to
resolving the situation in Libya, including through the
participation of our Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Kingdom of Morocco in
the Paris conference on 29 May. Furthermore, Morocco
also stresses the importance of ensuring Libya’s
territorial integrity and non-interference in its internal
affairs, in order to enable the Libyans themselves to
arrive at a settlement. Morocco stands ready to offer the
necessary assistance to ensure reconciliation among
the Libyan parties, support the democratic process
and provide Libyans with the necessary training and
expertise to establish and run their own institutions.
Between 2014 and 2016, the scourge of terrorism
in general and foreign terrorist fighters in particular
expanded to an unprecedented degree into the Middle
East, the Sahel-Sahara and the Maghreb, where several
groups are active, particularly Al-Qaida, Da’esh and
Boko Haram. In that regard, we welcome the Security
Council’s timely response aimed at suppressing such
developments through its adoption of various resolutions,
in particular resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at the highlevel summit held in September 2014 (see S/PV.7272),
resolution 2253 (2015), aimed at cutting off terrorism’s
financial support, and resolution 2396 (2017).
Morocco has been determined to be involved
in all the regional and international efforts to fight
this scourge. In that regard, we have hosted several
meetings on border security, including the inaugural
conference of the Border Security Initiative in El Jadida,
in cooperation with the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre. We are also currently co-Chair,
with the Netherlands, of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, which has adopted several memoranda on
good practices, including The Hague-Marrakech
Memorandum on Good Practices for a More Effective
Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon.
We have also developed a national strategy for fighting
terrorism based on optimizing security governance
by updating our counter-terrorism legal framework,
combating social insecurity and promoting sustainable
human development and introducing religious reforms,
in particular by training the young imams who teach
the principles of Islam. King Mohammed has launched
initiatives to train male and female imams, including
from our brother countries in Africa and Europe, by

18-1959453/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

providing them with religious teaching based on the
values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation and respect
for others.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, once again for organizing today’s
debate. I can assure you, Sir, of Morocco’s commitment
to peace, security and development in our region
and beyond.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Russian delegation
on its presidency and thanking the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation for presiding
over this meeting. We support the convening of this
open debate dedicated to the very important issue of
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
welcome the focus of your concept note (S/2018/524,
annex), Mr. President, on the Middle East and North
Africa, given the fact that the region is facing serious
threats to its security and stability.
When His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
of Bahrain spoke at the Summit of the League of Arab
States, he emphasized that the international community
must play a greater role in ensuring respect for the
resolutions on this subject and their implementation,
and in creating an environment that is conducive to
resolving the crises and conflicts in the Arab region.
The international community must also play a greater
role in imposing and implementing its resolutions and
creating a positive environment that provides more
opportunities in order to achieve political solutions
to Arab and regional crises, end foreign interference
and provide the necessary protection to affected
peoples so as to facilitate the development of practical
solutions that will allow those States to maintain their
sovereignty, independence and security.
Stability and security in the Middle East and
the entire world require a common political will and
serious, concerted action from all parties, based on
respect for the norms governing relations among States,
in order to confront as one the greatest challenge facing
us — terrorism — and stop all those who sponsor,
finance and support it, be they individuals, States or
other entities. Terrorism is not limited only to terrorist
groups that we can combat and eradicate. It is a tool that
is sometimes used by certain States to generate crises in
targeted countries in the service of their own interests
54/61

25/06/2018

and agendas, thereby turning them into essential
accomplices in terrorism and a destabilizing element
that adversely affects international peace and security.
We therefore cannot allow those States to play a part
in settling the conflicts and ending the humanitarian
crises that they have instigated. It is the international
community’s responsibility to confront those countries,
demand accountability and prosecute them so as to
achieve security and stability in the world.
Concerning the Palestinian people and their
leadership, the Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its
unwavering position. That is one of our top priorities.
We underscore the need to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, with the goal of establishing an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, based on the two-State solution and the Arab
Peace Initiative, as well as the relevant international
resolutions. We underscore that final status issues
can be achieved only through negotiation between the
Palestinians and Israelis and will never be resolved by
unilateral decisions that run contrary to international
resolutions and hinder the settlement of the crisis and
achieving peace.
One of the main causes of the crises in the Middle
East and North Africa is the intervention of certain
countries, led by Iran, in the internal affairs of States
by destabilizing them through their support of terrorist
groups like Hizbullah. Cooperating with terrorists is
a flagrant violation of international law. We see that
demonstrated by the crisis in the brotherly country of
Yemen, where thugs and militias supported and led by
Iran carried out a coup d’état against the legitimate
Government and violated its sovereignty and territorial
integrity in a blatant violation of international law, while
impeding any attempt to achieve a peaceful solution
based on international initiatives, in particular the
Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, international
dialogue and Security Council resolution 2216 (205).
In that regard, we underscore the need to respect fully
the unity, sovereignty and stability of Yemen and to
reject any form of interference in its internal affairs.
We emphasize the need to find a political solution and
to support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
We are fully committed to participating in the Arab
coalition to support the legitimate Government in
Yemen. The port of Al-Hudaydah must also be liberated
so as to end weapons trafficking benefiting militias,
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

including missiles threatening the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and other countries of the region.
Countries that are struggling to restore their
stability and sovereignty and fighting against attempts
to transform them into crisis zones are investing all
their material and human resources in the quest for
development and reconstruction, which entails an even
greater responsibility on the part of the international
community to end the actions of rogue States that,
through their actions, have prolonged the suffering of
world’s youth and prevented them from achieving their
aspirations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain underscores
that the maintenance of international peace and security
is the collective and individual responsibility of all,
and that we have worked and will always work towards
further strengthening our commitment to supporting
the principles underlying that responsibility, including
respect for the sovereignty of States and strengthening
international partnerships based on tolerance and
spreading the culture of peace. We will spare no effort
to build on the accomplishments that we have already
achieved, support our region and put it on the path to
security and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank it for convening
this very important meeting to share our points of
view with regard to international peace and security
in the Middle East and North Africa. We welcome the
presence of the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation to preside over this meeting. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which analysed the realities of the region. We also
extend our heartfelt thanks to Poland for its work during
its presidency of the Council in May.
The best way to ensure lasting peace, tolerance
and the prevention of conflicts is to ensure sustainable
development, equal opportunities and the equitable
distribution of national wealth, inclusive of everyone
irrespective of ethnicity, religion or gender. We believe
that, in order to promote peaceful and open societies,
secured on a solid foundation and in accordance
with Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, Members

S/PV. 8293

States must respect the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and those governing international
law, which prohibit interference in the internal affairs
of other States, which promotes ethnic, religious and
community divisions, thereby entailing national
destabilization and the outbreak of conflicts that only
lead to the destruction, ruin and demise of the local
communities and the developmental gains that were
achieved by them. Those conflicts are also destroying
the development progress made by some countries in
recent years, despite ongoing wars. In addition, we
believe that the equitable distribution of international
water resources among coastal States around a shared
body of water prevents crises because injustice
resulting from water quotas undermines sustainable
development in countries sharing any body of water,
which is a matter of water law and human rights law.
The Middle East has always been one of the
regions most exposed to political, security, economic
and strategic upheavals. We are concerned about the
harmful impact of the presence of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East because they constitute
a strategic threat to regional and international peace
and security. In every international forum, Iraq has
therefore called for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. We have also
called for the implementation of the comprehensive
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in all of the countries of the region.
We have therefore committed to strengthening the
international weapon-of-mass-destruction disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. We try to be a force of
stability both regionally and internationally, far from
all tension and instability in the world. The Government
of Iraq is committed to respecting its obligations under
international treaties and conventions on disarmament
and non-proliferation based on the provisions of the
permanent Constitution of the Republic of Iraq.
The Israeli occupation is the cause of tension in the
Middle East. The security and stability of the Middle
East depend on finding a just solution that takes into
consideration the Palestinian people’s legitimate
right to freedom. It also hinges on the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Moreover, we must
take the necessary measures to mitigate the risk of
inflaming religious sentiment, which could transform a
political conflict on the ground into an endless religious
war. That is what the extremists want, as it would

18-1959455/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

exacerbate violence, terrorism and extremism in the
region and throughout the world. We urge everyone to
act responsibly and make efforts to reach a just solution
to the Palestinian issue and to put an end to the Israeli
occupation, while ensuring the full withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation from all occupied Arab territories.
Iraq is committed to the stability and territorial
integrity of Syria. That requires a balanced and peaceful
inter-Syrian solution that is accepted by the Syrian
Government and all the parties concerned. The question
of security and stability in Syria is very important and
it is inextricably linked with the security and stability
of Iraq, as the Da’esh terrorist organization operates in
the region between Syria and Iraq. That means that the
fight against the Da’esh terrorists is a common goal of
all countries that are combating terrorism. That fight is
of strategic importance for the entire world, especially
countries of the region.
In addition, Iraq supports a peaceful solution in
Yemen. We call for a national dialogue with a view
to safeguarding the rights of the Yemeni people and
putting an end to the carnage in order to restore security
and stability to Yemen.
We reaffirm that it is critical to reach a
comprehensive political solution to the Libyan crisis and
to respect the Libyan Political Agreement, which is the
only political framework to resolve the political crisis
in Libya, in order to achieve stability and prosperity
in Libya.
The spread of takfiri ideology in the Middle East
has led to the emergence of terrorist groups such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and other associated groups, which
have sown the seeds of sectarianism and division
and committed atrocious crimes against all segments
of the Iraqi population. They have also pillaged
monuments and destroyed cultural heritage in Iraq. We
are counting on the international investigation team
established pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) to hold
the Da’esh criminals accountable and to ensure justice
for the victims.
My Government works to strengthen cooperation
with international bodies and organizations in order to
ensure aid to the Iraqi people, who have confronted the
most powerful terrorist group in the world with the help
of the Global Coalition against Da’esh. We would like
to thank friendly countries that have helped us regain
control of our territory. I would like to reaffirm that
my country’s Government is taking all the necessary
56/61

25/06/2018

measures to ensure the definitive return of displaced
persons in order to revitalize the economy and
bring back the social life of former times, to ensure
development and to restore stability throughout the
country, while attracting investment. We will abide by
the Constitution of Iraq in the settlement of all problems
and act in the best interests of the people of Iraq. We are
committed to protecting the federal system of Iraq, its
unity and its territorial integrity.
The Council must make efforts to peaceably settle
conflicts, including through arbitration and mediation.
It must also play an important role in supporting
international law in order to achieve international peace
and security, especially international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Russia for its successful stewardship of the Security
Council this month and, equally important, of the World
Cup. As part of your presidency, Sir, we applaud your
commitment to discussing the root causes of conflict
plaguing the Middle East and North Africa. Russia has
been a historic partner in our region and committed to
addressing the fundamental issue underlying many of
our challenges — terrorism and its bedfellow, extremist
thought and ideology.
At the outset, let me say that the positions of the
United Arab Emirates on regional matters are known.
In response to Russia’s call for us to be action-oriented
in our intervention, I would like to offer ideas for an
integrated approach to addressing each of the regional
conflicts that are causing instability in our region.
What is clear is that diplomacy has failed in the Middle
East, yet diplomacy will always be key to solving the
region’s crises, and therefore we must renew our efforts
to see it strengthened.
There have been calls today for new initiatives akin
to the Helsinki process of 1975, to build confidence and
resolve tensions in the region. The United Arab Emirates
welcomes any substantive dialogue that contributes
to building confidence among regional States. First,
however, as was the case at the end of the Cold War, we
must all recommit to the central principles and concepts
that drove the creation of the current world order. Until
that common understanding is accepted by all, we will
condemn ourselves to a continuous cycle of violence in
our region and beyond our borders.
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

For any such dialogue to be meaningful, all actors
must accept the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. As is raised in the concept note (S/2018/524,
annex), Iran in particular has consistently violated those
norms and must end its irresponsible presence in Arab
countries in the form of militias and terrorist groups.
As the representative of the United States said today,
“In war zone after war zone and terrorist act after
terrorist act, we find Iran and Hizbullah at the root
of violence in the Middle East.”
To counter extremist ideology, which is spreading like a
cancer in our region, we call on Member States to lend
their support to like-minded countries of the moderate
Arab centre that are shifting the Middle East towards
stability, development and the rejection of any State
system based on extremist ideology.
Furthermore, while we understand the need to
partner with external actors, lasting regional security
cannot be decided from afar. True stability in the
Middle East will require Arab decision-making and
leadership. We must not repeat the mistakes of the great
Powers after the First World War, which believed that
they knew better than the people of the region, who
have been suffering some of the consequences of that
approach for more than a century now. That way of
thinking must end as the region steps up to shoulder
its own responsibilities for its own future. The era of
hegemony and great-Power politics must be replaced by
a renewed respect for the twentieth-century nation-State
system that we believe can still meet the needs of the
twenty-first century. For that vision to materialize, the
Security Council must play its part as a neutral steward
of peace and security and avoid a slide into irrelevance.
As other speakers have noted, a historical
understanding of the context must form the basis of
our future policymaking. Let us start with Yemen,
where a picture has been painted by some of a nation
plunged into chaos as a result of the intervention of the
Arab coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen. Some
have forgotten that, as recently as four years ago, the
legitimate Yemeni Government headed a functional
State and had a clear process for political transition.
The Council should have taken decisive action when
the Houthis took Sana’a in September 2014, which
caused the breakdown of the Yemeni State apparatus
and the resulting descent into civil war. If the coalition
had not entered at the request of the legitimate
Government and in accordance with resolution 2216

S/PV. 8293

(2015), today we would be dealing with a lawless State
dominated by an illegal militia that represent only 3 per
cent of the population but seek to control the fate of
27 million Yemenis.
In Syria, as the brutal war enters its eighth year, in
our view a prominent Arab role is essential to resolving
the conflict. With all due respect to the Powers that are
deciding the fate of the Syrian people today, Syria is
an Arab nation and its future lies in an Arab regional
solution with the support of the international community
and the United Nations. Along with the negative ones,
there are positive trends in our region. For example,
with regard to Iraq, we join others in applauding the
defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
we congratulate the Iraqi people on the success of
their recent parliamentary elections. The United Arab
Emirates looks forward to a renewed Iraqi role in the
Arab political scene.
However, we cannot hope to address new conflicts
without resolving older ones. The call for a Palestinian
State will remain a rallying cry for proponents of
extremist ideologies. Until the rights of the Palestinians
are met, the issue will remain one of the root causes of
regional instability and will prevent Israel from having
a secure place in our region.
Finally, diplomacy in our region will not thrive
unless we restore the deficit of trust that exists. To do
that, we need honest and transparent partners and the
collective vision of our shared security. More than a
year ago, we took diplomatic measures against the State
of Qatar because we could no longer tolerate its policies
and support for the terrorist groups that undermine
stability in our region and throughout the world. The
new Arab centre of which I spoke will go from strength
to strength, as our model speaks to the hearts and
minds of the millions of Arabs who want a future based
on optimism rather than nihilism. We will always be an
inclusive group for those that reject extremist ideology
in all its forms and seek to partner peacefully in a
positive and moderate vision for our region.
The United Arab Emirates and its allies are
actively working to stabilize our region and to advance
its development. Bellwethers for thriving societies
are the protection of the rights of minorities and the
celebration of diversity, ethnicity and creed. Building
and maintaining strong institutions are key to that. The
unrest of the past seven years is largely the result of an
institutional trust deficit across the region, which saw

18-1959457/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

simmering discontent boil over in the collapse of the
social contract between people and Government.
By contrast, the focus and commitment of the
United Arab Emirates to the strength of its own
institutions, based on inclusiveness, transparency and
good governance, have produced strong social trust. We
must therefore renew our efforts for institution-building
across our region and replenish the trust deficit that
is shaking its very core. We stand ready to facilitate
new strategies to address the multitude of crises in
our region. We seek partnerships with both historical
friends and new ones so as to advance those efforts.
We ask only that our partners respect our equal voice
at the table in deciding our own collective future. An
optimistic and forward-looking model for the region is
critical to our collective success. We should not focus
solely on a future that we do not want. Instead, we must
begin to envision where we want to go and what will be
required to reach that destination.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
to the United Nations, and Mr. Gerton Van Den Akker,
representative of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

25/06/2018

The parties can continue to engage in blame games
and to hold each other responsible for the failures.
However, the fact of matter is that one cannot expect the
weaker party to remain docile and passive in the face
of the continuous onslaught of atrocities, aggression,
occupation, desecration of religious sites, invasion of
territory, violation of United Nations resolutions and
so on.
Rightly, that is the situation of the Palestinians, the
crimes of the Israeli Government and the state and fate
of the mediation process. In talking about how to make
it work and to ensure sustainability, the following are
imperative. Israel should immediately stop occupying
Palestinian lands and building new housing. The blatant
violation of human and international laws must stop.
The blockade of Palestinian territories must end. The
international community must remain impartial and
non-partisan. The very reason for the establishment of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) was no
other than the Palestine issue. Ever since, we have seen
the crises and the attempts to resolve the dispute going
through different ups and downs.

Mr. Mehdiyev: Let me begin by offering my
sincere appreciation to the Government of the Russian
Federation for convening this important meeting. I am
confident that our deliberations today will help to refine
our response to the challenges of peace and security at
the global, regional and national levels.

If I may stretch it to that extent, the crises in the
region are no less complicated. They say that those who
do not learn history are doomed to repeat it. That is
precisely how everyone has acted with regard to the
other countries in the region. The colonial intervention
in Palestine led to what we see there today. Similarly, the
foreign interventions and proxy wars have played havoc
in the region at an unprecedented level. There is a need
to pause and take stock of the aggravating situations.
The resolution of conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa region requires sincerity, impartiality and
commitment. Mediation cannot be dictation. It cannot
be ignorance of the facts and of history. It cannot be the
denial of rights.

The crises engulfing the Middle East and North
Africa region are undoubtedly the most difficult
and challenging as compared to any other similar
contemporary situation. As we have seen over the years,
the challenges are numerous but those that effectively
engulf all positive efforts are when the Powers that be
in the global political system tend to be partial and
partisan, when crimes against humanity and the blatant
violation and mockery of internal laws go unchallenged,
when a party acts with extreme impunity and arrogance
merely on the basis of its military muscle, and, last but
not the least, when neighbours act in an unfair way
through proxies and work as spoilers.

Apart from the threat that the long-standing and
unresolved conflicts, mainly located in the Muslim
world, continue to pose to the peace and security of
our societies, new tensions and conflicts with cultural
and religious dimensions have also recently emerged
to challenge our collective efforts to build a better
world that is founded on moderation, understanding
and harmony. Prejudices and misunderstanding
among cultures and civilizations increasingly fuel the
extremist discourse across the divide. The perilous
currents of Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism,
as well as sectarianism, clearly have the potential to
endanger the peace, security and well-being of present

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to the
United Nations.

58/61

18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and future generations unless priority is given to
dialogue and mediation.
As the OIC also grapples with tensions from
within and outside its area, priority is also focused
on the surge of violent extremism, terrorism and
radicalization, escalating tensions between some States
and the ongoing conflict situations in various OIC
regions through a new peace and security architecture
to resolve conflicts, using the tools of mediation, the
good offices of the Secretary-General and a proactive
and quiet diplomacy, as well as the mechanism of the
Executive Committee provided for in chapter XV of the
OIC Charter.
One of the greatest threats militating against our
efforts to address intolerance and hatred on the basis
of religious beliefs and cultural identity is the growing
scourge of defamation and the vilification of Islam and
Muslims in parts of the world, particularly in the West.
I shall reiterate OIC’s offer of an effective
partnership among all stakeholders in promoting
peace and a world of hope, dignity and justice. As the
second largest intergovernmental organization after the
United Nations, with 57 member States spread across
four continents, the OIC, the collective voice of the
Muslim world, has the responsibility, in accordance
with its charter, to safeguard and protect the interests
of its member States within the spirit of promoting
peace and harmony among the various peoples of the
global community.
In that context, the O1C maintains cooperative
relations with the United Nations and other regional and
subregional bodies. Over the years since its creation
in 1969, it has also developed a strategic partnership
with such bodies, in particular the United Nations, to
protect the vital interests of the Muslim world, to work
towards the peaceful settlement of disputes, and to ease
heightening tensions that could undermine international
peace and security. It therefore remains steadfastly
committed to preventing hate and inflammatory
rhetoric that, if left unchecked, could disrupt our
global order and cause a religious conflagration with
catastrophic consequences.
We would like to underscore the importance of the
following points: developing the necessary political
within the international community to resolve longstanding conflicts, including the Arab-Israeli conflict,
which has continued to have a negative impact on
global peace and security; adopting a new paradigm

S/PV. 8293

based on a dialogue-based culture of peace and security
that focuses more on early warning and pre-emptive
responses to avert conflicts, while de-emphasizing
long and wasteful conflict management; enhancing
governance, including by ensuring that Member States
address the root causes of conflicts, while strengthening
their mediation capacity and capabilities; establishing
a network of United Nations-OIC mediators, experts,
think thanks, civil society groups, including the Group
of Friends of OIC Mediation; mobilizing and allocating
sustained funding to OIC mediation activities;
promoting a more culturally and religiously sensitive
mediation approach for sustainable global peace;
enhancing the United Nations Alliance of Civilization
and formally recognizing islamophobia as a threat to
global peace and security, adopting appropriate counter
measures through Human Rights Council resolution
16/18 and the Istanbul process and enhancing the use of
the Secretary-General’s good offices in mediation and
conflict resolution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I am
pleased to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
The European Union (EU) ensures that the Middle
East peace process remains high on its political agenda
at a time when the region faces many other challenges.
The European Union remains fully committed to its
known positions on the parameters for a two-State
solution and to the importance of avoiding steps that
erode the viability of the two-State solution, as laid
down in the Quartet report of July 2016, including in
particular continued Israeli settlement activity, which is
illegal under international law and remains an obstacle
to peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), and
acts of incitement and violence.
We are deeply alarmed about the sharp escalation
of violence we witnessed most recently in Gaza, which
left a large number of Palestinians dead and injured.
We underscore the absolute urgency of addressing
the gravity of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and
express our firm support to the efforts of United Nations
Special Coordinator Mladenov in that regard. Israel
must respect the right to peaceful protest and ensure
the use of proportional measures when protecting its
legitimate security interests. We urge all parties to
take immediate steps to de-escalate the situation and

18-1959459/61

S/PV.8293

Maintenance of international peace and security

to act with utmost restraint to avoid further loss of life.
Israeli security forces must refrain from the excessive
use of force against unarmed civilians. The lethal use of
force should be exercised with maximum restraint and
only as a last resort to protect life. Those leading the
protests in Gaza, including Hamas and other groups,
have a responsibility to avoid provocations and ensure
that they remain strictly non-violent. We condemn the
firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel.
We underscore the EU’s clear, consolidated position
on Jerusalem as a final status issue and will continue
to respect the international consensus on Jerusalem
embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980), including
on the diplomatic representations until the final status
of Jerusalem is resolved.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the recent significant reductions of funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In an already
unstable region UNRWA must remain able to carry out
its important function.
The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year of
continuous and widespread violence, brutal violation
of international law, as well as the repeated use of
chemical weapons by the regime and Da’esh. The
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility
for that situation. The continued deliberate denial and
obstruction of humanitarian access to those in need must
stop. Unhindered, safe and sustainable humanitarian
access must be implemented, as called for most
recently in resolution 2401 (2018). The EU deplores
the repeated violations of the so-called de-escalation
areas and urges the Astana guarantors, Russia, Iran and
Turkey, to ensure a complete and durable cessation of
hostilities throughout the whole Syrian territory. The
Syrian regime and its allies have started an offensive
in the region of Dar’a, in south-western Syria, in
a de-escalation zone that the Astana guarantors
committed to safeguarding. All necessary measures to
protect civilian lives, as well as unhindered, safe and
sustainable humanitarian access must be ensured.
The EU reiterates its strong condemnation of the
repeated use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime
and by Da’esh as confirmed by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The EU reiterates
the strong need for accountability in Syria for all war
crimes committed and in particular for the use of
60/61

25/06/2018

chemical weapons. The use of such weapons is a war
crime and crime against humanity. In that respect, the
EU urges the Security Council to rapidly re-establish
an independent attribution mechanism to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of chemical weapons
attacks. In that regard, the EU regrets the Russian vetoes
of the renewal of the JIM mandate in November 2017.
The EU reiterates that Syria needs a political solution
and a political transition in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. We commend the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and call for
the swift establishment of the constitutional committee,
including the full and effective participation of women
without further delay.
The EU reaffirms its extreme concern about the
continuing deterioration of the situation in Yemen.
The EU is seriously concerned about the recent
intensification of the military operations in and around
the city of Hodeidah, including the impact of the military
operations by the coalition on the civilian population.
The EU reiterates its strong condemnation of attacks
against civilians, urges all parties to the conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians and fully respect
international humanitarian law, including by providing
unimpeded humanitarian access and safe passage for
those who wish to escape the fighting. The EU also
calls on all parties to ensure the full and effective
functioning of Al-Hudaydah port as the lifeline for
humanitarian support and commercial access point for
essential supplies.
The EU expresses its concern about the fact that
the most recent developments risk undermining United
Nations-led efforts to resume negotiations towards
a political solution of the conflict and welcomes
the Organization’s determination, as expressed
by Mr. Martin Griffiths, to move ahead with the
political process.
The EU condemns the launch of ballistic missiles
by the Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
including at civilian targets, and against vessels
transiting through the Bab Al-Mandab Strait. The EU
expresses grave concerns about the proliferation of
ballistic missiles and technology in the region as such
actions feed regional tensions.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
is a key element of the global nuclear non-proliferation
18-19594

25/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

architecture, enshrined in resolution 2231 (2015) and
is essential to the security of the region and beyond. It
has been working and is delivering on its goal. As long
as Iran implements its nuclear-related commitments,
the EU will remain firmly committed to the continued
full and effective implementation of the JCPOA. The
EU deeply regrets the decision of the President of the
United States to withdraw from the JCPOA. While the
EU expresses its concerns related to ballistic missiles
and increasing tensions in the region, it reiterates the
need to address them outside the JCPOA in the relevant
formats and forums.
Finally, with respect to Libya, the EU remains fully
committed to an inclusive inter-Libyan political process,
and we express full support to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salamé’s efforts to achieve a
political settlement and ensure that elections take place
by the end of 2018, once the proper conditions are in
place, as outlined in Special Representative Salamé’s
statement to the Council on 21 May (see S/PV.8263)

S/PV. 8293

and in line with the 6 June presidential statement of the
Security Council (S/PRST/2018/11), which welcomed
the momentum generated by the international
conference on Libya, which took place in Paris on
29 May.
The EU remains the main provider of humanitarian
aid and cooperation in Libya. Together with the Libyan
authorities, the United Nations and the African Union,
it is also committed to setting up a more efficient
system to manage migration, in particular to improve
migrants’ living conditions in Libya and ensure they
can be repatriated should they wish to be, while meeting
international humanitarian standards.
Lastly, the EU has deployed a military mission
and a civilian mission to provide further assistance to
Libya. The EU will sustain its engagement in Libya and
continue to do its utmost to contribute to its stabilization
and national reconciliation.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-1959461/61
