UNITEDNATIONS

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 23 JUNE 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 480)

.......,.,,.,,................

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, hzongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swazrland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/9237 and Add.l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SJPV.1480

P

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi’ty Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 23 June 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l480)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/923? and Add.l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia
Latter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, lvorll
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper

Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/Q237 and
Add.+2)
Reports of the Committee established in uursuance of
Se&ix
Council resolution 253 (1968) ~S/L?fl!i4 and

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish j: In accordance ivith the decisions previously adopted by the Council,
and witb its consent, I shall invite the representatives of
Mauritania, Tanzania, Guinea, Somalia, India, Sudan and
Saudi Arabia to participate, without the right to vote, in
the debate on the question before us.
2. In view of the limited spaceat the Council table, and in
accordancewith the practice followed in the past in similar
cases,I shall invite those representatives to take the seats
which have been reservedfor them in the chamber, on the
understanding that when they wish to make statements
they will be invited to take seatsat the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. A. Ould Daddah
(Mauritania), Mr, A. B. C. Danieli (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. A. Toure (Guinea), Mr. M, Warsama (Somalia), Mr, S, M S. Chadha (India), Mr. M. Fakhreddine
(Sudan), and Mr. J M Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated 20
June 1969 from the representative of Burundi in which he
asks to be allowed to participate, without the right to vote,
in this debate. If I hear no objections, I shall take it that the
Council so agrees.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze Terence
(Burundi) took the place reserved for him in the Council
chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT @an&ted fram Spanish): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
5. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Finland, upon whom I now call.
6. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): As I said in my previous
statement in this debate, our natural disappointment in the
slow rate at which the policy of sanctions against the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia is evolving should not lead US
to underestimate the historic significance of the unanimous
decision taken a year ago by the Security Council to apply

towards the illegal minority racist regime :in Southem
Rhodesia. According to that policy, the rebellion now in
power in that Territory is not to be met head o:n, but rather
every effort should be made to reach a compromise
settlement with it. Several speakers have underlined the
novelty of that approach in British colonial policy, It is in
fact the first time that a rebellion is to be not crushed but
appeased by the United Kingdom Government.

economic sanctions for the purpose of putting an end to
the suppression of the political rights of the black majority
in Southern Rhodesia. The Finnish Government strongly
believes that the Security Council, having once embarked
upon a policy of sanctions, must find the means to carry it
through, for the sake of the people of Southern Rhodesia
and for the sake of the authority of the United Nations. It
is from this point of view that I shall now examine the
report of the sanctions Committee which is on the agenda
of our meeting.

11. This appeasement has taken various forms during tie
past three-and-a-half years. Periodic negotiations have taken
place from time to time with the rebels by Cabinet
Ministers of the British Crown, including the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom. Along with that, the United
Kingdom, after admitting its unwillingness i:o crush the
rebellion, has proposed to the Security Council that
so-called selective sanctions be applied to the Smith rGgime.
The mere fact that the United Kingdom, while fully
maintaining its responsibility towards the Territory, has
turned to the United Nations for assistanceconstitutes the
crux of the present ambiguous situation-ambiguous
because claiming responsibility over a Territory ruled by a
rebellion but not being ready to deal with it, asking for
United Nations assistancebut trying at every turn to limit it
to the minimum, has made the situation even more difficult
and resulted in the present deadlock. The United Kingdom
policy of playing on two instruments at the same time ha
resulted in no meaningful United Kingdom action, white it
has reduced the utility of the United Nations action.

7. The report shows that the decision taken by the
Security Council on 29 May 1968 and contained in
resolution 253 (1968) has not yet been fully carried out. It
is revealing that by the end of 1968 only eighty-one
Member States and four members of speciahzed agencies
had reported to the Secretary-General on the implementation of the resolution. As late as on 6 June 1969,
thirty-three States, twenty-nine Members of the United
Nations and four members of speciahzed agencies, had not
replied to any of the communications from the Secretary
General requesting information on measures taken to
implement the resolution. We are thus conducting a
world-wide operation with incomplete intelligence.
8. While it is obvious that the policy of South Africa and
Portugal is causing the greatest damage to the system of
sanctions, it also appears from the report of the sanctions
Committee that other States are carrying on trade with
Southern Rhodesia. According to one estimate mentioned
in the report, this illegal trade amounted to approximately
w million in 1968. The report suggestsa number of steps
that could be taken by States complying with resolution
253 (1968) to increase the effectiveness of the sanctions
and thus to stop this illegal trade. In view of the relatively
simple structure of Southern Rhodesia’s exports, it should
also be worth exploring whether it would not be possible to
agree on ways and means to interrupt or at least appreciably cut down the export of certain key commodities
from Southern Rhodesia through South Africa or Mozambique.

12. The policy of sanctions has been at the heart of thii
dubious game. First we had the policy of the so.caIIed
selective sanctions. Later came the so-called comprehensive
sanctions, which, as I propose to demonstrate :later, have so
far been anything but comprehensive. This gradual
approach, as some speakers have underlined in this discussion, has enabled the Smith regime to adjust to the new
situation, to look for alternative outlets for its goods, 10
make new arrangements for transportation, fuel supply and
so on. Consequently the tightening of the sanc.tionshas not
really affected the Smith regime, as proven convincingly by
the figures quoted by several speakers in our discussion and
by the boasts of Ian Smith.

9. Those are questions of the kind which, in the view of
my delegation, could be examined in consultations among
members of the Security Council, or perhaps, in the first
place, within the sanctions Committee. We believe that we
should now concentrate on finding more effective measures
to ensure full implementation of Security Council resolution 253 (1968) rather than on the far-reaching new
proposals contained in the draft resolution presented to the
Council at the 1479th meeting by the representative of
Algeria, proposals that are bound to divide the Council and,
consequently, remain without practical effect, To dismiss
the present system of economic sanctions as a failure before
agreement could be reached within the Council on what
else could be done would be to weaken the credibility of
the sanctions now in force and confuse international
opinion which has been ready to support the sanctions.

13. The conclusion to be drawn from this situation is clear
to ail of US. Either we decide on full sanctions against the
Smith regime or it is useless to continue to apply sanctions
at a snail’s pace. The policy of sanctions proposed up IO
now by the United Kingdom is nothing but shadow-boxing.
It is dictated not by the desire to eliminate Smith and his
cohorts but by considerations of preserving them in tie
government of that land for a long time to come by
arranging compromises with these racist rebels. The grad*
ually introduced and almost totally ineffective sanctions
were primarily meant to strengthen the hand of the United
Kingdom negotiators to strike a better bargain with Smith.
14. It is for that reason that the draft resolution [SJ’
submitted by the Afro-Asian nations represen.
ted in the Security Council, provides in its openWe
paragraph 3, for full sanctions by all against the racist
regime. My delegation feels that it is high time to e&ark
on this road. We have been strengthened in this conviction
by the reaction of the representative of the United
927O/Rev.I]

10. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): During this discussion a
number of speakershave underlined the complete fallacy of
the United Kingdom position on the situation prevailing in
Southern Rhodesia. This fallacy has all along been demonstrated in the policy of the United Kingdom Government
2

L

Kingdom, who, referring (1476th meeting/ to the statistics
cited by the representativeof the Soviet Union on United
Kingdom investments in Southern Rhodesiaduring past
years, claims that this representedno violation of the
sanctions.If we have sanctionswhich makeit possibleto
invest tens of millionsof poundssterlingin the economy of
Jan Smith, then it is time to do somethingabout these
so-calledsanctions.

Since South Africa and Portugal are thus clearly violating
the Charter of the United Nations, operative paragraph5 of
the draft resolutionbefore us is fully justified in providing
that the sanctions envisaged in resolution 253 (1968)
should be extended to South Africa and the Portuguese
colony of Mozambique,or rather to Portugal.
18. In this connexion we have often been told by some
representativesthat it is not possible for them to apply
those sanctionsbecauseof the considerablesacrificesthis
provision would entail for their countries, That is a curious
argument,to say the least.Westill recall that the very same
countries were well able to ignore the sacrificeswhenthey
decidedupon the measuresof embargoapplied againstthe
socialistcountriesduring the cold-warperiod. Therewasof
course no United Nations resolution to support those
discriminatory measures.The only motive behindthem was
the desireto stifle the economy of the socialistcountries
and to force them to restore capitalism to its previous
power. It is instructive now to watch the samecountries
ruling out financial sacrificesin the struggle againstthe
racist regimesof southern Africa when they so readily
consentedto large lossesof trade with the socialist.world.
But then it wasa question of fighting not fascismor racist
regimesbut rather the peopleswhich bore the brunt of the
great struggleagainstfascismand which resolutely oppose
racial discriminationand colonialism.

15. The secondreasonfor the collapseof the policy of
sanctions is the non-compliancewith our decisionsby
severalMember States. The secondreport (S/9252/ of the
Committee establishedin pursuanceof Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) states in paragraph12 that Portugal-on the pretext of not having receivedfrom the Security
Council an answerto its questions-hasin effect refusedto
comply with resolution 253 (1968) of the Council. In
paragraph 14 we read’ that a number of Member States,
including South Africa, have not repliedto any communications from the Secretary-Generalin this matter.
16. However, in the first report of that Committee
[S/8954] * we readthat all availableevidenceindicatesthat
South Africa hasbecomeby far the maintradingpartner of
Southern Rhodesia.According to estimatesprovided to it
by the Secretariat, the Committee reported that South
Africa’s imports from Southern Rhodesiaamounted to
about $80 million in 1967, and South Africa’s exports to
Southern Rhodesiato about $160 million. The preliminary
data for January-March 1968 indicated that South Africa’s
exports to Southern Rhodesiahad beenexpandedfurther
during the first half of 1968. Although no information on
the commodity composition of this trade wasavailable, it
was estimated by the Secretariat that about $25 million
worth of South Africa’s exports to SouthernRhodesiain
1966 and 1967consistedonly of fuels.
17. Acting contrary to the provisionsof the International
Convention relating to Economic Statistics, the Govemment of South Africa hasadoptedthe practiceof showinga
single aggregatefor trade with African countries, which
would not disclosethe individual countries of origin or
destination. During his visit to South Africa in March 1969,
Ian Smith saidthat he did not seeany reluctanceor fear on
the part of South Africa to trade with Rhodesia.That is the
way the sanctions decided by the Security Council are
complied with by a Member State. It is unnecessaryto
dwell’in detail on the role of the ports of the Portuguese
colony of Mozambiquein handling fuel and other supplies
for Southern Rhodesiaand forwardingits exports overseas.
There is no doubt in the minds of any of the delegations
seated around this table that the two Member States
referred to have deliberately and defiantly violated Article
25 of the Charter,which statesthat:
“The Membersof the United Nations agreeto accept
and carry out the decisionsof the Security Council in
accordancewith the presentCharter.”

19. It is certainly astonishingthat Governmentswhich
never tire of lecturing others on democracy and human
rights capitulate so completely the moment selfish economic interests enter the picture. The racist regimesin
southern Africa represent the worst as far as denial of
elementary human rights, racial superiority and complete
refusal of self-determination are concerned.Ian Smith has
bormwed the bulk of the South African legal system,an
entire set of laws regarding racial segregation;national,
political, economic and cultural apartheid has been ruthlessly implemented in Southern Rhodesia. In all these
matters the view and policies of Vorster and Ian Smith are
no different from the ones which Hitler, Rosenbergand
other Nazi stalwartsheld in their time. The representativeof
the administeringPower calls the fifty-year-old rule of the
white settlers the exercise of self-governmentand proudly
states that it prevailed with its endorsementfor half a
century. In our view it had nothing to do with selfgovernment. Considering that fifty years of so-called
self-governmenthave led to the Smith regimeand to the
tragicomedy of the farce referendum on 20 Junelast, one
can understandthat the United Kingdom meansit whenit
tells us that progressmust be inevitably slow. In reply to
the representativeof the United Kingdom we areboundto
emphasizethat there can be no compromisewith fascism.
The Council cannot compromise the good name of the
United Nations.
20. My country, asa memberof the apartheidCommittee
of the United Nations, feels that it should raiseits voice
againstthe arbitrary persecution,imprisonmentand execution of the best Zimbabwe people, who fight for their
freedom, for their genuine independence and for their
fundamental human and national rights asenshrinedin the
United Nations Charter. Unfortunately the draft resolution
remainswanting in this respect.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Supplement forApril, May and June 1969, page191.
2 Ibid,, Twenty-third Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1968, page184.’

3

26. To begin with, I may perhaps be permitted to quote a
passage from Winston Churchill’s book “Reflections and
Adventures.” I quote:
“ . . * First, a Statesman in contact with the moving
current of events $nd anxious to keep the ship on an even
keel and steer a steady course may lean all h.is weight now
on one side and now on the other. , , . Yet his object will
throughout have remained the same, His, resolves, hii
wishes, his outlook may have been unchanged, his
methods may be verbally irreconcilable. . . , But all this
may be capable of reasonable and honourable explana.
tion. Statesmen may say bluntly, ‘We have failed to
coerce. We have now to conciliate’, or alternatively, ‘We
have failed to conciliate; we have now to coerce’.”

21. I feel obliged to refer also to the repeated appeals
voiced by the representative of the United Kingdom in
favour of the unity of the Council in the matter of
Southern Rhodesia. The history of this problem in the
Council must persuade everyone that the majority of the
States represented here, notwithstanding their reservations
and serious misgivings, have opted for unity in the past. But
this unity, based on the delaying tactics of the administering Power, has led us up a blind alley.
22. Now it is time for the United Kingdom and those who
sympathize with it to join the majority and its policies and
thereby help to bring about the unity that will lead to
results and not to repeated deadlocks asin the past. This is
the unity we must seek and this is the unity that will
eliminate Smith and his regime. The earlier, formal unity in
the Council has served only to embolden the Salisbury
racists. A unity based on fundamental principles of the
Charter and not on mere expediency is what is needed. No
other unity can be accepted.

27. This Council, which has witnessed the confabulations
held between Salisbury and London during the last few
years, is now better able than ever to interpret correctly the
United Kingdom’s aim. As can be gathered from the famous
passage which I have just quoted, this policy has been
meticulously applied by Mr. Churchill’s successors and
disciples to Zimbabwe. The waverings of United Kingdom
policy are well known, and a large number of delegations
have shown how powerless economic sanctions have been
since Ian Smith usurped power. The London Government,
for its part, has maintained the contrary view and called for
a moratorium during which those sanctions would force
Smith to realize that he could not keep himself in power.

23. The discussion in the Security Council has clearly
shown that world public opinion now demands that we
take energetic measures to bring self-determination to the
oppressed people of Zimbabwe. The measures applied up to
the present time have obviously been inadequate to do this.
New and resolute measures are needed, measures which are
called for in the text of the draft resolution contained in
document S/9270/Rev.l. But it is important to state that
all this is not necessarily required; should the United
Kingdom exercise its responsibilities, as recalled in operative paragraph 1, and take all necessary measures, including
the use of force, to bring an end to the rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia, as provided for in operative paragraph 2, there will be no need for the United Nations to do
anything more. The choice now lies with the United
Kingdom. If the United Kingdom acts resolutely;there will
be peace and self-determination for the people of Zimbabwe; if it does not, the Security Council will have no
alternative but to apply to the letter the provisions of the
draft resolution. My delegation thus will vote for the draft
resolution, for the reasons which I have given in this
intervention.

28. A large number of Governments, including that of
Burundi, have constantly warned the United Kingdom
against its maternal indulgence towards the usurpers. That
attitude has caused the Labour leadership to be sharply
accused of weakness and complicity.
29. On many occasions, both in the General Assembly and
in the Fourth Committee, the delegation of Burundi has
stressed that the shilly-shallying of the mother country has
been a premeditated and deliberate contribution
to the
strength of the rebellion in Rhodesia. This hlas proved the
need to use force to restore legality.
30. Now that nazism has been established in Zimbabwe,
will the British Government persist in dlescribing the
previous warnings as unrealistic or emotional? The admlnhtering Power can now see that the advocates of armed force
had no interest in subjecting it to bitter and unjustified
criticism. Unfortunately the situation has recently become
worse and the gloomy predictions have been fulfdled since
the establishment of apartheid in Rhodesia.

24. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Burundi. In
accordance with the Council’s previous decision, I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and call upon him to
speak.

25. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (translated porn French):
iE^-31. As the economic embargo on which the United
Mr. President, I should like to express my gratitude for
Kingdom banked has failed, and as its conciliatory attitude
your kindness in calling upon me at this stage of the debate
towards Smith has led the latter to inflict a humiliating
on Rhodesia. Quite a few of the aspects of this problem
defeat, what alternative does London propose to try? Will
have already been raised and debated by the numerous
the Security Council let the United Kingdom Government
speakers who have preceded me, so that my delegation sees condemn five million Africans to the perpetual wretchedno need to go over the problems which have already been
ness promised them by the usurper’s mock constitution?
dealt with but will rather try to place the Rhodesian
Or does the Labour leadership prefer to opt for a defeat&t
problem in its true perspective and define its essence and
solution, since all its compromises with Smitlh have mevita.
the nature of t&s apartheid system that has just been given
bly driven it towards chicanery and surrender of principle?
official status in Rhodesia. It will be necessaryto showhow
32. Like us, the London Government has finally reaiizcd
deceptive certain views can be if one tries to gloss over the
Rhodesian problem and its consequences.
that the impunity enjoyed by the Rhodesian rebellion has
4

:

!
:
i
’

r

+

given it a long start towards its goal. Since the path of
conciliation taken by the United Kingdom has led to a dead
end, the proper solution must be sought in coercion, in
accordance with the Churchillian political dogma which I
quoted earlier on.

country, the sordid contempt with which they have just
responded to its very maternal treatment, the immeasurable
danger posed by the twin regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury-all these are so many compelling reasons for shaking
off that blissful optimism which has lulled certain Governments to sleep.

33. The advocates of the use of force against Smith are
not thirsting to shed human blood, as some may believe.
The delegations which advocated the overthrow of the
Salisbury rebels by force used to be accused of political
immaturity. Some critics even went so far, at least in
whispered comments, as to ascribe this demand to an innate
and untamed Afro-Asian thirst for blood. On the contrary,
the honourable course is to remove any misunderstanding
by stating the real reasonsfor such a solution.

40. Will the United Kingdom adopt towards Smith “the
position of the retired burglar” which it adopted towards
the Italian Duce? If so, the administering Power must
understand that such a surrender will be a prelude to a
catastrophe of at least the same magnitude as the Second
World War, confronting the same great Powers which persist
in underestimating the gravity of the situation in southern
Africa. In the last analysis the United Kingdom itself will
not escape the disastrous consequences of the explosive
climate which it will have brought about in Rhodesia. The
official establishment of nazism in Rhodesia, yesterday a
dangerous possibility and today a monstrous reality, will
turn like an overwhelming boomerang against its instigators
and inflict consequences for the United Kingdom itself.

34. Far from trying to slake any thirst for blood, the
advocates of force considered it the sovereign remedy for
the arrogant rebellion in Rhodesia. In other words, it was
an alternative dictated by the needs of the Salisbury
situation and the absence of any other effective means,
since the great evils rampant in Zimbabwe called for this
drastic remedy.

41. The ingenuity of the dogmatic South African segregationists, banking on the simplicity of the blacks, has
invented the euphemism apartheid for a reality identical
with nazism both in its ideological essence and in its
expansionist aims.

35. The surrender of the Labour Government to the
Rhodesian usurper now obviously resembles at every point
the credulous concessions made by Chamberlain to the
Fiihrer and might well lead to other agreements like those
reached at Munich on 29 September 1938.

42. I have often pointed out in the General Assembly and
the Security Council a striking parallelism, illustrated by
facts and evidence as obvious as they are irrefutable,
between Hitler’s nazism and South African apartheid.

36. This comparison has seemed to me necessary for a
clear forecast of the disastrous consequences of the
situation which has just been created in Rhodesia,

43. I shall therefore limit myself to a few examples which
prove how closely the doctrine preached and followed by
the fanatical pigmentocrats of South Africa resembles
Hitlerism’s deification of one race. The theoreticians of
apartheid have eulogized it so fully that I am embarrassed
by my choice of quotations. One of the most rabid
advocates of apartheid, Mr. Malan, stated:

37. It might be helpful to recall briefly the episode which
preceded the Second World War. While Hitler was expanding his Reich day after day by his invasions in eastern and
south-eastern Europe, the British underestimated the
gravity of the situation in that part of Europe. Instead of
going to the heart of the problem, Chamberlain preferred to
shy away from it into sterile negotiations. So at the age of
seventy he made his first journey by air and went three
times to seek a compromise with Hitler. That is what the
present British Prime Minister has done with Smith. At each
meeting the founder of nazism very skilfully exploited the
weakness of the West and increased his demands; that has
likewise been Smith’s attitude towards the United King
dom. Instead of resisting Hitler’s expansionism by force,
the British took the line of least resistance by urging
Czechoslovakia, threatened with imminent annexation, to
surrender everything.

“The history of the Afrikaaners reveals an intention so
determined and so precise that one is led to believe that it
is the work not of men but of God. We have a divine right
to be Afrikaaners; our history is the greatest work of art
ever designed by the great architect of the centuries.”
44. For the same reason, and following the same procedure as the artisans of racial supremacy in Europe, the
South African Nazis have taken as their main mission the
deification of their white caste.

38. While the signing of the Munich agreements actually
quickened and safeguarded the Ftihrer’s expansionist movement to the East, Chamberlain in his ingenuousness plumed
himself on his return to London to have “peace in our
time” in his briefcase. The peace had not been saved; no
diplomatic triumph had been won and it was in fact a
crushing defeat, since the Second World War broke out less
than one year after the signers of the Munich’ agreements,
Deladier aird Chamberlain, returned in triumph to Paris and
London.

“Men of the same blood (said Hitler) should belong to
the same Reich, That is why for me the small frontier
town of Braunau symbolizes a great mission. . . . A State
which at. a time of racial contamination jealously seeksto
conserve the best elements of its own race must one day
become the master of the whole world.”
45. The advocates of apartheid in South Africa aim at the
domination, if not of the whole world, at least of all Africa;
and fTOm this point of view one wonders whether Africa
alone will suffer or whether the Powers outside Africa will
not also be deeply affected.

39. Now, the painful rebuff with which the Rhodesian
settlers have just repaid the tender solicitude of the mother
5

taken over and made its own the doctrine of Adolf Hitler.
especially the mission of ensuring the victory:, “against all
false and artificial laws”, of a so-called natural and sacred
law: that of the community of blood.

46. This racist assumption, underlying the theory which
would glorify one race by condemning the others to
slavery, can be illustrated in another way. I should now like
to quote Mr. Raymond Aron, who speaks of the destiny of
South Africa as closely linked with that of Rhodesia:

53. Now, all circumstances tend to corroborate the various
predictions that the unleashing of a war by nazism is no
longer an intention but a certainty, and that if its outbreak
is perhapsnot just at hand, the questionwilI only be oneof
timing.

“The only way to perpetuate the subjection of the
vanquished is to forbid them access to the skilled
professions, to guarantee the representatives of the master
people a monopoly of the scientific and administrative
posts. This is what the whites are doing in South
Africa . . .“.

~4. Just like the Leader of the National SochdistGerman
Workers’ Party, the creators of the monstrouspolicy of
apartheid have vowed implacablehatred to a race which
lives side by side with them; they preach the same
philosophicaldogma exalting a superiorspeciesof humanity which Hitler formulated as a true religion in hia
Weltanschaunung.
Just like Hitler, the invent’orsof apartheid have no other watchword but the idolat.ry of ?aciilJ
unity basedon community of blood”.

47, Of course that is what the whites are doing in
Rhodesia, since the blacks, who have not gone to school or
are not scholastically qualified, are not even permitted to
exercise their civic rights and political power. And I will
continue my quotation:
‘I * . . That is how the nazis would probably have acted
in eastern Europe, drawing the logical conclusions from.
the doctrine that the Slavs, as born slaves, are subhuman
and destined to permanent servitude. The doctrine of the
essential inequality of men, which an industrial society
condemns within homogeneous communities, the racists
can apply to relations between communities.”

55. But although,unlike the Ftihrer, the Nazi schemers
are
not driven by a need for Lebensraumwhenthey dreamof
conqueringhalf Africa, there are many reasa’ns
why they
plan to take the offensive.
56. First, to meet the needsto which the standard-bearers
of racial inequality and their Rhodesianand Portuguese
discipleshave been driven in their mad crusadefor the
perpetuationof colonial dictatorship.

48. To identify the aims of the South African and
Rhodesian whites with those realized by Hitler may seem
today to over-estimate Pretoria’s plans; but a miscalculation
may prove tomorrow that certain members of this Council
will have underestimated at the present stage the deadly
blows which are now being prepared against Africa.

57. Secondly,to ensurethe political survivalof a Rhodesia
dominated by apartheid, and to help economically-back+
ward Portugalto escapefrom its obviouspoverty.

49. The reabsorption of the African sub-continent which
is now being plotted by the apostles of the deification of
the white race has been predicted by other authors; and for
that reason I should blame myself if I did not quote a
passage from Le Monde which very clearly expresses the
aims of the South African racists:

58. Thirdly, the enlargement and defence of the white
fortress,
59. Fourthly, the acquisition and exploitation of a wider
andmorediversifiedmarket.

“It is said that if the Rhodesian rebellion manages to
succeed and the sanctions are lifted, the same policy of
partition, leaving the whites in control of all the cities and
all the industrial power, could extend north of the
Limpopo into Rhodesia and perhaps eventually into
Angola and Mozambique. In addition to all that, and
although it is very seldom admitted in public, there is also
talk of encircling Zambia, bypassing Tanzania and reducing those two countries to the status of docile satellites,
and then of extending’this policy to Katanga.”

60. Fifthly, to bring about the annihilationof the nonwhites, who .today, have been reducedto the status of
submenat the mercy of the deified white superman.
61. In its issueof November last Le Monde.Diplmatiwe
wrote asfollows:
“On the whole there is an informal but effective
alliance between South Africa, Portugal and the Rho
desianrebel regime, which is supported by powerful
trends of opinion. This is essentially South Africa
itself. . . governed by men who judge the facts of their
situation with shrewd and calculatingminds. There wds
first a growing conviction that the econo:micpower of
South Africa would be better exploited if it covered a
wider commonmarket, including its own sourcesof raw
materials,such as the oil of Angola, within a kind @f
common market dominated by Pretoria and Johanneaburg. I . .”

50. A moment ago I was talking about the expansionist
aims of South Africa; this shows how far their preparation
has gone.
51. This expansionist mania which has seized on the
inventors of apartheid makes it easy to understand how
Rhodesia, occupied against the most elementary principles
of international law, will give the conqueror a vital
springboard for his assault on his future prey-south-eastern
and southern Africa.

“Since 1962 this new aggressivepolicy lhastaken b-0
main forms, The first is regular military collaboraiinn
with Portugal and Rhodesia,which beganevenbefom the

52. There is no need to prove that such a wily strategy,
aimed at the domination of all southern Africa, has literally
6

settlers’ coup d&at in 1965. . . . The other has been the
rebellion of the Rhodesian settlers and South Africa’s
need, if that rebellion was to survive, to extend’ its
influence northward and to place Rhodesia under its wing
by making it a political and economic satellite .”
62. The texts and facts that I have Just cited are clear
evidence of the extent to which the fate of the Rhodesian
regime is closely linked with that of South Africa. Hence it
would be a mistake to dissociate the expansionist plans
which have been jointly and simultaneously concocted in
Pretoria and Salisbury. When all is said and done, everything goes to show that Rhodesia is only a bridgehead of
nazism, meant to gather this African Eldorado to the white
bosom.
63. Having, of course, longer experience in the Nazi
adventure, the South African whites provide the mainspring
for the ultimate objective pursued by the Pretoria-Salisbury
axis. No less certainly, however, the Rhodesians are playing
an important part in it. This collusion will create an even
greater danger to humanity than racial segregation itself.
64. Since it is a proven fact that apartheid is only an
imitation of nazism, both in its doctrine and in its
expansionist aims, does this Council need anything more in
order to predict the same consequences as those brought
about by the madness of the German Fiihrer? And if the
calamity which will be born from these two hotbeds of
nazism is likely to affect even Powers situated outside
Africa, the extent of the danger should obviously lead to
the creation of a universal coalition.
65. Some persons calculate ingeniously, but incompletely
or too subjectively, that this frightful possibility is bound
to be confined to Africa alone. Such a policy in no way
differs from that of the ostrich which buries its head in the
sand at the approach of danger. By the very nature of
things, the principal and immediate target of this mad
political and racist hunger will be the African countries
which are directly exposed to the rapacity of the PretoriaLisbon-Salisbury trio. However, those who see farther
detect in this separatist mission a long-range plot on a vast
scale.
66. We agree that the vital interests and close relations
shared by the Governments and circles which are the
partners of the racist Rhodesian regime are a source of
immediate profits. It is no less true, however, that these
advantages can be enjoyed for only a short time. For the
protectors of a Nazi caste are even now drawing international condemnation upon themselves and deliberately
alienating the emerging continent, just on the eve of
tremendous and extremely fruitful collaboration and cooperation between the new Africa and the rest of the
world-and all for an opposing cause which is inevitably

doomed to disappear and disintegrate at the hands of those
who will benefit by present trends; for, whatever happens,
the worshippers of apartheid will not escape for ever from
the liberation movement which is sweeping the whole
world. On the other hand, abandonment by the United
Kingdom of its association with the cause of exploitation in
Rhodesia in particular and in colonial territories in general
will open a new road which will benefit both itself and
Africa.
67. If the modern world can only adapt itself in this way
to the needs of the century and to the legitimate demands
of the victims of foreign domination, it will both make a
long-term investment and sing the swan-songof the harsh
history of decolonization, the inevitability of which can be
discerned amid the vast floods which swallow up the rights
of the people of Zimbabwe.
68. It is an established fact that the Africans, no less than
other human beings throughout the world, are prepared to
brave all obstacles and all hardships, through thick and thin,
to regain the inalienable right of all men to liberty.
69. This need, rooted deep in the very nature of all
peoples, was very clearly expressed in Roman public law,
which provided: ‘Salus Populi suprema lex esto”-Let the
welfare of the people be the supreme law.
70. Despite the present obstacles, circumstances and conditions in Africa, a time will corn< when the Africans can
no longer permit themselves to remain for ever under any
foreign rod.
71. I have finished. I hope that the appeals of the
Afro-Asian group and of the delegations which support it
will not be condemned to oblivion. Gladstone used to say:
“‘A speech has often changed my opinion but never my
vote”, We should like to hope that the opposite will be true
in this Council.
72. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): There are
no other speakers on my list. Before adjourning this
meeting, I wish to inform the members of the douncil that
the co-sponsors of the draft resolution contained in
document S/9270/Rev.l have informed me that they had
intended to ask that that draft be put to a vote by the
Council during this afternoon’s meeting. They have added
that, in compliance with a request made by other members
of the Council, they have decided to postpone their request
for a vote for twenty-four hours; that is, until the’ next
meeting of the Council. In accordance with consultations
held previously, this next meeting will be held tomorrow,
24 June, at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED

NATIONS

publications

the world.
or Geneva.

Consult

your

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may

be obtained

bookstore

or write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Notions
Unier
sent
dipositairer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vour
Notions
Units,
Section
des venter,
New York

KAK flOllY’(HTb

COMO

Ventos,

I13AAHKFI

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todor
porter
Nuevo

Litho in United Nations, New York

from bookstores
and distributors
United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

to:

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
ICI librairiec
ouprbs
de votre libroirie
ou
ou Genivc.

OPTAHH3AlJHH

OSbEAHHEHHbIX

DE LAS NACIONES

de 10s Nociones
Unidor
estbn
del mundo.
Consulte
a IV librero

en venta
o dirijare

throughout
New York

et les ogencss
odrerscz-vows
d:

HAUHA

UNIDAS
en libreriar
a: Nacioner

y cosos distribuidoras
Unidos,
Seccidn

de

York o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

82085-November

1972-2,050

:
