.L

UNITED

NATIONS

SECUItITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2446th

MEETING:

NEW

26 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2446)

. ..... ..... ..... ..... ... ...... ... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:

-..,
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2446

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Sect&y Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2446th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. UMBA

di LUTETE

26 May

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting,
I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2446)
1. Adoption

1983, at 4.00 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:’
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439th to 2444th meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,- ‘the
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 pm
Adoption. of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 Tom the Permanent Refiresentative of India to the United Natious addre&ed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarv(AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Aizout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. MutIiz {Argentina), Mr. Joseph (Australia).
Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr.
Adjibade (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bulgaria), iMr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Trucco (Chile),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr. AlAshtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Davin (Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia),
Mr. Ott (German Demticratic Republic), Mr. van Well
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr.
Rdcz (Hungary), Mr. Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Irtdonesia), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan),
Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait) Mrs.
Jones (Liberia), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Traore (Mali). Mr. Martr~ Bosch (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia), Mr, Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr.
Chissano (Mozambique), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama), Mr. Jrunal

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mawitius) took ir piace at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Coun&
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.
1

(QataO, Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegao,
Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone),
Mr. A&n (Somalia). Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa),
Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (&j&n Arab
Republic). Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr.
Owiny (Uganda), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper Volta), Mr. Martini Urdaneta
(venetuela). Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

tional Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris from 25 to 29
April 1983.
10. The Council is particularly honoured and.its debate
is enriched by the presence and participation of Comrade
Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO. His statement at the
2439th meeting was certainly a major contribution to our
search for a solution to the Namibian question.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from -French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Czechoslovakia in which he requests to be invited to take part in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite him to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, pursuant to relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

11. The tireless efforts of the Secretary-General in the
quest for a peaceful resolution of the Namibian problem
are a matter of record. It is in this context that my delegation gratefully welcomes the report he has submitted to
the Council [S/157763. With his customary frankness,
incisiveness and lucidity he has not only provided useful
background information about the present impasse in
our efforts to achieve Namibia’s independence, but has
also placed the convening of these meetings in its proper
perspective.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia) took a place at the side of the Council chamber.

12. With the indulgence of the Council; I shall, even at
the risk of being boring, restate the real and only object
of the present meetings as perceived by us in the frontline States. These meetings have been convened with the
sole objective of securing the earliest implementation
of
Council resolution 435 (1978) without any modifications
or qualifications. We are, therefore, not here to provoke
or court any unnecessary confrontation with any country
or group of countries. Our commitment to the search for
a speedy resolution of the Namibian question is a matter
of public record; so also is our co-operation with the
United Nations and with any country or group of countries joining in support of this cause. It is in this spirit,
therefore, that we have in the past been engaged in
serious consultations
with the countries generally
referred to as the Western contact group. And yet, very
regrettably, no tangible progress has so far been achieved
towards the implementation
of the United Nations plan
for Namibia’s independence.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to call the attention of members of the Council
to document S/15792, which contains the text of a letter
dated 26 May 1983 from the representatives of France,
the United Kingdom and the United States to the President of the Council. I intend to put the proposal contained in the letter to a vote at the next meeting of the
Council devoted to consideration of this item.
7. The fmt speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zimbabwe, Mr. Witness M. Mangwende. The Council
welcomes him and I invite him to make his statement.
8. Mr. MANGWENDE
(Zimbabwe): It is most appropriate, Sir, that these meetings of the Security Council on the
question of Namibia is taking place under your stewardship. I congratulate you most warmly on your accession to
the presidency and am confident that with your vast diplomatic experience and skill you will lead the Council towards
its desired goal. Coming from Zaire, a valuable member of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the NonAligned Movement, you are well acquainted with their
preoccupation regarding the colonial question of Namibia.

13. As members of the Council know, it is now five
years since, with so much fanfare, the Governments of
Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States presented to the
Council a set of proposals for a peaceful settlement of
the Namibian colonial problem. The proposals led to the
adoption by the Council of its well-known resolution 435
(1978), which has since been accepted by the entire international community as the realistic basis for a peaceful
settlement of the Namibian question. The hard-working
negotiators of the well-known United Nations plan had
hoped for a settlement in 1978. Yet, because of South
Africa’s stalling tactics very little progress-if any-was
achieved towards the implementation
of the plan in the
following two years.

9. As a member of the Council, Zimbabwe very warmly
welcomes and appreciates the participation in this debate of
ministers from many countries of the OAU and the NonAligned Movement. Their presence augurs well for the
outcome of our deliberations and eloquently demonstrates
the unanimity of both the OAU and the Non-Aligned
Movement on the urgent need to end the illegal occupation
of Namibia. We wish particularly to express our gratitude
for the valuable contributions made to the debate by the
following: Mr. Narasimha Rao, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of India, the worthy representative of Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement; and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Moustapha
Niasse, who presided over the recent successful Intema-

14. However, as members of the Council will recall, during the last part of 1980, South Africa indicated through
the Western contact group that it was then prepared to
move towards the implementation of the plan if it could
be convinced of the impartiality of the United Nations in
2

the supervision of the Namibian elections envisaged in
that plan. In response to that, the United Nations convened a pre-implementation
meeting in early 198 1 at Geneva, with the following main objectives: to set a date for a
cease-tire and to initiate the necessary process of implementing the United Nations plan as outlined in resolution
435 (1978).

in which South Africa’s continued military occupation of
southern Angola since July 1981 must be seen.
19. Last, but not least, the latest air raids against
Mozambique,
which my Government
has already
denounced in the strongest terms, also fall under the
above rubric. Like those committed on previous occasions against Mozambique and other countries of the
region, the raids of 23 May were absolutely unprovoked.
It is not surprising, therefore, that they have been
roundly and widely condemned and denounced by all
civilized mankind.

15. It is, however, now an historical fact that the Geneva meeting collapsed without achieving any of its goals,
because, although SWAP0 had declared itself ready to
sign a cease-fire-agreement with South Africa at any time
and anywhere, and was willing to co-operate with the
United Nations in implementing the plan, South Africa
did not share any of the objectives of that meeting.
Instead, the South African delegation seized the opportunity to use the Geneva meeting as a propaganda forum to
promote the so-called internal parties of Namibia.
Although very disappointed, those of us who observed
the Geneva meeting were hardly surprised at its outcome,
which merely confirmed what had been said by the representatives of the Pretoria r&ime before and during the
meeting.

20. I have already said that the present debate has been
necessitated by the urgent and pressing need to obtain
South Africa’s co-operation in efforts to implement resolution 435 (1978) so that the people of Namibia, who
have suffered greatly and continue to suffer under colonial occupation, may achieve their freedom and independence without further delay. Eleven months ago this goal
seemed to be only one leap away. In fact, there was so
much optimism in the air that the March 1983 Namibian
elections under United Nations supervision seemed to be
a real possibility.

16. Since the abortive 1981 meeting, the Pretoria regime
has done nothing to suggest any willingness to co-operate
with United Nations efforts to implement the United
Nations Namibian plan. On the contrary, everything it
says about its presence in Namibia and everything it is
doing there clearly demonstrate a determination to maintain the illegal status quo in the Territory. Its arrogant
contempt for the legitimate demands of the Namibians
for freedom and independence and its flouting and open
defence of international opinion and law have increased
markedly since 1981. Efforts by the United Nations to
achieve Namibia’s peaceful transition to freedom have
gone unheeded while the situation in Namibia and in the
whole of southern Africa has critically escalated during
the period. Pretoria’s illegal colonial occupation is mainmined in Namibia by brutal force while a campaign of
military aggression and intimidation as well as economic
blackmail is vigourously pursued in order to destabilize
the whole region.

21. I refer here to the momentum generated by consultations between, on the one hand, the Western contact
group and, on the other, the front-line States, Nigeria
and SWAP0 from around mid-1981, culminating in the
more informal but intensive meetings here in New York
in July and August 1982 between the representatives of
these groups. As the report of the Secretary-General
righly points out, the representatives were so satisfied
with the progress made that they jointly confirmed to
him that all relevant issues pertaining to the implementation of the United Nations plan had been raised and
addressed to their mutual satisfaction and especially to
the satisfaction of both South Africa and SWAPO. Useful consultations were also held with the SecretaryGeneral and his senior colleagues and experts in
preparation for the implementation
of the United
Nations plan, possibly by March 1983.
22. Regrettably, however, just as the front-line States,
Nigeria and SWAP0 were planning to request the convening of a Council meeting to adopt a short resolution
to set in motion the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978), it became clear that, as the report of the
Secretary-General says, other issues which were outside
the scope of resolution 435 (1978) and which had not
been raised or envisaged in earlier consultations were
becoming a stumbling-block
in the negotiations on Namibia. The United States, a member of the contact
group, and South Africa publicly and clearly said that
resolution 435 (1978) could not be implemented until the
Cuban forces stationed in Angola since 1975 were withdrawn from that country.

17. The unrelieved onnression and renression of the Namibian and South Afr%an masses under ferocious apartheid domination, together with the raging undeclared war
against front-line States and other majority-ruled States in
the region, tell the ugly story of a region in a very dangerous conflict situation which threatens regional stability
and international peace and security; That is the grim
regional perspective within which the current meetings of
the Council on the Namibian question are taking place.
18. This is also the grim context in which the raids by
the regime’s army and air force against Angola, Lesotho,
Mozambique and Seychelles during the period under
review should be understood. This too is the context
within which Pretoria’s use of subversive elements and
mercenaries to violate the borders of neighbouring countries for the purpose of destroying vital economic infrastructures and abducting and assassinating refugees must
be perceived. Similarly, this is the same criminal context

23. The front-line States, Nigeria and SWAPO, which
had up to now co-operated in good faith with the contact
group in efforts to address all issues pertaining to resolu- ,
tion 435 (1978), unequivocally rejected any attempt to
3

link the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola to the
process of Namibian decolonization. They insisted instead
that the United Nations plan as approved in resolution
435 (1978) was limited to the Namibian colonial question
and was therefore never intended to be a comprehensive
cure for the problems of the whole southern African
region, much less to be used for the promotion and protection of the global economic, geopolitical and strategic
interests of any super-Power. We still stand very firmly
by this interpretation of the plan and reject any linkage
or parallelism as naked interference in the affairs of sovereign States. We would further wish to remind those
insisting on linkage that they should instead bring pressure to bear upon Pretoria to withdraw its forces from
southern Angola, which it has been occupying, in
defiance of the Council’s demands and resolutions, since
July 1981. Is this silence on their part tacit encouragement to South Africa in its glaring violation of intemational law?

prevarication. We should therefore like the Council to
reaffirm the United Nations legal authority over Namibia
and its own primary responsibility for ensuring the immediate implementation of its resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978). We should also like the Council to mandate the
Secretary-General to initiate consultations with parties, to
the proposed cease-fire to facilitate the earliest implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
28. We also believe that even at this late hour South
Africa has an opportunity to, and still can, reconsider its
present position and thus facilitate the international drive
to achieve a peaceful settlement in Namibia. Accordingly,
the proposed draft resolution calls upon the Government
of South Africa to make a firm commitment as to its
readiness to comply with resolution 435 (1978). Pretoria is
also being called upon to co-operate forthwith and fully
with the Secretary-General in order to expedite the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) in the interest of the
early independence of Namibia.

24. It is the withdrawal of occupationist South African
troops from Angola that we should be talking about here.
Yet nothing is being said about this by those who would
like us to believe that they are honest brokers in the Namibian saga. Instead we are being urged to violate longestablished norms of international relations by dwelling
on a matter that is properly the sovereign responsibility of
two members of the Organization-Angola
and Cuba.
The Cuban internationalist forces are in Angola as a
result of a free, sovereign decision by both Angola and
Cuba. South African troops are occupationist forces. It is
therefore the withdrawal of those occupation& forces
that should rightly exercise the minds of all peace-loving
members of the international community, because the
presence of South African troops in southern Angola is
now the major obstacle to peace in the region. For how
can we accept the violation of the territorial integrity of a
State Member of this Organization as normal in intemational relations? How can we allow the racist aggressorSouth Africa-to
dictate terms to the victims of
aggression? South African troops should withdraw from
Angola at once.

29. This is perhaps the appropriate time to make a
slight but pertinent digression. In the course of a valuable
contribution to this debate on 23 May [2439rh meering],
the representative of the United Kingdom said that
South Africa co-operated and assisted in the implementation of the Lancaster House settlement of the Southern
Rhodesian question. Indeed, members of the Council
must have been, as we were, very surprised to hear the
spokesman of the apartheid regime accept credit for this
without any sign of embarrassment.
30. Is it conceivable that after over a decade of arrogantly violating and defying international
law with
respect to the illegal Smith regime in Rhodesia, the apartheid rulers of Pretoria suddenly had a change of heart
when the Lancaster House agreement was concluded? Is
it logical that they would have co-operated with the
Government of Zimbabwe when for five years they had
been doing everything possible to undermine the Govemments of Angola and Mozambique? Why would South
Africa suddenly co-operate in 1980? This assertion of
co-operation and assistance is certainly not borne out by
Zimbabwe’s experience during and after the implementation of the Lancaster House settlement. On the contrary,
South Africa declared itself to be the No. 1 enemy of
peace, reconciliation, development and prosperity in our
country right from the beginning and continues to do so
now. I am referring here to the same regime that, on the
eve of our independence, recruited over 5,000 counterrevolutionaries and criminals to be trained and equipped
and infiltrated back into our country to commit acts of
sabotage against our economic infrastructure and all
sorts of crimes against the peace-loving people of
Zimbabwe.

25. The members of the contact group have told the
Council that they are still committed to the achievement
of Namibia’s independence and that they are extending an
invitation to us to co-operate with them, as we have done
in the past. For our part, this invitation is hardly necessary. We must warn, however, that co-operation with
them is conditional upon a common understanding of the
real issue regarding Namibia. For us, the real and only
issue is the denial to the people of Namibia of their inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and independence by the illegal occupation regime of South Africa.
26. Similarly, co-operation with the contact group must
be based on a common desire to achieve implementation
of the United Nations plan in resolution 435 (1978), without modification, qualification or prevarication.

31. South Africa has yet to prove and demonstrate its
co-operation, not only with Zimbabwe but with countries of the whole region.

27. We have come to the Council because the five-yearold United Nations plan on Namibia remains unimplemented owing to South Africa’s intransigence and

32. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs
4

! of Yugoslavia, whom I welcome. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

37. The fact that South Africa has been occupying Namibia for 17 years since the United Nations ended its
Mandate [General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXZ) of 27
October 1966) and that it has ignored all the decisions
adopted by the United Nations over those years can no
longer be tolerated. This cannot and should not be tolerated, for, if it were, it would mean further violation of the
right of the Namibian people to freedom and independence and the continuation of their suffering. Instead of
being able to exercise their right to self-determination, the
Namibian people have for many years known only occupation, apartheid, terror and exploitation by the South
African regime. The ruthless exploitation of Namibia’s
natural resources by South Africa and by transnational
corporations, in spite of the relevant United Nations resolutions and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted on 27 September
1974 by the United Nations Council for Namibia,* constitutes a brutal violation of the inalienable right of the Namibian people to dispose freely of their natural, social and
economic potentials.

33. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): The fact that you, Sir,
are presiding over this exceptionally important meeting
of the Council is very encouraging. As the representative
of Zaire, you represent the positions of the African
Group of countries, whose unity and resolve in supporting the liberation struggle of the Namibian people are
well known. As a representative of a country in the south
of Africa, you are fully aware of the seriousness of the
situation in and around Namibia. Finally, your diplomatic skill and experience will contribute significantly to
the successful consideration of the Namibian problem in
the Council at the present time.
34. The non-aligned countries have been and continue
to be the broadest and firmest stronghold of the struggle
for independence of all colonial peoples, including the
people of Namibia. As the Council knows, I am attending
this meeting, like a number of other ministers for foreign
affairs of non-aligned countries, in accordance with the
decision taken at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983. The Heads of State
or Government called on the Council to meet as soon as
possible to consider further action to be taken in order to
bring about the implementation
of the United Nations
plan for Namibia, and to assume its primary responsibility for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). They
reaffirmed the solidarity of the non-aligned countries with
the Namibian people, and their support for their heroic
struggle under the leadership of SWAPO, the sole authentic and legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
[See S/1367.5 and corr.
#O-51.]

38. Today, in the ninth decade of the twentieth century,
the existence of colonial exploitation despite the opposition and condemnation of the international community
is an historical anachronism. Every further day, week or
month of occupation brings new victims and further suffering to the Namibian people struggling for freedom
under the leadership of their liberation movement,
SWAPO. It is from the United Nations, from this body,
from all of us here, that the Namibian people expect
help. How much longer will the people of Namibia have
to suffer and make sacrifices for their freedom?

I and 2, annex,, sect. I,- paras.

39. This situation should no longer be tolerated, for it
also poses a danger to world peace and security. The
illegal occupying regime has been massing its troops in
Namibia as well as forcibly mobilizing the Namibian
population and recruiting mercenaries. The Territory of
Namibia has become a springboard for continued acts of
aggression against the neighbouring front-line States,
particularly Angola, taking a heavy toll of human lives
and causing enormous destruction. The savage air raid
on Maputo, the capital of Mozambique, is the latest
expression of South Africa’s policy of destabilisation of
sovereign and independent neighbouring countries-and
that aggressive act was carried out on the very eve of the
convening of the Council, representing a new challenge
to the United Nations. All this is turning southern Africa
into a permanent and dangerous hotbed of crisis. The
continuation of the occupation and of the acts of aggression against both Namibia and the front-line States carries with it the danger of further interference by
non-regional factors and of changing the character of the
Namibian problem, which is a colonial issue. This leads
to the question of Namibia being drawn into block
rivalry and confrontation, making the process of the
acquisition of independence by Namibia conditional
upon the relations between the blocs.

35.. The seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries once again resolutely contiied
the position shared by almost all
members of the international community that the illegal
occupation of Namibia must finally come to an end. It
proceeded from the assessment that the region of southern
Africa is the hotbed of an international crisis with global
implications. The persistence of the South African racist
r&me in refusing to comply with the decisions of the
United Nations should therefore meet with the most resolute response and the coordinated action of the intemational community aimed at the urgent implementation of
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
36. The question of Namibia is not only an African problem but a global problem as well, involving as it does the
basic principles on which international relations are
founded. Foreign domination in Namibia, as anywhere
else, poses a direct threat to international peace and security. Therefore, resistance to foreign domination in Namibia and elsewhere is a precondition for safeguarding
peace and security. The South African racist r&ime, by its
very existence, threatens the security of Africa and beyond,
especially the adjacent regions of the Indian Ocean and the
south Atlantic.

40. Finally, the failure to resolve the problem of Namibia has manifold adverse effects on the prestige and
5

role of the United Nations. In the course of its almost 40
years of existence, the world Organization has many
times faced the fact that it is impossible to undertake
effective action and achieve results in dealing with questions on which groups of Member States maintain diametrically opposed positions. The problem of Namibia,
however, is a matter in regard to which there exists tht
broadest concurrence of all Member States, with the sole
exception of the occupying r&ime of South Africa. This
was evident when the Council five years ago adopted
resolution 435 (1978) approving the United Nations plan
for Namibia. All countries point out that they are in
favour of Namibia’s independence and of the implementation of the United Nations plan. It is essential for the
prestige and effectiveness of the United Nations, therefore, that all countries that support the strengthening of
its role commit themselves most resolutely to the urgent
solution of at least those problems in regard to which
there are both the concurrence of all Member States and
agreement on ways and means of solving them. The
problem of Namibia certainly belongs to this category. In
resolving this problem, particular responsibility is borne
by the permanent members of the Council that are
members of the contact group, whose countries maintain
relations with South Africa and therefore can have an
influence on it.

pendence to Namibia cannot and should not be made
conditional on anything, except on compliance with the
provisions of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). The
question of the presence of foreign troops in Angola is a
matter which should be considered and decided only by
independent Angola. This question has never had anything to do with Namibia, even at the time of the adop
tion of the United Nations plan for Namibia. Therefore,
the linking of the two cannot be interpreted in any other
way than as an obstruction of the plan.
44. It is high time for the United Nations to take decisive action aimed at carrying out its direct responsibility
for Namibia. This is a problem of colonialism and it
should be solved within the framework of the United
Nations, like all other similar problems. The Council,
which has adopted the relevant resolutions, has a central
role in this respect and it should not allow them to
become a dead letter. The process of moving towards
independence should finally be started. This time, however, we cannot confine ourselves merely to supporting
the implementation
of the United Nations plan. The
Council should demonstrate its resolve and seriousness,
befitting the role entrusted to it by the Charter, and set the
time-frame for the implementation
of the plan. During
that time the Council should closely follow the problem in
order to be able to intervene promptly and to remove any
possible obstacles that might get in the way. However, in
resolving the question of Namibia’s independence, other
channels should not be excluded, provided that they are
under the responsibility of the United Nations.

41. The United Nations plan approved in Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), which were adopted
unanimously, is already five years old. The hopes it raised
with respect to a possible solution have not been fulfilled
to thii date. For four years the tactics of the South Afiican racists were to undermine all consultations on the
implementation of the plan, on the most transparent pretexts. Last year, however, there seemed to be a change. It
appeared that the contact group of five Western countries
had finally acted in accordance with its responsibility and
decided to pressure South Africa into implementing the
plan. During consultations conducted last summer almost
all the practical problems were finally settled. Aside from
some technical problems with regard to the composition
of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG), it only remained for South Africa to decide
which of the two methods of election it was going to
accept. The way to the implementation of the plan seemed
thus to be wide open, and the Secretariat began extensive
preparations so as not to be overtaken by the seemingly
rapid developments.

45. We see the role of the contact group exclusively
within that framework and as an instrument of the implementation of the United Nations plan. Its responsibility
is to use its capacity to influence South Africa SO as to
make it comply with resolution 435 (1978). The intemational community rightly expects this from the contact
group, and any different activity by the group or by any
of its members or any attempt to take the question of
Namibia’s independence out of the competence of the
United Nations is unacceptable.
46. If the action on the part of the Council fails to
break the present deadlock, my country will, as it has
done in the past, support any measure aimed at exerting
pressure on South Africa, including sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter. We believe that all countries
should apply measures of economic boycott to South
Africa on the basis of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions.

42. However, a sudden insistence on linking the implementation of the United Nations plan to the presence of
foreign troops in independent Angola marked the beginning of the latest stalemate in the attempts to solve the
Namibian problem, a stalemate which still continues and
because of which we are gathered here. With the object of
continuing the illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist
r&me in Pretoria and the plundering of its natural
resources, new difficulties are created, making Namibia’s
independence conditional on entirely irrelevant matte&.

47. It is also the duty of all Member States to lend
their support to the actions taken by the United
Nations Council for Namibia. For a number of years,
that body-now under the able presidency of Mr. Paul
Lusaka of Zambia-has
been the initiator of most of the
actions aimed at assisting the struggle of the people of
Namibia and at attaining independence for Namibia.
The recent International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, sponsored by the United Nations, adopted the Paris Declaration on Namibia and Programme of Action on Namibia.2

43. My country’s position-which
we share with almost
all other countries-is that the process of granting inde6

member of the Council and as its President during many
crucial trials, I was able to hear in this room sometimes
excellent oratory, sometimes futile debate, but I also witnessed and participated in many actions leading to the
preservation of peace and the strengthening of the independence and territorial integrity and sovereignty of some
States Members of the United Nations, or helping
oppressed people gain their liberation and freedom. The
symbolic mural in this room is a reminder of this historic
role of the United Nations and its main organ, the Security Council.

These documents contain important recommendations
for assistance to the struggle waged by the Namibian
people under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole authentic representative, as well as for assistance to the frontline States. My country fully supports those recormnendations.
48. For its part, Yugoslavia will continue to support
the struggle of the Namibian people as long as that &tggle is necessary and until the people of Namibia are able
to decide their own future through free and fair elections
held under the auspices of the United Nations. My country considers support for that struggle an obligation
emanating from our own past and from the ideals and
principles that emerged in our own struggle for freedom.

55. In recent years, however, frustration, futility, despair
and impotence regarding the taking of action in the same
direction have prevailed more .and more in this room
where, during the history of the work of the United
Nations, we have witnessed so many bold actions in pursuit of the aims of the Charter. When, in 1978, we witnessed the unanimous adoption here of resolution 435
(1978), we were all elated to think that the year 1978
would be the year of the independence of Namibia after
so many protracted efforts to achieve it. After the adop
tion of that resolution, during the ninth special session of
the General Assembly, devoted to the problem of Namibia-which
I was privileged to preside over-in intensive private consuhations that were proceeding concurrently with the general debate, a timetable and a
calendar of immediate steps for the achievement of the
freedom and independence of Namibia were already
drawn up.

49. These meetings of the Council are a test of the
United Nations determination finally to start the process
of the independence of Namibia and not to allow any
further delays, excuses or actions incompatible with that
goal. It is the duty of the Council not to permit the
continuation of acts of aggression and threats to intemational peace and security in southern Africa. The solution of the question of Namibia’s independence would
greatly contribute to the general relaxation of tension
and to the stability of international relations. The expectations of the international
community must not be
betrayed this time. We hope that the Council will act in
conformity with its responsibilities and the powers vested
in it.

56. This was in 1978, during the months of April and
May. But again, everything was sabotaged, delayed, protracted, mixed with other unrelated matters, and so far
the whole effort has failed. If there is a case in which the
Council should reassert its authority, if there is an opportunity for the United Nations to play again the positive
role in finalizing the inevitable, historic, global process of
decolonization and emancipation of all the peoples in the
world, it is the case of the independence of Namibia, a
case so clear-cut, so unequivocally justified, so universally
accepted that it can be solved very promptly if the politi-cal willingness to do so prevails in this body.

50. In this context we believe that the role of the
Secretary-General in the implementation
of the United
Nations plan should be reaflirmed. We are confident that
his understanding of the problem and his dedication to
the independence of Namibia will significantly contribute
to the much-needed active role of the United Nations in
the forthcoming period.
51. All statements regarding the right of peoples and
countries to live in freedom will remain void of any
meaning unless they are implemented in Namibia as well.
The United Nations and the entire international community are faced with this historic responsibility.

57. If we failed to make 1978 the year of the independence of Namibia, the Council can succeed now, with
our universal support, in making 1983 the year of the
proclamation of the independence of Namibia, thus not
only fulfilling an old dream of the United Nations but
also ensuring the freedom, peace and independence of
the tortured people of Namibia, who have suffered for so
long, and preserving thereby the peace and security of the
whole continent of Africa, which should finally be rid of
colonialism and racist subjugation, in the interest of
humanity, justice and the further progress of all the
nations of the world.

52. Having ended my statement, I should now like to
add a few words on a personal note.
53. I have had the privilege to&y of addressing this
meeting of this most important body of the United
Nations after long years of absence from thii historic
chamber of the Security Council where, in the past
decade, I witnessed many important developments relating to the maintenance of peace and security in the world
and to securing the liberation, independence and peace of
peoples and nations that asked this body to take immediate action on the basis of the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfi~~
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Qatar, who wishes to
make a statement as Chairman of the Group of Arab
States at the United Nations for the month of May. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

54. To be here again fills me with emotion, memories
and reminiscences of the work of the Security Council in
the past. As an observer, a participant in the debates, a
7

third world, most of which belong to the Non-Aligned
Movement, that is, that the States members of the contact
group-r,
to be more precise, some of them-have
derailed the negotiations with the racist Pretoria r&me
and arrogated to themselves the right to inject a new
extraneous element into the issue under negotiation: the
linkage of the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
with the withdrawal of the Cuban forces from Angola.

59. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, may I at the outset thank you and the
other members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to participate on behalf of the Group of Arab States
in the present important debate.
60. In his report [S/15776], the Secretary-General
expressed his deep concern at the fact that, despite the
passage of five years since the adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978), it had yet to be implemented, and he
asserted that the political situation in the region had deteriorated. It was expected that, in accordance with that
resolution, which endorsed the United Nations plan,
independence would be achieved by Namibia during
1978-that is, after the fulfilment of certain legislative
and political requirements agreed to by all the parties
concerned at an early stage, and especially by SWAPO,
the legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
The Council welcomed the declared readiness of
SWAP0 to co-operate in implementing the resolution
and to sign the cease-fire agreement and comply with it.
But, from the beginning, the racist Government of Pretoria resorted to prevarication and raised a series of obstacles one after the other to prevent the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). It used the negotiations as a strategem to mislead world public opinion, to buy time to
tighten its grip on Namibia and, at the same time, to
enable the transnationals to plunder and deplete Namibia’s natural resources.

64. It is no secret that this arbitrary linkage, adopted
specifically by the United States Administration,
is
designed to serve American national interests and also
represents another dimension of the Past-West confrontation.
65. I therefore affirm, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, that the problem of Namibia has nothing whatsoever to do with cold-war manoeuvres, and that it is a
grave injustice to manipulate the destiny of the Namibian
people and perpetuate their sufferings under racist repression and inhuman oppression, and to prolong the denial
of their most elementary human rights just to score a
point in the rivalry between the super-Powers for spheres
of influence. It is as though the destinies of people who
are still, on the threshhold of the twenty-first century,
groaning under the yoke of occupation, count for nothing
in the plans of those States which still insist on linking the
independence of Namibia with the abdication, by yet
another independent African States, of a sovereign right.
And all- this so that the United States can score a point in
the Past-West confrontation at the expense not only of
the sovereignty of Angola but also of the future of the
Namibian people and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

61. The persistence of the racist Pretoria r&ime in its
illegal occupation of Namibia and in depriving the Namibian people of the right to self-determination, independence and freedom, under the terms of resolution 435
(1978), constituted flagrant defiance, of the Council and
the United Nations, which bears a special legal and ethical responsibility to rescue Namibia from the grip of the
white minority racist Government of South Africa. That
is a fact which the United Nations, we believe, does not
deny; In concluding his report, the Secretary-General
reaflirmed that he regarded the problem of Namibia as a
special responsibility of the Secretary-General in view of
the unique relationship between the United Nations and
the people of Namibia.
.

66. The only way to extricate the question of Namibia
from the impasse in which it has been placed by the
contact group, is for the initiative concerning talks on
this matter to be passed back to the United Nations,
especially to the Council, as provided for in resolution
435 (1978). Holding the talks within a United Nations
framework would protect them from being diverted from
their purpose by extraneous issues that serve only the
national interests of a super-Power that is not one of the
parties to the conflict. Accordingly, the Group of Arab
States reaffirms that resolution 435 (1978) remains the
only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian
problem. The Group therefore rejects the efforts made
by some States members of the contact group which have
not yet dissociated themselves from the principle of linking the independence of Namibia with other extraneous
issues, especially the withdrawal of the Cuban forces
from Angola. In addition to the fact that such linkage
steers the talks away from the right direction and does
not further the objectives of the United Nations plan for
Namibia, the introduction
of this extraneous element
gives the racist regime of Pretoria an opportunity to consolidate its occupation by continuously threatening the
neighbouring African States, in particular Angola, so as
to keep them permanently preoccupied with the protection of their security, and thus perpetuates the pretext of
linkage indefinitely. I do not think that the international

62. While commending the Secretary-General for his
efforts to discharge this responsibility, we must insist on
the importance and seriousness of the time factor, especially since one of the parties, the Pretoria regime, which
represents the illegal occupation authority, abuses this factor on the pretext of the negotiations of the contact group,
which for the past five years has been going round in a
vicious circle, the ingenuity of imperialism always discovering a new pretext completely extraneous to the central
issue of the occupation of Namibia. The negotiations,
which until then had been the only means of ensuring the
implementation
of resolution resolution 435 (1978), have
reached an impasse.
63. An examination of the statements of the great maiority of representatives in the Council sheds light on a fact
on which there is unanimity among the countries of the
8

community has already forgotten the military campaigns
waged by South Africa against the front-line African
States, including attempts to invade Angola and the
latest brutal raid against Mozambique.

74. Japan is not a member of the Security Council at
this time but, because it is so deeply concerned not only
about Namibia but also about the situation throughout
the region, my delegation feels in duty bound to speak out
on this question.

67. We therefore support the recommendations of the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris
from 25 to 29 April? with the participation of 136 States.
We especially support the rejection of any attempt to link
Namibia’s independence with the withdrawal of the
Cuban forces from Angola and call on members of the
contact group to follow the example of France, one of
the members of that group and dissociate themselves
from the idea of linkage since such an attempt, in addition to impeding the decolonization of Namibia, constitutes flagrant interference in the internal affairs of an
independent State Member of the United Nations.

75. Before doing so, I wish to comment on the recent
violence in Pretoria and South Africa’s retaliatory raid
into Mozambique on 23 May last. Japan abhors these acts
of violence and deeply regrets the suffering and loss of
life. Such acts of reciprocal violence can only lead to a
deterioration of the situation throughout southern Africa
and retard still further efforts towards a solution of the
many problems there. Those unfortunate events, though
not directly related, make the Council’s consideration of
the question of Namibia especially timely and appropriate. It will provide an opportunity to review the situation
and, what is more, to build up new momentum in the
efforts to achieve an independent Namibia and, it is
hoped, bring a degree of stability to that gravely troubled
region.

68. We also call upon the Council to adopt the necessary measures to implement its resolution 418 (1977) by
securing the commitment
of all Member States to
observe the arms embargo against South Africa.

76. During the two years since the Council last took up
this question [2267th to 2277th meetings], strenuous
efforts to bring about a solution have been made by the
international community. My delegation heartily commends the efforts of SWAPO, the OAU, the contact
group, the front-line States and Nigeria, as well as the
good offices of the Secretary-General.

69. We therefore support the call of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of India, who spoke to the Council on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement [2439zh meeting],
to establish a time-frame for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and for the Council to remain actively
seized of this problem until that process is accomplished.

77. I should like particularly to express my delegation’s
deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his further
report concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia [S/157763. That report, which has my
delegation’s full support, contains a well-balanced presentation of the conflicting interests and should serve as a
useful basis for the current deliberations.

70. However, if the South African Government persists
in its defiance. of the resolutions of the Council and in
refusing to honour its commitments in accordance with
the Charter, the Council has no option but to exercise its
responsibility, invoke the provisions of Chapter VII of
the, Charter of the United Nations impose sanctions
against the racist regime of Pretoria to make it acquiesce
in the will of the international community and put an end
to its illegal occupation of all the Territory of Namibia,
including Walvis Bay and the islands that are an integral
part of the occupied Territory of South West Africa and
to declare its annexation by South Africa null and void.

78. The Secretary-General notes that, during the twoyear period covered by the report, progress has been
made in a number of ways. For example, principles concerning the Constituent Assembly and the Constitution
for an independent Namibia have been accepted by the
parties concerned. He also reports that substantial progress has been made on the question of United Nations
impartiality and on the size, composition and arrangements for deploying the military component of UNTAG.

71. In conclusion, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, for which I speak, I reaffirm our support for Namibia’s just demands, endorsed in Council resolution 435
(1978), and our unreserved and total solidarity with the
Namibian people in their struggle to liberate their land
and achieve their independence under the leadership of
SWAPO, their sole legitimate representative.
72. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

79. Despite these positive developments, a peaceful,
just and internationally acceptable settlement is not yet
in sight. The undeniable progress that has been made in
the negotiations of the past two years has not been uninterrupted: there have also been setbacks, and this serves
to remind us that the issues involved are extraordinarily
complex and the gaps yet to be bridged substantial.

73. Mr. KURODA (Japan): Fit of all, I should like to
express my appreciation for this opportunity to participate in the discussion of the question of Namibia, one of
the most important and long-standing matters ever to
come before the United Nations.

80. It is widely recognized that South Africa’s intransigence has hampered the process of negotiation and is
thus a major obstacle to the complete resolution of the
Namibian problem. On the other hand, it should be
noted with concern that there are other factors, of which
9

we are all aware, that stand in the way of an early solution. In view of the complexity of the problem, we must
recognize that only patience and mutual trust will produce concrete results.

88. I also wish to express our appreciation of the work
of your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who presided over
the Council during the month of April.
89. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka was
among the ministers designated by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in March at New Delhi, to participate in
this series of meetings of the Council on the question of
Namibia. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. A. C. S.
Hameed, has asked me to convey his sincere regret that
urgent duties requiring his presence in Sri Lanka have
precluded his personal attendance at this meeting of the
Council.

81. My delegation fervently hopes that the talks among
the parties concerned, particularly the contact group
members, the front-line States, SWAP0 and South
Africa, will lead to the successful resolution of the problem, thereby paving the way for the independence of Namibia.
82. Japan appeals once again to South Africa to
respond to the voice of this world body and extend its
full and sincere co-operation to the implementation
of
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). Failure to do so
will merely postpone a settlement and result in additional
needless suffering and hardship throughout the region.

90. You, Mr. President, and the members of the Council !
have already heard a number of ministers and leaders of
delegations speaking on the question of Namibia, of
which the Council is now seized. The history of the question of Namibia, South Africa’s illegal occupation of the
Territory, the involvement and responsibilities of the
United Nations, the long struggle and the acknowledged
leadership of SWAPO, the heroism of its fighting men
and the patient perseverance of the front-line States
require no repetition; nor does one need to say who
stands in the way of a peaceful solution of the question.
The representative of South Africa, in a characteristic display, told the Council only two days ago [244Oth meeting]
of his Government’s terms, which sounded more like an
ultimatum. Suffice it to say that, apart from that show of
defiance, he did not say much that was wholly new.

83. In the meantime, we must not forget the tragic
plight of the Namibian people, as well as that of others
whose lives are affected by South Africa’s illegal occupation of the Territory and by the ensuing armed struggles
taking place both in Namibia and in southern Angola.
Japan will continue to join the rest of the international
community in efforts to alleviate the human suffering
there and provide the Namibian people with the assistance necessary to enable them to overcome the present
difficulties and prepare for the independence of their
country.
84. Looking to the future, the Government of Japan
reaffums its commitment to extend positive support in
various forms to the operation of UNTAG once it is
established and, following the achievement of independence, Japan will make every possible effort to extend its
co-operation to the people of Namibia throughout the
nation-building
period.

91. The Secretarv-General’s further reuort concemine
the implementation of Council resolution; 435 (1978) a$
439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia is a restrained and accurate account of events since the Council
last considered this question. Even the representative of
South Africa, whose Government has invariably complained of bias on the part of the Organization-not
to
speak of the international community as a wholegrudgingly acknowledged at the 2440th meeting what he
described as the more constructive tone of that report.
Resolution 435 (1978), which is the basis for a Namibia
settlement, was, he said, accepted for implementation by
South Africa as far back as December 1978.

85. I should like to end my remarks by joining with the
Secretary-General in calling
“urgently on all concerned to strengthen and concert
their efforts within the framework of the United Nations
and to demonstrate the necessary political will to bring
about the early independence of Namibia . . . as the
essential and primary issue, which we must now face up
to without further delay”. [ibid, para. 20.1

92. Therefore, resolution 435 (1978) is where we are;
and, as for its acceptance by all, there is no dispute. After
its adoption by the Council in 1978, the work of its implementation was assumed by the Western contact group,
whose members were, for all purposes, the authors of
that ‘resolution. It is furthest from my delegation’s wish
to discount or deny the efforts that the Western contact
group has invested in this task. Yet, it is no secret that,
time and again, it was itself thwarted in its efforts by the
obduracy of the Government in Pretoria, whose policies
within its own territory, in Namibia and towards its
neighbours remain irreconcilable with what passes elsewhere for ordinary common sense and human decency. I
refer in particular to the South African Government’s
policy of apartheid which, in this, the twentieth century,
holds over 80 per cent of its population in bondage, and

86. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
87. Mr. FONSEKA
(Sri Lanka): Sir, may I at the
outset extend to you my delegation’s congratulations and
good wishes on your assumption of the duties of President of the Council during the month of May. It was also
particularly heartening to see the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zaire, a friend and not so long ago a colleague,
who now holds high offlce in your country, presiding
over the proceedings of the Council during these most
important deliberations on Namibia.
10

that only because of the colour of itsskin. The security
which South Africa demands from its neighbours and
from the international community is essentially security
for the perpetuation of that inhuman system. But we
have not come here to discuss that issue.

Assembly at its thirty-seventh session,3 in which he
focused with sincerity and remarkable frankness on the
crisis facing the Organization. The observations of the
Secretary-General could not apply with greater relevance
to any other issue challenging the world community
today. The question of Namibia presents an opportunity
for the Council-and,
may I add, for the members of the
Western contact group-to discharge the special responsibility they have assumed to demonstrate their commitment and to reaffirm the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

93. It is common knowledge that the South African
Government caused the collapse of the pre-implementation talks at Geneva in January 198 1. Apart from other
devices for procrastination,
that was followed by the
South African Government’s new line, long mentioned
only in the corridors but now openly proclaimed. That
line is that Namibia’s independence is unquestionably
linked to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.
That was an issue which was not raised when resolution
435 (1978) was adopted by the Council and accepted by
South Africa, and it has been acknowledged by some
members of the Western contact group to be irrelevant to
the question of Namibia, which is one of decolonixation.
The Secretary-General’s report, restrained as it is, tells us
of this new situation.

97. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
98. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
It is a pleasure for me at the outset, Sir, to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council at
this critical phase of the question of Namibia. Through
you, the delegation of Egypt salutes fraternal Zaire, which
you represent here with your well-known ability and experience. We are confident that your experience and qualities will contribute to the achievement of the success we
all desire in the Council’s consideration of the issue it is
discussing today.

94. It is almost five years since resolution 435 (1978)
was adopted and over two years since the events which
took place at Geneva, after which the Western contact
group made renewed efforts to prevail upon an intransigent Government in South Africa. Implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) was and remains the responsibility
of the United Nations. The time has come for the United
Nations to resume that responsibility. In so doing, the
United Nations and the Secretary-General will have
every opportunity at their full discretion to consult with
and seek the co-operation of all the parties which have so
far been involved; and that includes the Government of
South Africa, SWAPO, the Western contact group and
the front-line States. We should like to think that that
co-operation with the Secretary-General will be no less
forthcoming.

99. The delegation of Egypt is pleased also to welcome
Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people. Through
Mr. Nujoma we pay a tribute to the militant people of
Namibia and renew our pledge that Egypt-in whose cap
ital, Cairo, the first office of SWAP0 was situated-will
remain at their side in the face of constant aggression by
the racist regime of South Africa, and will do so until the
Namibian people achieve their inalienable rights of selfdetermination, sovereignty and independence.
100. I should like to read out to the Council the following message from Mr. Hosni Mubarak, President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt. The text of his letter is as follows:

95. Parallels have been drawn between Namibia and
the protracted process which brought about the independence of Zimbabwe. The need for caution has been
expressed, and threats have been issued about the futility
of setting deadlines. Again, while not discounting the
worth of the protracted efforts that brought about the
independence of Zimbabwe, we know that, throughout,
Zimbabwe was kept outside the United Nations forum,
which is not the case of Namibia. On the subject of deadlines, the Secretary-General cannot be asked to function
in a vacuum. It is normal and customary for him to
report back to the Council, and to- seek a report by a
specified date is no ultimatum or deadline. After the
adoption in 1978 of resolution 435 (1978), the Council in
its wisdom set no deadlines for a solution, but it did
indeed receive reports. The Council knows best whether
it will need to have recourse to other measures in the
Charter of the United. Nations to enforce its own
resolutions.

“Egypt reaffirms its firm resolve to continue its sup
port for the struggle of the people of Namibia under
the leadership of SWAPO, its sole legitimate and
authentic representative. Egypt supports every sincere
effort by the international community represented in
the United Nations that is aimed at enabling the struggling people of Namibia to shake off the yoke of colonialism and regain its full and legitimate rights to
freedom, sovereignty and independence.”
101. Council resolution 435 (1978), which was unanimously adopted, contained the framework for a just settlement leading to the independence of Namibia. The
delegation of Egypt, together with other delegations,
therefore feels justified in calling upon the Council at this
time to take the action necessary for implementing that
resolution fully, without any qualifications or modifications. The United Nations has a special responsibility for
the question of Namibia, one that dates back to its earliest

96. To my delegation, this meeting seems an appropriate opportunity to recall the Secretary-General’s report
on the work of the Organixation, submitted to the General
11

meetings some 37 years ago, when it discussed for the first
time ways to prevent the. racist Government of South
Africa from implementing
its scheme to annex that
Territory.

Namibia, and the struggle being waged by the People’s
Liberation Army of Namibia, the military wing of SWAPO,
to free the country from colonialism and occupation is just
and legitimate.

102. Egypt unequivocally condemns and categorically
rejects the racist policy of South Africa in Namibia and
adopts the same position with regard to any support or
assistance given to that racist rhgime, which necessarily
leads to the consolidation of South Africa’s occupation of
Namibia and to its persistence in its racist and colonialist
policy against the people of Namibia and the people of
South Africa. From the very beginning, South Africa has
adopted a position contrary to the will of the intemational community with regard to Namibia, a will unanimously embodied in the efforts and resolutions of the
United Nations. The racist Pretoria &gime has not only
ignored the resolutions of the international Organization;
it has also frustrated the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia and has prevented it from carrying
out the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United
Nations. It has persisted in its schemes to control the
Territory of Namibia and deplete its natural resources.

106. The statement [2439th meeting] by Mr. Sam
Nujoma, the leader of SWAPO, the sole authentic and
legitimate representative of the Namibian people, to the
Council was categorical and clear. In it, he called upon the
United Nations to shoulder its responsibilities, in view of
the failure of the attempts so far to attain its stated objective, namely, to enable the Namibian people to establish an
independent State in their own territory, a State based on
justice, liberty and equality. There can be no doubt that
the delay in reaching a peaceful settlement and the lack of
any real progress towards that settlement obliges us to
reafftrm the importance of the time factor in every intemational problem, and particularly with regard to the problem of Namibia. On the human level, we have a people
chafing under the yoke of a colonizer that employs arbitrary and inhuman principles and methods condemned by
the entire international community. On the political level,
the problem entails factors that threaten to lead to an even
greater deterioration and even a conflagration throughout
the Territory, if not beyond its borders.

103. Five years after the adoption of resolution 435 (1978)
and the beginning of the efforts by the members of the
Western contact group, we have seen no progress that augurs well for the independence of the Narnibian people. On
the contrary, we have seen a clear deterioration in the situation, not only in Namibia, where the Government of Pretoria has sought to tighten its grip on the occupied Territory by various means, but also outside Namibia, where it is
engaging in armed aggression against African front-line
States and occupying some of their territories in a calculated effort to provoke disturbances and destabilization.

107. Speaking on behalf of the people of Namibia, Mr.
Nujoma was extremely positive; he reiterated and restated
his position on the cease-fire in Namibia and his interest in
cooperating
with the Secretary-General; he lucidly
expressed his agreement with the Secretary-General’s position as reflected in the concluding observations in his
report to the Council [S/Z5776J. The delegation of Egypt
calls upon all the parties concerned to make a careful study
of that positive position of SWAP0 and to compare it
with the statements made by the representative of the
racist South African r&me at the 2440th meeting and the
continuous aggression being carried out by that r&ime
against the people of Namibia, as well as against Mozambique, Angola, Lesotho and other countries in the region.

104. The problem of Namibia was given special priority
at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in
March of this year, because of the concern created by
Pretoria’s persistence in occupying the Territory, in violation of the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations and United Nations resolutions,
and because of the importance the Non-Aligned Movement attaches to the deplorable situation that has resulted
from the fact that that regime continues to oppress the
people of Namibia and to commit aggression against
neighbouring African States, thereby creating a threat to
international peace and security.

108. Indeed, no one can disregard or has the right to
challenge the will of the international community as it was
manifested at the International Conference in Support of
the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
held recently in Paris, in which 136 States participated
together with several liberation movements and intemational bodies. In the Paris Declaration on Namibia,z the
Conference expressed the resolve of the international community to support the independence of Namibia and the
right of its struggling people, under the leadership of
SWAPO, their sole authentic and legitimate representative, to liberation and sovereignty over all their Territory.

105. The final document of the Conference [S/Z5675 and
Corr. 1 and 2, hex, sect. IJ reflected the firm position-of
the countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement in a
clear and lucid manner. I need not dwell upon the contents
of that comprehensive document, which refers to the importance of a renewed commitment on the part of the intemational community to stand firmly against the racist and
colonialist policy of South Africa, including the imposition of mandatory sanctions against that r&me, and
calls for the full implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
in’ both the letter and spirit, without any modification or
qualification. Resolution 345 (1978) remains the only basis
for achieving a peaceful settlement of the question of

109. The delegation of Egypt supports the observations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, especially those concerning resolution 435 (1978) and the fact
that that resolution has yet to be implemented. We also
feel that the new developments that have become a factor
in the negotiations and which lie outside the scope of
resolution 435 (1978) place new impediments in the way
of the people of Namibia and are a hindrance to their
liberation from colonialism, which is the principal objec12

tive of the Council resolution. The Secretary-General
frankly stated that the implementation
of the resolution
now appears to be conditional on the withdrawal of
Cuban forces from Angola. We support the position of
the Secretary-General in this connection and the concluding observations to his report.

the current series of meetings of the Council will culminate in the achievement of our common goal: that of
enabling the people of Namibia to exercise their legitimate right to freedom-and independence so that Namibia
may occupy its rightful place in the ranks of the intemational community.

110. In presenting its position on the problem of Namibia, the delegation of Egypt has been anxious to present the subject in the context of the position of
non-alignment,
the United Nations and international
conferences, a position in which Egypt considers itself a
party to the general consensus.

117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

111. First of all, Egypt condemns the continued, illegitimate occupation of the Territory of .Namibia, as well as
South Africa’s rejection and hindrance of a just solution
to the problem.
112. Secondly, Egypt supports SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, in its just
and legitimate struggle to achieve independence. We support the front-line States in their position on the problem
and condemn all forms of aggression against those States
by the racist dgime of Pretoria.
113. Thirdly, Egypt calls for the full and immediate
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), without any
qualification or modification. We also call for the establishment of a time-frame. We use the term “time-frame”
and not “deadline”, but call for a reasonable time-frame
for implementation of the aforementioned resolution, on
condition that the Council be apprised of the full picture
in order to adopt the actions it deems suitable. Egypt also
calls upon the Council, in the face of the intransigence
and defiance of the racist regime of South Africa, as
embodied in the statement of its representative at the
2440th meeting, to condemn the continued illegitimate
occupation of the Territory of Namibia and to condemn
South Africa’s defiance of the resolutions of the intemational Organization and to adopt the necessary effective
measures provided for by the Charter of the United
Nations.
114. Fourthly, in evaluating the efforts of the contact
group, Egypt takes into account several factors-the
most important of which is the time factor. We feel there
is a need for speed in enabling the Namibian people to
exercise their right to independence in their own Tenitory. Egypt also affhms that, from the practical standpoint, the delay in fully implementing
resolution 435
(1978), simply enables South Africa to persist in its occupation and colonization of Namibia.

118. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (inferpreration from Arabic): Once more the Council is meeting
to consider, at a high level, the difficult situation in southem Africa resulting from the Pretoria regime’s persistence
in impeding the Namibian people from regaining its
usurped rights, notably those of freedom, independence
and territorial integrity in accordance with Council resolution 435 (1978), which contained the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia. The Pretoria Fascist
Government has frustrated all efforts to implement that
plan by constantly raising issues totally unrelated to resolution 435 (1978). I refer in particular to Pretoria’s mahcious attempt to establish a link and to draw a parallel
between the withdrawal of the Cuban forces at present
legally stationed in Angola and the withdrawal from Namibia of the racist forces which occupy that country by
sheer force of arms and use barbarous means to thwart
the aspirations of the Namibian people. In his report
[ibid.], the Secretary-General highlights the question of
linkage, citing the conditions imposed by South Africa,
which are outside the scope of resolution 435 (1978) and
of the final document of the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
in March at New Delhi, which declared that “the Conference most categorically rejected the linkage or parallelism
being drawn . . . .between the independence of Namibia
and the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola.”
[S/I5675 and Corr. 1 und 2, annex, sect. Ipara 48.1 The
arguments of the apartheid r&me, supported by the
United States, are nothing more than an attempt to interfere in Angola’s internal affairs, which we cannot accept.
Indeed, the Council must demand the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of South African forces from
the Angolan territory they have occupied since South
Africa’s aggression against that country, which aspires to
economic and social development.
119. My delegation considers it unnecessary to dwell on
the details of <he problem now under consideration. We
fully support the position of the non-aligned countries on
this issue as expressed by the Minister for External Affairs
of India, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

115. Fifthly, Egypt confirms that the problem of Namibia is the responsibility of the United Nations in the
first place and supports the statements of the SecretaryGeneral in his report to the Council. Egypt also calls for
continued action by the United Nations and the
Secretary-General for it falls to them primarily to seek a
just solution to the problem of Namibia.

120. From the mouths of the oppressed always comes
the truth. The contact group no longer enjoys the contidence of SWAPO. Recently, we heard the Namibian militant, Mr. Nujoma, inform us that hi organ&&ion
believes that:

116. In conclusion, on behalf of the African-Arab
people of Egypt, I should like to express our hope that

“the role of the five Western Powers has ceased to be
that of an honest broker in terms of the implementa-

tion of Council resolution 435 (1978). These Powers,
and the Reagan Administration in particular, must be
prevailed upon to desist forthwith from their sinister
attempts to hijack and misuse the Namibian negotiating process in their own economic and strategic inter-

124. Occupation, tyranny and oppression such as the
peoples of Namibia, South Africa and the neighbouring
States are suffering are not unknown to us in the Middle
Past. Because of our own suffering and bitter experiences
we can fully understand the suffering of the peoples of
southern Africa. Because of the racist and arrogant
nature of the r&imes of Pretoria and Tel Aviv-both of
which have had long practice in selective settler colonization-it
is impossible not to see not just the similarity but the complete identity of the terrorist practices of
the two regimes. Both have usurped land by force and subjugated the indigenous population that owned it. Both
have exploited natural and human resources out of selfinterest. Both have put themselves in a classification
above that of other human groups, which they have gone
to the length of dividing these groups into categories and
grades. In Africa, the racist minority claims that it
selected to carry the message of the white man. In occupied Palestine, the racist Zionists claim that they carry
out occupation, murder, the displacement of persons,
usurpation and destruction sometimes because of a
divine mission and sometimes in the name of the history
which it has invented and formulated to justify its aggression against our Arab people. The Council listened to the
statement [244&h meeting] of the representative of the
white racist minority in South Africa. Did that statement
not remind its members of the twisted logic exhibited by
the representative of Israel in this Council? Is there not
an alliance, co-operation and co-ordination in all fields
between the two racist rCgimes-that
of Tel Aviv and
that of Pretoria? Is there not a similarity in the hatred of
the innocent refugees who are pursued by the two
r&imes with their aircraft and armoured cars in order to
destroy them in the countries of asylum?

ests.” [2439fh meeting, para. 146.1

121. The Council cannot ignore this justified appeal,
which, if it shows anything, shows deep disappointment,
especially as the contact group had arrogated itself the
task of mediation, acting within the framework of resolution 435 (1978).
122. The question before the Council must be dealt
with on the basis that the Council is the organ responsible for ensuring the implementation
of its resolutions in
this case in particular, resolution 435 (1978). Any deviation from that objective would be considered a setback to
the attainment of independence by Namibia. Therefore
the Council must be guided by the decisions of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris during
the last week of April, which was attended by representatives of 136 States and also representatives of national
liberation movements and international organizations.
In its evaluation of the situation in Namibia, the Conference expressed its alarm at the fact that the Council has
so far been unable to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security because of
the opposition of the Western permanent members of the
Council. The Conference considered that the imposition
of sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and their effective world-wide application was the only way of compelling South Africa to
comply with the resolutions of the United Nations.

125. The International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle ‘of the Namibian People for Independence condemned Israel and other Western countries for cooperation with the racist r&me of South Africa in the
economic, political, military and nuclear fields-cooperation which encourages Pretoria to challenge the
international community. The Conference also strongly
condemned the collusion of certain Western Governments, in particular the Governments of the United States
and Israel, with the racist r&me of South Africa, especially in the nuclear field. We draw attention to the fact
that the so-called policy of constructive engagement
adopted by the Administration of President Reagan falls
within the same framework as the strategic alliance
between the United States and Israel.

123. Therefore, there is a conviction within the intemational community that the racist regime in South Africa
can only be made to respect resolution 435 (1978) and the
peace plan if sanctions are imposed against it, since that
is the only language that is understood by the racists, and
the only practical means of compelling the racist r&me
to respect international law. If the Security Council failed
for any reason whatsoever to adopt a resolution imposing mandatory sanctions against South Africa, it would
mean that the apartheid &ime would be free to commit
any acts it wished and in Namibia and to escalate external aggression against Angola, Lesotho, Mozambique,
Seychelles and Zimbabwe. It should be noted that the
export of aggression to the neighbouring countries of
South Africa is a way of blackmailing the international
community and its victims alike with the aim of perpetuating the racist regime’s occupation of Namibia and
imposing further conditions to undermine the intemational legitimacy represented by resolution 435 (1978).
We believe that if the countries of the contact group
committed themselves to agreeing to the imposition of
sanctions against South Africa this would prove their
seriousness and give them credibility, particularly as they
were the sponsors of the plan adopted by the Council.
We know, however, that those States would not abide by
such sanctions.

126. The Syrian Arab Republic, on the basis of its position of principle, believes in the unity of the Arab-African
struggle against racist Zionism and aparrheid, because the
aims of the racist r&imes are one and the same and their
tactics are one and the same-that is, collusion and cooperation with the vicious forces that have a selfish interest in perpetuating exploitation, dependency and slavery.
127. The people of Namibia are suffering under the
yoke of deprivation and slavery, and that tyranny has
reached the point of preventing the exercise of all funda14

,

mental human rights. By coercion, some Namibians have
been recruited to fight against their own people, and acts
of murder, torture, forced evacuation, flogging, imprisonment and detention take place every day; in addition,
there arc the continuous attempts to separate Namibians
from each other, keeping them in bantustans and sowing
the seeds of enmity between them in order to foment civil
war. All this is coupled with the plundering of the natural
and mineral resources and the vicious exploitation of the
workers, including women and children. Despite all that,
there are those who put acts of self-defence on the same
level as State and other forms of terrorism and describe
heroic acts of resistance as terrorism, as if heroism in
resitance were the monopoly of Europeans and other
Westerners, something in which they take pride, while
denouncing it when it is shown by the oppressed peoples
of the third world.
128. I should like to quote the following statement
made by the representative of SWAP0 to the Council:
“I wish to declare, in the name of the people of
Namibia, that unless this august body acts decisively
to secure the withdrawal of South Africa from the
international Territory of Namibia, we shall have no
alternative but to continue the armed struggle with
greater intensity. We do not love bloodshed, but when
we are dealing with a Government like that of South
Africa, which believes in violence and bloodshed, we
must be prepared to meet it on its own terms. Our
struggle may be long and protracted; our struggle may
be bloody and costly in terms of human life; it is a
price we are prepared to pay for our independence.‘*

ensure their independence and eradicate racism from
southern Africa, know from historical precedents that
defeat must be the fate of the aggressor and the exploiting colonialist. That is why we hope that the Council, ifit
wants to exercise its responsibility by putting an end to
aggression, safeguarding the international
order and
maintaining
world peace, will impose comprehensive,
mandatory sanctions against South Africa in order to
compel it to abide by the will of the international community, because sanctions are the only and the ultimate
means of solving the problem of Namibia peacefully.
Otherwise there will be no solution but the continuation
of the armed struggle by the Namibian masses under the
leadership of SWAPO, which enjoys the support of all
people who love peace and liberty. We are convinced
that the final victory will be on the side of right and
justice and the people struggling for freedom, independence and equal rights.
130. Before concluding, I should like to pay a tribute to
the valuable efforts of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Special Committee
Against Apartheid to continue the struggle against
racism, occupation and colonialism so that Namibia and
all the peoples of southern Africa may enjoy full rights.
The meeting rose at 4.35 pm

[ZSSSth meeting, para. 124.1

129. The Syrian Arab Republic, its people and its
Government, while declaring their full support for the
struggle of the Namibian people under SWAPO, while
confirming their intention to sustain that struggle by all
means and while affirming their support for and solidarity with the front-line States in their historic struggle to

Litho

in United Nations,

New York

Nom
’ See Oficial
Records of the General Assembly, ??drty$‘fth
Session.
Supplement
No. 24, Vol. I, annex II.
t See Report of the International
Coqference
in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
PeopIe for Independence,
Paris, 25-29 Aprir 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),
part three.
’ OJ’icial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh
Session,
Supplement
No. 1.

oo4oCl

90-&X05-March

1991-2.050
