UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2519’”

MEETING:

29 FEBRUARY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2519). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339) ..,......*......................
,........I................

1

SIPV.25 19

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or ‘in which
,:
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, ‘are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.,

,

‘..

I

2519th
Held in New York
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

MEETING

on Wednesday,

1. Adoption
2.

on which we shall

4. Need I recall the tragic character of the situation
prevailing in Lebanon, and in particular in the Beirut
area? The sufferings of the civilian populations and the
constant threat to peace and security in that region
posed by the violence make it necessary for the international community to shoulder its responsibilities.

agenda (SlAgendaf2519)
5. As everyone here knows, France has always
worked in favour of international action on this matter.
We have always wanted the United Nations to take its
proper place and to play its proper role in helping to
bring peace and reconciliation to that troubled country.
That was the case when the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
was created-a force in
which my country was the first to take part and is today
its main troop contributor. That was also the case when
we officially made known, in responding to the request
of the Lebanese Government to take part in the multinational force, that we should have preferred a United
Nations force. Subsequently, on several occasions the
French authorities entered into bilateral and multilateral contacts in an attempt to replace the multinational
force with a United Nations presence.

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16339)
The meeting

1984, at 3 p.m.

submitted by the French delegation,
be voting this afternoon.

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives-of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, .Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

29 February

was called to order at 4.00 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339)

6. Today the conditions that prevailed when that
force was established have drastically changed, and the
situation in the Beirut area has further worsened. That
is why France now proposes to the Council that it
should assume its responsibilities
by deciding to substitute a United Nations presence for the multinational
force.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings
[2524th and
2416th meetings], I invite the representative of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table, and the representatives of Italy and Senegal to take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. The draft resolution before the Council is the outcome of painstaking, determined efforts. It takes into
account to the fullest extent possible the concerns
expressed on all sides. Although France is submitting
the draft text, it is, as everyone knows, principally the
outcome of long work carried out in the main jointly
with all those in the Council who believe, as we do, in
the paramount role that the United Nations must play in
achiev.ing an end to violence and a decrease of tension,
in order to help bring about reconciliation
and peace.
I do not hesitate to say that the draft resolution is just as
much their work as it is ours.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table, and
Mr. Jannuzzi (Italy) and Mr. Sarre’ (Senegal) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/l635l/Rev.2,
which contains
the text of the revised draft resolution submitted by
France.

8, We are aware that the adoption of that draft resolution would be merely one stage in carrying out the task
that we must assume to achieve peace and reconciliation, but it is a necessary step.

3. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) [interpretation from French]: I asked to speak once again
merely to introduce draft resolution S/16351/Rev.2,
1

.

9. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretationfrom
Russian]: Although it is
the last day of February, allow me, Sir, to welcome you
to the lofty post of President, of the Council. Your
diplomatic abilities and skill are helping us to solve the
problems that the Council has been considering this
month.

ritory the so-called multinational force whose backbone was the United States Marines supported by an
entire armada of ships from the United States Sixth
Fleet. Sparing no efforts, Washington sent untold numbers of emissaries to the Middle East, who, to the
accompaniment of loud statements about.progress towards peace in concert with their Israeli proteges,
imposed upon the Lebanese a servile agreement that:
essentially would have turned Lebanon into an American-Israeli protectorate.

10. I also pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Chamorro Mora, for the
very tactful and competent guidance he provided for
the Council’s work in January,
‘>
11. Once again the Council’s agenda has on it the
question of the situation in Lebanon. Those of us who
were here during the tragic events which took place in
the summer of 1982 as a result of the massive Israeli
aggression against that small country remember what
deprivations and trials were suffered by the Lebanese
and Palestinian peoples. Many people still have fresh
in their minds the pictures of death and destruction
brought by war to Lebanese territory, the massive bombardments and artillery sieges that the occupiers systematically carried out against the besieged capital of
Lebanon and the barbaric massacre of the defenceless
refugees in the Sabra and Shatila camps.

16. From the very outset the Soviet Union vigorously
warned of the dangerous consequences of interference
from overseas, and especially of deployment of a multinational force in Lebanon. That prediction turned
out to be true. The presence of the multinational force
in Lebanese territory not only did not help normalize
the situation in Lebanon, as Washington had self-confidently affrrmed in the past; but, on the contrary, it
further worsened the danger facing the Lebanese people and Government.
17. Events in recent months could not better serve td
illustrate that fact. Having dropped the pretense of
being peacemakers, the United States Marines and the
ships of the Sixth Fleet dropped on Lebanon hundreds
of tons of bombs and shells in an attempt to dictate
to the Lebanese how they should arrange their own
internal affairs. According to the American press,
starting on 8 September, American ships in Lebanon
fired more than 300 shells from 16-inch guns and more
than 1300 shells from 5-inch guns. They also dropped
high-explosive and cluster bombs from aircraft. One
can imagine how many victims there were among the
peaceful civilian population as a result.

12. Literally from the very first hours of that aggression, the Council clearly and quite unambiguously
demanded that Israel put an end to it. In resolutions 508(1982) and 509 (1982). both of which the Council adopted unanimously, the substantial basis was laid
for a subsequent settlement in Lebanon through the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal from that
country of Israeli forces and the ending of military
actions on Lebanese territory,

18. Quite rightly, the American-Israeli intervention
was decisively rebuffed by Lebanese patriots and by
other national patriotic forces in the Arab world.
Thanks primarily to their firmness and c&rage, Washington’s efforts to carry out a “rescue mission” and to
put a breach in the Arab ranks clearly failed.

13. For well-known reasons, those resolutions were
not implemented. Under cover of a strategic alliance
with Washington, Tel Aviv brazenly ignored the demands of the Council, and, by the way, it thereby
unceremoniously trampled upon its own direct obligations under the Charter. The ink on those Council
resolutions had not yet dried when Israel, and right
after it the United States, competed with each other
in affirming that those fundamental documents were
obsolete, that they had been overtaken by events and
that therefore, so to speak, they had become inap
propriate.

19. In connection with the recent statements of off&
cial United States representatives to the effect that the
United States has supposedly always advocated the
sending of United Nations forces to Lebanon, and virtually against its will went ahead with the emplacement
of the multinational force in that country, L should like
to recall the following facts.

14. A year and a half has passed since then, but the
situation in Lebanon continues to be extremely complicated and tense. The Israeli occupiers continue to
dominate the southern part of the country, where, by all
accounts, they intend to dig in for a long time. Israeli
aircraft are again bombing Lebanese cities and towns.

20. As long ago as July 1982-that is, at the peak of
Israeli aggression against Lebanon-the Soviet Union
put forward a proposal that the use of UNIFIL contingents in the region of the Lebanese capital be considered. The United States did not respond to that
proposal. In September 1982, after a barbaric massacre of defenceless Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila camps, almost all the members of the Council,
including the Soviet Union, were prepared to take a
decision on the immediate sending of United Nations
forces to Beirut. Nevertheless, such a decision was

15. Some people in Washington then found it propitious to set up operations in Lebanon and to include it
within the “sphere of vital interests” of the United
States. That precisely was the long-term calculation
that dictated the decision to deploy on Lebanese ter2

frustrated precisely by the United States, which preferred to send to Lebanon Marines and military contingents of their partners in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. In subsequent months, highly placed
representatives of the United States Administration,
including the Secretary of State, repeatedly made
statements to the effect that they saw no possible role
for the United Nations in Lebanon.

by the position of the Soviet delegation in the Council
when we considered the proposal to send United Nations forces to Beirut. From the very outset of the
consultations on that question we clearly stated that we
were ‘prepared for a constructive discussion of this
proposal, on the understanding that the important and
necessary conditions be established so as to have the
operation take place. Among such conditions, over and
above withdrawal from Beirut of the multinational
force, are of course the need to withdraw foreign warships from the Lebanese coast and to have guarantees
that there would be no resumption of artillery fire, air
strikes or any other interference in the internal affairs of
Lebanon by the multinational force.

21. Those are the facts that today some would prefer
to forget, and they now are vigorously showing their
renewed loyalty to the United Nations.
22. Now great efforts are needed to clear away the
obstruction caused by Israeli aggression and foreign
intervention in Lebanon so that the Lebanese can themselves solve their internal problems without interference from outside. In that regard, what is mainly necessary is to ensure implementation of the fundamental
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) and to bring about
an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli
forces from all Lebanese territory. No one has cancelled those resolutions; they must be implemented. It
is also necessary that the United States end its crude
military blackmail of Lebanon, its barbaric firing from
the ships of the Sixth Fleet. Its ships and the other
foreign military fleets should be removed from the
Lebanese coast.

25. In spite of the Soviet delegation’s great demonstrated flexibility and the statement that we were ready
to seek a mutually acceptable solution to the key questions, during the course of the work on the draft resolution it became quite clear that some members of the
Council did not wish to assume the responsibility not
to resume interference in Lebanon. The draft resolution contains other unacceptable or ambiguous wording
-for example, that relating to the mandate of the
United Nations forces in Beirut and so on. And, aithough we favoured continuing consultations on this,
it was finally introduced in the Council without any
further consideration of our position in order to force
a vote. Thus the work in the Council on this draft
resolution to which many members have contributed
was broken off owing to the unseemly manoeuvres of
Western delegations, which bear full responsibility for
this.

23. But the opposite is happening. Even now, after
the so-called redeployment of American Marines to
their ships, almost not a day goes by when the United
States fails to continue strikes against Lebanon-and,
by the way, the United States does not even make much
effort to come up with pretexts. Things have reached
the point where the President of the United States, at
his press conference on 22 February of this year, stated
for all to hear that it is enough for one shell to fall-perhaps even accidentally, perhaps a shell fired by some
unknown person from some unknown place against any
American institution in Beirut-for the large-calibre
artillery of the battleship New Jersey to again be
brought into action. If we were to follow the logic of this
doctrine, if I may call it that, then after the explosions
on the grounds of the residence at the Soviet Mission
here, the United States Administration should have
acknowledged that the Soviet Union had a right to
bombard New York. The absurdity of such an approach
is quite obvious. As was stated on 27 February by
the.Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union,
Andrei Gromyko: “No objective observer would believe that one could blast one’s way out of this impasse
with the artillery of United States battleships or the
military interference of the Marines.”

26. The Soviet delegation expresses its regret at such
an outcome to the consideration of this question in the
Council. There was an opportunity to achieve a positive
outcome. In its present form, owing to the reasons that
I have mentioned, this draft resolution is unacceptable,
and the Soviet delegatibn will vote against it.
27. In conclusion, we should like to emphasize that
we have great sympathy for the Lebanese, whose fate
has included such harsh sufferings and deprivations.
We support the constructive efforts to bring about
a quick completion of the dialogue and national reconciliation among the various Lebanese groups and
express our firm hope that those efforts will lead to
the restoration of the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, which as a fullfledged member of the international community will
make its contribution to the strengthening of peace and
security in the Middle East and throughout the entire
world.
28. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the revised
draft resolution submitted by France [S/Z635Z/Rev.2].
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put it to the vote.
now.

24. Today, we again confirm that the real settlement
for the situation in Lebanon should be achieved not by
separate deals and arm-twisting but, rather, on the basis
of a strict and unswerving implementation of the relevant United Nations decisions, for which the United
States representative also voted in the Security Council. That is precisely the approach which was dictated

29. First, I shall call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
3

30. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) [inrerpretation from AruKc]: Egypt has supported the French initiative from its
very inception and since France has proposed the replacement of the multinational force with United Nations forces in Lebanon. This idea has now been crystallized in a draft resolution, introduced in the Council
moments ago by the representative of France. As a
matter of fact, our support is based on a number of
important considerations.

37. Given all these elements I have put before the
Council, and stemming from Egypt’s strong belief in the
constructive role the United Nations and the Security
Council, in particular, must play, Egypt will vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by France.
38. Mr. KI (Upper Volta) [interpretation
from
French]: When we began work in the Council on the
situation in the Beirut area a few weeks ago, my delegation had the firm and strong conviction that the Council
could and had to contribute to the restoration of peace
not only in the capital of Lebanon, which had been so
shaken and sorely tried and tested, but also throughout
the entire country. As we seeit, the Council is seizedof
a sensitive and complex problem whose sole lasting and
realistic solution must be sought in the more comprehensive context of Lebanon as a whole. Otherwise we
would be seeking to put out afire without concern for its
source; we would be applying ,partial solutions whose
sole merit would be to delay more serious explosions
that would affect the peace and security of the region.

31. First, the international community has a clear
responsibility to avoid a dangerous vacuum in Lebanon following the total withdrawal of the Multinational
Force+ vacuum which on the humanitarian level may
lead to more tragedies for the Lebanese people, especially the defenceless civilians, and for the refugees,
including the Palestinian refugee camps, which are
insufficiently protected following the withdrawal of the
Italian forces.
32. Secondly, the draft resolution also stresses the
importance of preserving the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. That is a
basic principle to which Egypt adheres, advocates and
will always defend.

39. Also, we are not losing sight of the fact that the
situation in Beirut is but one component in the broader
problem in the Middle East, the centre-piece of which
remains the Palestinian problem. We are convinced
that, as long as the .Palestinian people, which has so
long been without a country, is not given its right to selfdetermination and to a homeland, and continues to be
tossed about at the whim of various Powers, that part of
the world will not enjoy peace.

33. Thirdly, the draft resolution also calls for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon. That is a
principle which the Council cannot but support. At
the same time, we would have preferred a clearer and
stronger wording on this point in the draft resolution,
especially requesting the unconditional, immediate
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from all Lebanese
territory, as the Council has previously requested. Despite the fact,that the paragraph on this point does not
mention that clearly, that is our understanding of the
paragraph concerned.

35. The situation in which Lebanon exists today
-with all which that implies in dangerous threats that
may have repercussions on peace and security in the
region, as well as a threat to Lebanon and its territorial
integrity-is the strongest justification for a United Nations presence and support for the role which could be
played by the Organization in Lebanon.

40. As far’ as we are concerned, the difficulties at
present existing in Lebanon stem also directly from
outside interference’and the will of outside Powers to
control that country. We believe that the Lebanese
people knows where its interests lay and must be the
sole judge of its own destiny. It is a mature people
which is able to settle its problems without ,any outside
interference* Therefore we deem inadmissible the presence on Lebanese soil of Israeli occupation troops in
the south, as well as of the so-called multinational force
in Beirut and Lebanese territorial waters. ‘Hence, all
foreign troops, whatever they may be, must withdraw
from that country. We continue to believe that only the
immediate withdrawal of those forces and strict respect
for the territorial integrity, unity, national sovereignty
and independence of Lebanon can create conditions.
favourable to reconciliation of all the people of the
country, something that is indeed necessary. And for
us, it is the duty of the Council to hasten the restoration
of peace in Lebanon and to help alleviate the suffering
of its civilian population, including the .Palestinian
refugees.

36. As a non-aligned Arab country, Egypt, which is
linked to Lebanon with the best possible relations, has,
like other States, participated objectively in the rather
difficult consultations on this draft resolution. We have
played our part and we are proud of it, despite the
disappointment we may feel in a few minutes.

41. Throughout the consultations we said that for our
part we were ready to go along with any initiative that
‘might lead us to that goal. This is why we viewed
favourably the French proposal designed to ask the
Council to send to Lebanon a United Nations force
entrusted with the maintenance of peace.

34. Fourthly, despite the fact that today we are not
discussing the whole Lebanese issue, at the same time
the draft resolution does not ignore the very important
necessity of initiating the national reconciliation dialogue among all the Lebanese factions. The positive
result of such a dialogue is an indispensable basis for
Lebanon’s peace and security. There is no doubt that
we all hope for a sincere response to the Council’s
appeal to cease hostilities and achieve a cease-fire not
only in Beirut but also in all of Lebanon.

4

42. The draft resolution before us is the outcome of
serious and earnest negotiations. We ourselves made
a contribution
to those negotiations within the nonaligned group. Some of the views that we expressed in
private consultations along with other members of the
Council have been taken into consideration. We would,
of course, have wanted other points, such as the withdrawal of all foreign troops and agreement by all parties
concerned, to be better spelled out. But, in an effort at
conciliation and in order to act quickly for the benefit of
the Lebanese population and the Palestinian refugees,
my delegation is ready to accept this text, and we shall
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.

these acts of Israel, the innocent people of Lebanon
have paid a heavy price.
2
48. The Government and people of India have been
profoundly anguished over these tragic events. The
Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, has given
utterance to our sorrow and concern on a number of
occasions in our Parliament
as well as elsewhere,
including in the General Assembly when she addressed
it in the autumn of last year.’
49. Recent developments
have resulted in’a sharp
escalation of tension and conflict in Lebanon. The current crisis in Beirut beginning early this month was the
culmination of this deepening tragedy.

43. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India):’ I have already had
occasion to felicitate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I should
only like to reiterate my appreciation for the patience
and skill with which you have guided our consultations.

50. This is not the occasion nor the time to dwell on
the circumstances in which the multinational
force
came to find itself in Lebanon. However, events have
demonstrated beyond any doubt that the position of the
multinational
force was untenable and that its continued presence could only further aggravate tension
and conflict. It became necessary therefore for the
Council to consider the action to be taken by the United
Nations to till the vacuum in the Beirut area following
the withdrawal of the multinational
force and to bring a
healing touch to the area.

44. The Council is once again debating the serious and
explosive situation in Lebanon, this time the sharp
escalation in violence and bloodshed that has engulfed
the Beirut area. It is indeed appropriate that the Security Council, entrusted under the Charter with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of intemational peace and security, should take upon itself the
task of finding ways and means of alleviating this serious situation, which could have wider repercussions
for peace and stability in the region as a whole.

51. Against this background we have viewed with
great sympathy the current efforts in the Council initiated at the request of France, whose initiative we
welcomed, to establish a United Nations presence in
Lebanon, upon the withdrawal of the multinational
force. In our consultations with the French delegation,
as well as with other delegations, we have insisted that
while concentrating on the current crisis in Beirut we
should nevertheless bear in mind the larger perspective
of the problem of Lebanon as a whole, as well as the
continuing impasse in the Middle East. We were also
anxious to ensure that the objective of the United Nations force should be clear and that its mandate should
be precisely defined before it was deployed. It was also
essential, in our judgement, to see some evidence of a
genuine process of national reconciliation
in Lebanon.
The people of Lebanon, who have suffered so much for
so long, should have the opportunity to find harmony,
peace and stability, free from all foreign interference.

45. The Council has in the past adopted various resolutions seeking to bring about an immediate end to the
fighting in this war-tom hapless country and demanding
that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith
and unconditionally
to the internationally
recognized
boundaries of Lebanon. Unfortunately,
those resolutions have remained unimplemented.
46. The continuing conflict in the Middle East remains the most serious threat to peace. The tragedy-in
Lebanon is but one symptom ofthe malaise that has
caused untold suffering for thousands of innocent people of that country. Any solution of the problem of
Lebanon ‘cannot be divorced from our search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting ‘peace in the Middle
East which must be based on the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human
rights.

52. Throughout our defiberations-lasting,
I believe,
over nearly three weeks-we have endeavoured, along
with other non-aligned countries members of the Council, to contribute towards evolving a draft resolution
that would be acceptable to all, or at least have the
acquiescence of all, members of the Council. Clearly,
any draft resolution to be meaningful and effective must
have the concurrence of all members of the Council and
the parties concerned.

47. In June 1982, the international ‘community
was
pained and shocked by the blatant Israeli aggression
against Lebanon and the brutal atrocities committed by
Israel against the civilian population. The invasion was
undertaken on the alleged ground of self-preservation
and security. Under the pretext of protecting its own
civilians, a large number of innocent men, women and
children in Lebanon were mercilessly killed. The invasion was obviously a part of Israel’s calculated policy to
achieve a systematic decimation of the Palestinian people and a complete erosion of the independence and
sovereignty of the neighbouring State of Lebanon. For

53. With a view to contributing
towards a positive
outcome of our efforts, my delegation, together with a
number of non-aligned countries members of the Council, made several suggestions to improve the original
5

text put forward by France. It is a matter of deep
satisfaction to us that the delegation of France has
shown a spirit of co-operation and displayed flexibility
and has incorporated most of those suggestions. I
should like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the representative of France for this.

try the peace and stability that are so necessary to
augment the prospects for a positive outcome to the
current dialogue of national reconciliation.
60. From the very beginning of this exercise, the
overriding concern of my delegation has been to
produce a text which would be adopted by consensusor
at least without a negative vote. The road has been long
and arduous, thus necessarily slow; we are happy to
note, however, that the present draft resolution takes
into account most of the concerns expressed by my
delegation. In consequence, our thanks go to the
French delegation, and in particular to Mr. Luc de La
Barre de Nanteuil, for the patience and understanding
shown throughout the whole process.

54. We would have wished that the Council had had a
little more time to resolve some remaining problems.
We are aware of the urgency of the situation and the
necessity for early Council action. Even so, a few more
hours spent in an effort to solve these remaining problems would not have been time ill spent. My delegation
regrets that, unfortunately, this has not been possible.
55. Notwithstanding what I have just said, in our
judgement the revised text has been substantially
improved and is sufficiently balanced to meet most
-though not all, as was abundantly clear from an
earlier statement that we heard in the Council--f the
concerns which have been expressed in the course of
our consultations. For example, as far as India is concerned, my delegation would have strongly preferred
the inclusion of a preambular paragraph reiterating the
demand for the withdrawal of Israeli forces forthwith
and unconditionally to the internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon in implementation of resolutions 508(1982) and 509 (1952). We believe the omission
of such a preambular paragraph is a serious lacuna in
the draft text.

61. I must say, however, that we would have liked to
have had a little more time to see if we could have
achieved an even more comprehensive text. We firmly
believe that we were moving in the right direction and
that the target was in fact well in sight. We believe, in
particular, that we would have benefited further from a
more accurate knowledge of the high-level talks taking
place at Damascus today on an important element very
relevant to this subject.
62. Having said that, and in the present circumstances, we still feel that we should support the draft
resolution, looking less at the tragic past and more to
the future.

56. My delegation is aware of the concerns which are
not fully met by the present draft resolution. None the
less, it is our belief that it represents a sufficiently broad
and acceptable framework of essential elements and
provides a reasonable basis for the Council to take
the initial step towards the constitution of a United
Nations force. Naturally, when the report of the Secretary-General is received, as required under operative
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution-that is, if the draft
resolution is adopted-remaining ambiguities should be
cleared before the Council takes action to authorize the
deployment of the force.

63. At the same time, even if the exercise is interrupted today, we wish to make a public appeal to all
concerned eventually to respond positively and to
extend full respect and support to the task being contemplated for United Nations personnel, whatever its
final outcome, so that if and when they undertake their
assignment full safeguards will be given to those persons dedicated to the preservation of peace, to the
ideals of the United Nations and to ensuring the reemergence of Lebanon as a free, independent nation at
peace within itself and with all its neighbours. This in
itself would be a step towards restoring a broader peace
in the Middle East after the Legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people have finally been recognized by all,
so many agonizing years after they have appealed to the
United Nations for assistance in a peaceful approach.
The complexity of these tasks should not daunt us. Our
collective efforts must continue and intensify in the
future.

57. Guided by the considerations that 1 have just
stated, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.
58. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Sir, I suppose it cannot
occur too often for a President to be congratulated on
the last day of February in a leap year. I sincerely
congratulate you, Sir, today, in great recognition of
your sterling service in this prolonged and rather troubled month.

64. Mr. ICAZA GALLABD (Nicaragua) [interpretation from Spanish]: We have before us a draft resolution which is the result of arduous work by the members of the Council. From the outset we welcomed the
French initiative with interest, and many of the suggestions made by the non-aligned countries were designed
to ensure that this initiative had all the guarantees necessary for useful and effective participation by the
United Nations in regard to this problem. We acknowledge the efforts made by the French delegation to meet
these concerns.

59. We are all aware of the tragic events which are
taking place in Lebanon and there is no need for me to
repeat our own concern in detail on this occasion. We
have been asked today to vote on a draft resolution
which attempts resolutely and effectively to address
that tragic situation and which, if adopted, would constitute a necessary step towards restoring in that coun6

65. We cannot forget that Lebanon continues to be
under fire and bombardment
and that part of its sovereign territory remains under the occupation of Israeli
forces. We are also aware that with some additional
effort it might have been possible to obtain a better
outcome for this draft resolution. Nevertheless, we feel
that the efforts we have made have not been in vain, for
we have been guided solely by the interests of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to which we belong, the interests of peace in that tormented region of
the world and our belief in the ability of the United
Nations and the Security Council to carry out their
work.
66. The results as expressed in the draft resolution
before us are not perfect, but we feel that they could
contribute to an improvement
of the situation in Lebanon. For that reason, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.
67. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): The United States wishes to affirm in this public
meeting our high regard for the careful manner in which
you, Sir, have conducted the affairs of the Council
during this month of your presidency, and also our
respect for the manner in which the French representative has pursued, with both patience and skill, the
effort to achieve a draft resolution today that might
provide a new element of peace in the tragic Lebanese
situation.
68. TheUnited
States will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us, and will do so as part of a longstanding, continuing effort to help to re-establish and
reinforce the peace necessary for the restoration of the
territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon. We shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution because we hoped that it would contribute to
ending the violence that maims and kills, without regard
to age, role, religion or social condition, its Lebanese
targets. The United States will vote in favour of the
draft resolution because we hoped and expected that it
might contribute to the protection of Lebanon’s civilian
population: Palestinian, Druse, Shiite, Sunni; Muslims
and Christians of all varieties-that
is, of all Lebanese
people. These have been the goals of United States
policy and they remain the goals of United States
policy.
69, We have understood from the beginning of the
whole tragic series of problems in Lebanon that international co-operation would be necessary to the restoration of peace and sovereignty in that country. To
that end, the United States has encouraged and participated in international efforts to reinforce peace and
self-government in Lebanon. We have worked in the
United Nations and outside it, joining in successive
resolutions,
supporting
existing deployments
and
advocating much broader deployments of United Nations observers, seeking an enhanced United Nations
role, for many months. We have worked outside the
United Nations, alone and with others, to assist the

Government of Lebanon to reinforce its peace and
consolidate its authority to exercise its sovereign control over its own territory. To these ends, we have
participated
in the multinational
force, which was
created because of the unavailability
at the time of a
United Nations force for that purpose.
70. The United States has paid a high price for its
efforts on behalf of Lebanon. Our Embassy was
bombed; many Americans and others were killed in
that bombing. Nearly 300 young American Marines, in
Lebanon precisely for purposes of peace-keeping, were
murdered as they slept.
71. Major obstacles have been placed in the way of
Lebanon’s unity, sovereignty and peace. It is unfortunate to learn today that more obstacles will now
be placed in the way of serious efforts to reinforce
and enhance Lebanon’s unity, sovereignty and peace.
There has been less clarity than desired in much of the
public discussion about the nature of these obstacles.
Again and again one reads and hears that the terrible
violence in Lebanon of the past weeks is the nearly
inevitable consequence of Lebanon’s tribal and confessional heterogeneity,
of the tradition of rivalry and
hostility
among Lebanon’s
traditionally
warring
groups. We have read and heard here today a great deal
more about the internecine tribal, confessional conflicts and about the presence of Israeli troops in the
south than we have read and heard about the more than
50,000 Syrian troops and Palestinian and Iranian and
other associates in Lebanon. We have heard much less
about the systematic use of violence-violence
systematically encouraged from outside Lebanon for the
purpose precisely of preventing unity, sovereignty, and
peace in Lebanon.
72. Turning now to the draft resolution, the United
States would like to comment that the establishment
of a peace-keeping force of the sort foreseen in it
would, if it were to be constituted, stand in a long and
distinguished record of United Nations peace-keeping
efforts. Beginning in 1948 with the United Nations
Truce Supervision
Organization
in Palestine,
the
United Nations Military Observers in Kashmir, the
United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon, in
1958, and the United Nations Emergency Force in the
Middle East and the United Nations Operation in
the Congo, United Nations peace-keeping forces have
proven to be an important adjunct to carrying out the
primary purposes of the Charter. It is never untimely
to remind ourselves of those .primary purposes of the
Charter. They are, of course, the maintenance of international peace and security, the maintenance of national sovereignty and independence, the maintenance
of territorial integrity of Member States and the alleviation of massive suffering and the protection of fundamental human rights of civilian populations.’
73. Those are noble purposes. The Organization was
created to serve them. It has served them well with its
peace-keeping
efforts. Those peace-keeping
efforts

_

political equilibrium
essential for the preservation of
the unity, independence and territorial integrity of the
country.

have not ever proved inconsistent with the protection
of the inherent rights of nations to individual or collective self-defence, which rights also exist under the
Charter. The United Nations peace-keeping efforts,
indeed, have not proved themselves inconsistent with
the rights of any nations or any peoples. It therefore
becomes particularly unfortunate-that
no new peacekeeping effort is to be permitted the Council this day.

79. Clearly the trend towards the political fragmentation of Lebanon cannot be reversed by efforts serving
the interest of one party or the other. The situationcalls
for initiatives which allay rather than provoke partisan
suspicious and which are aimed at reconciliation among
the Lebanese factions, whose co-operation is indispensable for the unity and cohesion of that country,

74. ,,If, the United Nations were’ to be permitted to
undertake an enhanced peace-keeping role today in
Lebanon we would have, on behalf of the United
States, .further and more detailed commentary about
the precise terms of the draft resolution. Since, unfortunately, our Soviet colleague has told us of his intention to veto, I see no useful point to be served by any
more explicit commentary on the text of the draft resolution.

80. The United Nations has an important role to play
towards redressing the fast-deteriorating
situation in
Lebanon which would supplement the efforts in this
direction by responsible Governments
in the region
itself.. The, French initiative to activate the Security
Council fits admirably in this context and has earned
our appreciation.
I wish to pay a special tribute to
Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil for the untiring efforts
he has exerted in this context. In our view the proposal
for introducing a United Nations force in Beirut, which
did not find acceptance in the Council in the past, is
equally relevant today. The presence of a United Nations force in the area of Beirut could prove critical in
mitigating violence and ensuring a cease-fire, which
would provide Lebanon a breathing space in .which
efforts for national reconciliation
could be sustained to
produce tangible results.

75. I would simply say in commenting on this unfortunate situation and its unfortunate outcome that the
Soviet representative has spoken today sowing hate,
watering it with lies and harvesting violence, refusing to
co-operate and attacking others precisely for refusing
co-operation. The United States is sick of these calumnies addressed against us. We are sick of the habit of
accusing others-and
us quite particularly-for
actions
and policies which do not characterize our Govemmerit% actions and policies but precisely those of the
ones who address the charges. The United States regrets these tactics on behalf of our Soviet colleagues.
We hope they will abandon these tactics. We hope they
will even reconsider their opposition to a new and constructive peace-keeping role for the United Nations in
Lebanon’for the purpose of enhancing the peace, sovereignty and security of those people who have suffered
so long.

81. It is noteworthy that none of the parties in Lebanon or outside it has opposed the proposal for a United
Nations force in the country, even though these parties
have set out conditions for its introduction. In practical
terms the revised draft which proposes the establishment of a United Nations force, has gone a long way
towards meeting these conditions. A case in point is the
question of the departure of the multinational
force,
which was the focus of attention during prolonged consultations on the French proposal for the establishment
of a United Nations force. Opposition to the multinational force from political groups representing large
sections of the Lebanese population has removed its
purported ruison d’2tre. The provisions of the draft
resolution reinforce our assessment that its adoption
could have been followed forthwith by the exit, of the
multinational
force from Lebanon.

76. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as ”the representative of Pakistan.
77. Lebanon is passing through a most critical and
agonizing period of its history. In the recent past, and
particularly since the Israeli invasion of 1982, large
parts of its territory have suffered the ravages of foreign occupation, and what remains of the country is
tom by seemingly endless confrontation
between its
many warring groups.
78. The deepening human tragedy in Lebanon is
matched by growing anarchy on the political scene. The
primary victim of this intolerable situation is the population of Lebanon, which is living under the terror of a
civil war compounded by foreign intervention. It would
be naive to assume that the crisis in Lebanon, with all
its complications,
could lend. itself to easy solutions.
Such an assumption proved to be a costly miscalculation on the part of those who took it upon themselves to
give Lebanon the direction of their. choice. Yet a process’thus began which could help in bringing to an end
.the pervasive violence and bloodshed and in creating
,conditions
whic.h could prompt: reconciliation
and the
^,:1(: : -yyy&,.
I-i,
* .‘C,
. . ,,.I:..’
*. .*
. ,.* : 9“ ”

82. The draft resolution clearly envisaged that the
United Nations force’would take up positions when all
elements of the multinational
force had left Lebanese
territory and territorial waters. The mandate of the
United Nations force, which was the subject of delicate
negotiations,
provided for monitoring
the cease-fire
and extending help in protecting civilian life, including
the Palestinian refugee camps. Pakistan feels particularly concerned over the safety of the Palestinian
refugee camps and demands that every step be taken
against the repetition -of the barbarous crimes against
the Palestinian refugees, such as those.perpetrated
in
Sabra and Shatila in 1982.
8

83. Admittedly, the stipulated Council action is not a
remedy for all the problems besetting Lebanon, the
foremost of which is the continuing presence of Israeli
forces in its territory. The introduction of a United
Nations force in Beirut is being proposed, however,
with a limited objective, and is not meant to represent a
comprehensive remedy for the Lebanese crisis. Yet we
do not rule out the possibility that the-presence of such a
force could have become a prelude to a process which
could eventually restore the unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.

especially when that fate is linked to important external
factors
and to the wider peace in the region.
,
91. Despite today’s vote, I would appeal to the Council to continue to consider the situation in Lebanon with
the closest attention and with a sense of urgency. The
Council should, in my opinion, do this with the intent
that in the near futurewayswill be found f&the United
Nations to expand its role in Lebanon, not only for the
benefit of Lebanon itself, but also for the.(,cause of
international peace and security.
\,
92. .For my part, I shall continue to do all that I can
to promote a constructive United Nations roie in this
tragic situation.
:
93. The PRESIDENT: I shall now on those members
of the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
.a
94. Mr. MEESMAN (Netherlands): From the outset
my Government has expressed its support for France’s
valuable efforts to arrive at a Council decision which
would enable the United Nations to make a more meaningful contribution to the maintenance of peace and
security in the Beirut area, a decision that in our view is
already long overdue. We felt that the draft resolution
upon which we have just voted, which was the fruit of
prolonged and intensive consultations, went a long way
to doing just that. We had therefore hoped that today
the Council would have been able to act in accordance
with its responsibilities. Alas, this was not to be.

84. Our faith in the usefulness of a United Nations
presence remains based on the consideration that only
the United Nations has the capacity to meet the need
for an impartial presence which could bring tranquillity
in Beirut and provide a respite for the Lebanese leaders
to intensify their efforts for national reconciliation.
85. In view of theseconsiderations, Pakistan will support the draft resolution before us.
86. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of the
Council.
87. I shall now put to the vote the revised draft resolution submitted by France, contained in document
Sil635llRev.2.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
Infavour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

95. My Government has followed developments in
Lebanon, and lately in particular those in and around
Beirut, with growing concern. We continue to hope that
it will be possible to break the vicious circle of violence
so that there will be no further loss of life. Moreover,
an effective cease-fire might pave the way for further
steps on the road to national reconciliation so that at
the end of the day all unauthorized foreign forces will
have been withdrawn from Lebanon and the territorial
integrity, unity, sovereignty and independence of that
country will no longer be in doubt; Regrettably, today
the Organization has again been prevented, by the
negative vote of one of the Council’s permanent members, from making even the modest contribution to the
enhancement of this process which the draft resolution
calls for.

Against: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
f
There were 13 tiotes in favour and 2 againsf.
The draft resdlution was not adopted, the negative
vote being that of a permanent member of the Coun&f.

88. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General wishes
to make a statement, and I now call upon him.
89. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I wish to make a
brief statement in regard to the vote just taken by the
Council, which has shown that at the present time
disagreement among members of the Council prevents
the United Nations from playing an expanded role in
the tragic situation in Lebanon.

96. Article 24 of the Charter provides that the Members of the United Nations confer on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and we, the members
of that Council, are collectively and individually responsible for the implementation of that important
mandate. My Government is sorry to note ,that, notwithstanding the seriousness of the ’ situation ‘with
which we are dealing here today, the Council has failed
to live up to the hopes and expectations of the peoples
of the world. Obviously, the outcome’of today’s vote is
a major disappointment to my delegation, in particular

90. The United Nations has been involved in the Lebanese situation in one way or another for -more than
35 years. Lebanon is a founding Member of the Organization. Quite apart from important humanitarian
activities, we have at the moment some 6,000 peacekeeping personnel on the soil of Lebanon. As a matter
of principle, the United Nations has, and must have,
a profound concern for the fate of ‘a Member State,
9

because it again puts a major obstacle in the way of the
ability of the United Nations to make that contribution
to an improvement of the situation in Lebanon .which
the world is entitled to expect of the Organization.

102. We have as a Council been intensely involved,
especially over the last three weeks or so: Today we
came to the, moment for action on part at least of the
problem. It is a grave disappointment to my delegation
that the action has amounted to.inaction.

97. Things being what they are, however, I can only
add that the Netherlands will continue to look for
opportunities to enhance the process of peace and
reconciliation in Lebanon. We fully associateourselves
with the draft resolution where it expressesthe need for
a positive outcome of the dialogue of national reconciliation, which; in the words of the fourth preambular
paragraph, is “an indispensable basis for peace and
security in Lebanon”. At an earlier meeting of the
Council, on 16 February, we already urged

103. We find it impossible to understand that anything
that has been said this afternoon ,justifies a veto on
limited action by the United Nations at the request of
the Government concerned, the Government of Lebanon. We believe that many small, non-aligned countries will view with great concern this demonstration of
how easy it is to block the Security Council from doing
its duty under the Charter. It has implications for the
security of all those who depend upon the United Nations.

“ail parties concerned to resume without further
delay the process of reconciliation and negotiation,
aimed at the establishment of a Government enjoying
the widest possible . . . support and exercising
authority throughout the territory of Lebanon. Such
a Government would be in a much better position to
assert its authority and to accomplish the desired
goal of a complete withdrawal of all non-authorized
non-Lebanese forces from Lebanese territory.”
[2515th meeting,

104. The Council has devoted much effort to the
elaboration of the draft resolution on which it has just
voted. France had the distinction of initiating and sponsoring it. However, as the French representative has
rightly said, the whole Council, including those deiegations that have just voted against it, contributed to
refining its wording. We all compromised in the hope of
achieving consensus.

pam. 56.1

105. We have failed, for the time being. One aspect in
particular of this failure puzzles my delegation. The
deliberations of the Council in the last three weeks have
been focused on the situation in and around Beirut, and
no one was more insistent on restricting our discussion
on the draft resolution to the smallest geographical area
possible than the delegation which hasjust explained its
negative vote with statements relating to Lebanon as a
whole, or to parts of Lebanon other than Beirut. That
delegation constantly told us that we must restrict ourselves to the city of Beirut only, not even to the Beirut
area. It expressed suspicion regarding operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution which speaks of the
United Nations force having

98. I should like to reiterate here once again that my
Government continues to be of the opinion that there
can be no territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and
independence of Lebanon unless and until all unauthorized foreign forces have left that country.
99. The present setback notwithstanding, we continue to hope that the moment is not far off when the
Organization will be allowed to play in the area the
meaningful role to which so many of us have been
looking forward for so long. It would seem to us that
such a United Nations force should be a peace-keeping
force rather than one which will have to enforce peace,
with the risks of getting itself involved in the fighting
and thus of intervening in the internal affairs of Lebanon. A stable and effective cease-tire in the Beirut area
would in our view therefore continue to be an essential
prerequisite for a United Nations force to be able to
carry out its proposed mandate in the area effectively.

“the mission of monitoring compliance with the
cease-fire and helping to protect the civilian populations, including in the Palestinian refugee camps,
and, without intervening in the internal affairs of
Lebanon for the benefit of any party whatever, will
thereby assist in re-establishing the peace necessary
for the restoration of the territorial integrity, unity,
sovereignty and independence of Lebanon”.

100. I think it was appropriate for me to make these
observations although, regrettably, they cannot be of
direct relevance to the situation as of this moment, for,
should the question of a United Nations peace effort in
Beirut or Lebanon come up again, the Council may
wish to reflect upon some of these considerations,
which in our view continue to be of relevance for an
operation of this nature.

It appeared to think that the task was too wide. Yet,
when it spoke this afternoon, its objections to the draft
resolution seemed to be concerned with actions far
outside the city of Beirut.
106. As I have already said, we have- spent the last
three weeks focusing on the situation in and around
Beirut. But I would join with the delegation I have just
criticized and with others in affirming that the problem
of Lebanon is much wider than Beirut. We must bear in
mind that in the draft resolution we have been looking at
we have not been trying to deal with the whole problem.

101. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): The
situation in Lebanon is grave. It has serious implications for its neighbours, for the Middle East in general
and for international relations as a whole. It is therefore right that the Security Council should consider the
situation and act upon it.
10

There are manv things which. if we had been trving’to
deal with the whole-problem; my Government-would
have liked to seeincorporated in the draft resolution but
which, in a spirit of compromise, we were prepared to
omit for the sake of getting agreement on limited action
dealing with the most urgent problem. For example, we
would have liked to refer to Council resolutions 520
(1982) and 521 (1982); we would have liked a clearer
statement about the early withdrawal of all external
forces; we would also have preferred to insert the word
“initially” in the second sentence of operative paragraph 3 to make it clear that the United Nations force
could begin with a relatively small task, broadening
later, if it was successful, to a larger task.

Underlying all this, and over a period of many years,
the United Nations has shown great concern for the
plight of the Palestinian refugees. In short, the United
Nations has achieved a good deal. It is the belief and
hope of my Government that it can do agood deal more,
and that it should be allowed to do so.
111. I have already said that the situation in Lebanon
is grave: the authority of the duly constituted Lebanese
Government is called into question, ‘there is factional
strife, and the security of ordinary men and women is in
doubt. Our sympathy goes to all those ordinary men
and women and to all those who are constructively
trying to bring about reconciliation, peace and security.

107. I must stress that my Government believes that
all countries should respect the territorial integrity,
unity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as the draft
resolution stipulates.
108. My Government earnestly hopes for a resumption of the dialogue of national reconciliation. We trust
this will lead to a situation in which a new Government
of Lebanon, the former one having already resigned,
will come into office with national acclaim and will
assert its authority through the Lebanese army and
security forces throughout the country. In order to
achieve this it will of course be necessary for those
external forces that now exercise authority in one part
or another of Lebanon to leave.
109. We are encouraged by the clear statements made
by all Governments which have forces in Lebanon that
they do not intend to keep them there. We recognize
that there are difficulties in removing these forces.
Among such difficulties might be a deterioration in the
internal security position in parts of Lebanon. These
and other difficulties have to be taken into account. We
think that the United Nations may be able to play a
constructive part in resolving them, whether through
discussion here or through the provision of forces at the
request of the Lebanese Government.
110. My Government is deeply convinced, and has
repeatedly said, that there should be an expanded role
for the United Nations in Lebanon. Some people talk
loosely about the failure of the United Nations activities in Lebanon. They are wrong. Not all that we, the
United Nations, have put our hands to in Lebanon has
prospered and succeeded in full measure, but we should
not therefore leap to the opposite conclusion. Over
the years, the United Nations has done well in Lebanon. I note particularly that when United Nations
observers have been allowed to monitor a cease-fire
they have done so with courage and competence. Their
work has undoubtedly helped to preserve peace and
reduce misunderstanding. Similarly, when UNIFIL
has been allowed to function in accordance with its
mandate, it has been effective. Recently the United
Nations played a modest role in connection with the
evacuation of Mr. Arafat and his followers from Tripoli.

112. My Government strongly believes that the Lebanese have the same right as all the rest of us to choose
their own Government and to adjust their internal
affairs without external interference. This is a right
provided for in the Charter, and we trust that all States
Members will strive to ensure that the Lebanese enjoy
it freely.
113. It is against the background of all these efforts
and all these hopes and all these beliefs in what the
United Nations can do that I now come to the vote we
have just held.
.114. My Government’s vote in favour of the draft
resolution is, I submit, entirely in line with the Charter,
with what I have just said and with the needs of the
situation. The vote of two delegations measuredagainst
these criteria is a grave disappointment. My delegation
does not understand how these two delegations can
justify their position to the international community.
My delegation does not understand how these two delegations can square their own consciences before the
suffering and despair of the Lebanese people. My delegation does not understand how these two delegations
can expect us to believe that they are operating in
accordance with the best interests of the Arab nation,
or indeed the wider interests of us all, in security and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. Are they not encouraging and prolonging a situation of chaos?
115. Despite the gloomy conclusions which we are
obliged to draw from the vote we have just had, my
delegation undertakes to continue with its efforts to
bring about at least some degree of understanding and
some degree of improvement in the context of the Lebanese problem. We welcome the brief statement which
the Secretary-General hasjust made. We will apply our
closest attention and proceed with a sense of urgency.
We will not give up. We will go on trying to use the
Security Council and the United Nations to do the job
which they were intended to do.
116. Mr. LING .Qing (China) [interpretation from
Chinese]: Of late we have seen the continuous deterioration of the situation in Lebanon and a chain of
armed conflicts in the Beirut area which have once
again inflicted heavy losses of life and property on the
11

Lebanese people. The Chinese Government and people
are extremely concerned about the situation and deeply
sympathize with the miserable plight of the Lebanese
people.
,’
117. It is the view of the Chinese delegation that the
Security Council should play a positive role in the question of Lebanon. It should implement in earnest its
previous relevant resolutions. In the meantime, it
should also give‘consideration to other steps that .are
practical in the light of the present situation. Our principled stand is, that any action taken, by the Council
regarding Lebanon should be genuinely conducive to
the safeguarding of Lebanon’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity; to the elimination of
foreign aggression,and interference; and to the promotion of national reconciliation in Lebanon.

affairs. -The culmination of that interference was the
massive armed invasion of Lebanon by Israeli forces in
the summer of 1982.
124. In spite of the fact that the Council, in its resolution 509 (1982). demanded that Israel withdraw its
armed forces from Lebanon forthwith and unconditionally, the aggressor continues to occupy one third of
Lebanon’s territory and is carrying out devastating
bomb strikes in other regions of the country. Israel and
the United States imposed upon Lebanon a servile
agreement transforming that country into an AmericanIsraeli protectorate--and that, naturally, could not fail
to elicit legitimate protest and resistance from the national patriotic forces.of Lebanon; in fact it predetermined that there would be increased, deeper tension in
that country.
125. New woes and suffering for the Lebanese resulted from the arrival on Lebanese territory of the socalled multinational force. At that time, United States
Marines, warships and aircraft began carrying out their
“peace-making” mission with the help of bombs and
ships’ guns. Moreover, as is clear from the statements
of the United States President and Secretary of Defense, they are not renouncing possible further strikes
against Lebanon. The only thing that the United States
turned out to be prepared to do was to remove its
Marines, to the ships of the Sixth Fleet, that is, to
redeploy them two to three miles to the west. It is quite
clear that the aforesaid measure did not in the slightest
remove the threat to Lebanon. The Israeli occupiers
and the United States fleet, aircraft and Marines participating in military actions against the patriotic
forces of Lebanon have carried out a broad campaign
of .threats and military provocations against Syria,
and that is fraught with far-reaching consequences for
international peace and security.

118. Proceeding from this principledstand and taking
into consideration the fact that the United Nations
force called for in the French draft resolution has a
mandate with some positive elements-such as helping
to protect the civilian populations, including in the Palestinian refugee camps, and without intervening in the
internal affairs of Lebanon for the benefit of any party
whatever-the Chinese delegation voted in favour of
the draft resolution.
119. On the other hand, since the crisis in the Beirut
area is only part of the Lebanese crisis and the root
cause of the grave situation in Lebanon today lies in
Israel’s invasion and occupation of that country, we
cannot but stress that ‘the key to the solution of the
Lebanese question is the withdraw4 of Israeli troops
from Lebanon. It is our opinion that in the meantime the
foreign ‘warships in the vicinity of Lebanese waters
should not carry out any armed intervention in the
internal affairs of Lebanon under any pretext.

126. The interests of normalizing the .diffrcult situation in Lebanon demand a complete cessation of interference in the affairs of that country and the unconditional and complete withdrawal from Lebanon of the
interventionist forces of Israel and the so-called multination4 force, the removal of the warships of the countries participating in the multinational force from the ~.
shores of Lebanon and an immediate end to air and
artillery bombardments, which should not be renewed
in the future.

120. We sincerely hope that Lebanon’s various political factions will solve their problems independently,
through consultations; and free from foreign interference, so that peace can ‘be restored in Lebanon at an
.*
early date.
121. ‘Mr. KRAVETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) [interpretation from Russian]: The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was unable to support the
draft resolution for the following reasons.
122. Sharing the deep concern over the tragedy of the
Lebanese people, we fully agree that urgent effective
measures should be taken which would lead to peace
and stability in Lebanon. To that end, what is most
necessary is the elimination of everything that hinders
normalization of the situation in that country. Unfortunately, the draft resolution submitted to the Council
does not contain provisions which would achieve the
goals that the Council is pursuing.

127. These are the main conditions for normalizing
the situation in Lebanon and protecting its civilian
population. Without the implementation of these necessary conditions, the question of giving assistance to
Lebanon on behalf of the United Nations loses any real
basis. One cannot seriously suppose that a United Nations force established by the Security Council could
effectively carry out its mission if it was under the
observation of the United States fleet cruising along the
shores of. Lebanon with Marines aboard.

123. The main cause of the Lebanese tragedy is the
uninterrupted imperialist intervention. in Lebanon’s

128. The refusal to include in the draft resolution the
relevant provisions and guarantees, including indica-

\
12

.

tions that the agreement of all directly involved parties
was necessary, as well as the absence of a number of
other important provisions would make the mission of a
United Nations force for all practical purposes unrealizable.

134. The PRESIDENT: I shall now ‘cah‘on those representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the right
,,: ,’
of reply.
I.
135. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK (United States of America): The United States strenuously objects to the false
charges and unfair attacks of the representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. We object strenuously because those attacks absolutely distort and
misrepresent our purposes and our policies in Lebanon.
:
136. The United States Government, in voting for the
draft resolution before the Council today-a draft resolution which we believe to be a very. imperfect, in
many ways an unsatisfactory, draft resolution-was
expressing in as clear a fashion as possible our strongly
held commitment .to the view that peace in Lebanon
should be brought about by the Lebanese people; that
all foreign forces whatsoever should be withdrawn from
Lebanon; and that the Lebanese population-Christian, Muslim, whatever-should be left, without outside interference from any quarter, to seek a civilized
agreement that would respect the rights and preserve
the freedom of all.

129. In the light of all this, we cannot consider the
manoeuvres with the draft resolution as anything other
than an attempt, on the one hand, to justify interference
in the internal affairs of Lebanon and, on the other
hand, to do so in the name of the United Nations.
130. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) [interprefu&z
from Spanish]: First of all, Sir, since this is the last day
that you will be exercising the functions of President of
the Council, may I be permitted to offer you again our
most sincere congratulations on the skilful, diligent and
measured way in which you have conducted our work
during the month that is coming to an end today.
I express the hope that the great wisdom you have
demonstrated may shed some light for those who will
follow you in your very delicate functions.
131. Our vote today was an expression of Peru’s full
agreement about the need for vigorous, effective and
just action by the United Nations to help overcome the
grievous situation prevailing today in Lebanon. It was
also an expression of gratitude by our delegation for the
efforts made by the representative of France and his
delegation to advance an initiative designed to achieve
peace for a part of the world on which the attention of
the international community is focused today.

137. ‘Lebanon, we believe, has been and can be an
independent, democratic State. As an independent,
democratic State, under Article 51 ‘of the Charter,
Lebanon exercised its right to self-defence and to request others to assist in that self-defence for the purpose of reinforcing and maintaining its sovereignty and
independence. The United States responded, as did
others in the multinational force,-to the request of the
legitimate Government of Lebanon. We-have had no
purpose there except to assist in the restoration of the
peace, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, and
any suggestion to the contrary is at best profoundly
misinformed.

132. A group of countries with varying degrees of
development and common positions in the quest for
international peace andjustice has worked with impartiality, the best of intentions and everything we had to
offer to achieve a convergence,of positions among the
countries members of the Council. Almost all the suggestions that were submitted by this group to the delegation of France were accepted, and for this we once
again thank that delegation.

138. Mr. KRAVETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) [interpretationfrom
Russian): The representative of the United States did not specify what the
distortion made by the Ukrainian SSR with regard to
the United States position was. That frees me from
having to make a statement in exercise of the right of
reply.

133. Since significant progress had been achieved in
the quest by this international community for positions
that would ensure harmony with respect to the task
before us, the delegation of Peru would have liked to be
able to continue this effort a little longer, but we understand the reasons for putting the draft resolution to the
vote at today’s meeting. Nevertheless, we believe that
this outcome is not the end of the responsibilities of the
members of the Council. As was so accurately pointed
out by the Secretary-General, it is the job of the Council
to keep this matter under scrutiny and to seek progress
in the quest for peace in Lebanon. Therefore, on behalf
of the delegation of Peru, I should like to stress that all
our efforts and capabilities will continue to be available
to contribute to any initiative aimed at achieving the
unity of views which we have not attained today but
which we’are confident will be attained in the near
future.

139. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL (France)
from French]: The Council, has been
unable to adopt the proposal we submitted to it. This is
clearly an unfortunate outcome, particularly in the light
of all the efforts made by several countries in the Council and by us.

[interpretation

140. It is an outcome which is not good for the United
Nations. The Security Council is not fulfilling the mission entrusted to it under the Charter if it cannot reach a
decision in these kinds of circumstances. It is precisely
why we believed-and with us, the great majority of the
Council-in a possible role for the United Nations : that
we submitted the proposal.
13

141. It is an outcome that is not good for Lebanon.
I shall not refer again to the situation in Beirut, which is
in the minds of all at the present time. I should merely
like to say that our draft resolution was not intended to
settle all the problems of peace in this region. Above all
it was, in our eyes, a first step, a peace-making gesture
intended to promote the emergence of a climate of
reconciliation in Lebanon.

146. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Lebanon has asked to make a statement, and I call on him.

142. I should now like to thank all those delegations in
this Council with which we have worked particularly
closelyXhese past three weeks. I thank the countries
they represent, because those countries, like us, show
faith irrand make efforts towards the role the United
Nations dan play in helping achieve reconciliation and
peace. I thank their representatives personally for
their constant co-operation and I appreciated the qualities of clarity, courage, thoughtfulness, imagination
and constancy that they demonstrated, a constancy
which, with great rigour and dignity, they maintained
throughout.
143. I thank all those who were kind enough to show
their appreciation for my country’s efforts and, naturally, I thank them also for the very kind words spoken
about me and which touched me deeply.
144. My gratitude and that of my country finally, of
course, go to all those who were kind enough to vote in
favour of our proposal. It is encouraging for my country
to have found such broad support for its proposal. It
proves to us that the efforts we made were on the right
track, even if they were not successful.
145. Certainly, my thoughts, our thoughts go to Lebanon, to that friendly country that is suffering, to
those suffering people who have undergone indescribable trials and continue to do so. It is a country with
which, everyone knows, we have traditional relations
of friendships. We love Lebanon; we love its whole
population; we love all who live there; and we rule out
no one on the basis of religious persuasion or party. We
are a friend to all the Lebanese, and we have been
thinking about all the Lebanese and we continue to
do so. They are the ones we were thinking about when
we undertook this initiative; they are the ones we are
thinking about and we shall always continue to think
about.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

147. Mr. FAKHOURY (Lebanon) [interpretation
Mr. President, the delegation of Lebanon, while appreciating the efforts made by you personally and by the representative of France and other
representatives, regrets that for the second time in a
few months the Council has been unable to take a’
decision that could play a part, albeit a partial and a
limited one, in putting an end to a situation that all the
Council members have recognized as being very serious, indeed tragic. That tragedy has befallen Lebanon,
one of the founding Members of the United Nations.
The international community, through the Council, has
a great responsibility, not only vis-d-vis the Lebanese
people but also vis-d-vis the peoples of the world: that
of the guarantor of international peace and security. It
is indeed a bitter disappointment for all those peoples
who, at the most dire moments of their history, look
towards effective assistanceand help from the Council
in overcoming the crises confronting them.

from Arabic]:

00300

148. Despite our disappointment and regret, the delegation of Lebanon in turn appeals to the Council to
ponder the positions taken today. We. appeal to the
Council to give consideration and respond positively
without fail, and as soon as possible, to any new initiative which is in keeping with the seriousness of the
situation throughout Lebanon and by means of which
the Council may be able to fulfil the tasks entrusted to it
under the Charter.
149. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers for this meeting. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting

rose at 6 p.m.

NOTE

’ Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 9th meeting.

90-61313~hurry

1993-2.050
