163

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands;35
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Takes note of the observations, conclusions and
recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in April 1977 ;36
5. Expresses its satisfaction to the members of the
V,isiting Mission for the constructive work which they
accomplished, as well as to the administering Power
and the Government of the United States Virgin Islands
for the co-operation and assistance extended to the
Mission;
6. Requests the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, to continue to
take all necessary measures, in consultation with the
Government of the United States Virgin Islands, to
enable the people of the Territory to exercise fully
their right to self-determination in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration;
7. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political and constitutional status of the Territory and
to take such additional measures as would ensure preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the
people .of the United States Virgin Islands;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of the United States
Virgin Islands, to safeguard the inalienable right of
the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of its
natural resources by taking effective measures which
guarantee the right of the people to own and dispose
of those natural resources and to ,establish and maintain control of their future devdopment;
9. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of selfdetermination and, to this end, calls upon the administering Power, together with the Government of the
United States Virgin Islands, to take all measures
necessary to achieve a viable and stable economy in
the Territory;
10. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, 36 to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the United States Virgin
Islands;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session in the
35 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
36 Ibid., annex, paras. 364-381.

light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including
the possible dispatch of a further mission to the United
States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/32.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,s1
Recalling its resolutions 3432 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and 31/50 of 1 December 1976,
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland38 and of Guatemala, 30
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Belize, 40
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 41
Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, in particular that all peoples
have the right to self-determination, by virtue of which
right they freely determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Noting that, in the Bogota Declaration of 6 August
1977, it was agreed that "a solution of the Belize question should be found by the peaceful methods consecrated in the charters of the Organization of American States and the United Nations, and in accordance
with respect for its territorial integrity and with the
principle of the free self-determination of peoples",
Noting that, in July 1977, negotiations took place
between the Government of the United Kingdom, as
the administering Power, acting in clos,e consultation
with the Government of Belize, and the Government
of Guatemala, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4
of resolution 31 /50,
Deeply regretting the interruption of the negotiations
and the continued failure of the parties concerned to
negotiate an agreement in conformity with the principles established in resolutions 3432 (XXX) and 31 /50,
Concerned that the obstacles placed in the way of
the people of Belize to prevent them from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence without fear have not yet been removed,
Convinced that the people of Belize should be assisted in a practical manner to exercise freely and without fear their inalienable right to self-determination,
independence and territorial integrity,
37 Ibid., chap. XXIX.
38 Ibid., Thirty-second

Session, Fourth Committee, 20th
meeting, paras. 5-11, and 22nd meeting, para. 109.
39 fbid., 24th meeting, paras. 1-18.
4 0 Ibid., 22nd mee,ting, paras. 4-3 I.
41 Ibid., paras. 33-103.

VII.

1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial
integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, acting in close consultation with
the Government of Belize, and the Government of
Guatemala to pursue vigorously their negotiations in
strict conformity with the principles of General Assembly resolution 343 2 ( XXX), in consultation as
appropriate with other especially interested States in
the area, with a view to concluding the negotiations
before the thirty-third session of the General Assembly;
4. Also calls upon the parties involved to refrain
from any threats or use of force against the people of
Belize or their territory;
5. Urges all States to respect the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity, and to render all practical assistance
necessary for the secure and early exercise of that right;
6. Requests the Governments concerned to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the outcome of the negotiations referred to above;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to remain seized of the question and to
assist the people of Belize in the exercise of their inalienable rights.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/33.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and
to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of
the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 31 /29 of 29 November
1976, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter4 2 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 43
Deploring that some Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
42 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXXII.
43 A/32/253.

Territories have ceased to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in ,the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned
to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Char,ter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee ,to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thir,ty-third session.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/34.

Question of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 44
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of Portugal 45 and lndonesia, 46
Having also heard the statements of the representatives of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timor Leste
Indepcndente, 47
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
44 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. II, chap. X.
45 Ibid.,
Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th
meeting, paras. 22-26.
46 Ibid., 19th meeling, paras. 4-58.
4 7 Ibid., 11-th meeting, paras. 135-155, and 20th meeting,
paras. 101--130.
