1st

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Tuesda)~

THIRTY-SIXTH SESSION

Official Records

15 September 1981.
at 3.30 p.m.
NEW YORK

Address by Mr. Riidiger von Wechmar, Temporary President, Chairman of the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany

CONTENTS
Agenda item I:
Opening of the session by the Chainnan of the delegation of
the Federal Republic of Gennany
.
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent pmyer or meditation

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: As Temporary
President, may I be pennitted, by custom and tradition,
for the last time to ask for your patience in order to share
a few thoughts about our work and about the United Nations.

.

Address "oy Mr. RUdiger von Wechmar. Tempomry President.
Chainnan of the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany
.
Agenda item 106:
Scal~ of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: report of the Commillee on Contributions

4

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-sixth session of the
Geneml Assembly:
Ca) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
:.....

4

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President of the General Assembly

4

Address by Mr. lsmal T. Killani, President of the thirty-sixth session of the Geneml Assembly

5

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

6

Temporary President:
Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).
President: Mr. Ismat T. KITTANI (Iraq).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany
I. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open
the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly.

. AGENDA ITEM 2

4. The thirty-fifth session has been a very hard-working
Assembly. It had the longest agenda of any Assembly
session to date. It had the greatest number of speakers
ever to participate in the general debate last fall. It saw
more Heads of State or Government and Foreign Minis- .
ters coming to United Nations Headquarters than ever before.
5. My most sincere expression of gratitude once again
goes to the delegations of aH 154 Member States for having honoured my country and myself by unanimously
electing me President for the past year.
6. I also want to thank you all for the spirit of co-operation which you have shown on so many occasions and
which has made my difficult task much easier.
7. My special thanks go to the Secretary-General and to
his dedicated staff, without whom I would have failed in
my duties from the very first day.
8. Our thirty-fifth seSsion of the General Assembly has,
unfortunately, also been an Assembly of frustrations: frustrations mainly for the nations of the third world, but
also, I am sure, for many of the industrialized countries.
9. The United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea, the problem of Namibia, the launching of global negotiations, the questions of Afghanistan and Kampuchea,
the multifaceted problem of the Middle East and many,
many others remain either unsolved or deadlocked.
10. In some areas the world appears to be heading towards a collision course. That is why I am deeply disturbed and why I would like to appeal urgently. to all
Governments to give tangible proof dllring this thirtysixth session of the General Assembly of their detennination to preserve peace and security.

Minute of silent -,rayer or meditation
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.
The representatives, standing, observed a minute's silence.

11. We must. not transfer tensions between East mId
West to the third world. We must, on· the contrary, preserve the spirit and the concrete achievements of detente.
A lessening of tension between the armed camps in East
and West not only would be beneficial for all nations in
Europe but would be of invaluable importance for the developing countries.
A/36/PV.1

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

l2':' "\V~<are witnes~iI!g-almost helplessly-an acceleration ofthe arms race. Military expenditures are absorbing
m<.>re and more resources without making the world more
secUre. This year, nearly $500 billion are earmarked' for
sophisticated weapons and military hardware. Measured in
~und~ pe~ person, there exists more explosive power on
'out'ptanetthan food.
13.

ft.::n~ increase

in. officjal development assistance
eq~ivlllentJoonly 5.pe(cent Ofthat $Soo billion figure
would 'be sufficient easily to attain the target set in the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Na.tions Development Decade to ~elp those millions of
hUrillPi 'beings who still live in want and poverty.
14~ The special session on disannament next year will
offer new opportunities to set attainable targets and to
conduct negotiations so as to build up a momentum for
the, conclusion ofr..substantive agreements to halt and, indeed; to reverse me arms race.

IS. Let us assist the most powerful, the United States
and the Sovi~tUnion; to return to the negotiating table. I
share the hope of so many among us that we may witness
here at United Nations· Headquarters a resumption of negotiations between Washington and Moscow on the burning question of how to limit armaments, especially in the
field of strategic nuclear weapons. A ;summit meeting
soon of the Heads of State of the Soviet Union and the
United States would; in my view, reinforce our quest for
peace.
16. A face-te-face round of serious talks between those
who.hold the ultimate key to peace in the world would
undoubtedly hfllp to. remove the threat of the thunder. of
guns. While I am fully aware of the need to avoid exaggermedexpectations from such a summit encounter, I believe .the magnitude of the danger posed by nuclear war
requires recourse to the highest level.
'
17. ,1. fully understand that, without. tangible ~sults in
reductions. of arms, each side
strives'to match, the other's increase .in deployed weapons.
The !!ecurity' of the nations in Europe .seems to demand
such protection. It must therefore be a prime duty of the
United Nations to break this vicious circle.
negoti~tions, on balanced

the

tinchaflengedinternational arms traffic andthe
18.
continqed danger()f military conflicts by proxy constitute
additional threats'to peace and security. The United Nations must; therefore; not only devote much of its energy
and time to the creation of confidence-building measures
and' to concrete .steps' towards' disarmament,but must also
renew its efforts· to. establish a mOre effective United Nations peace-keeping machinery. Our Charter contains sufficient provisions to increase the present limited United
Nations role.
19. One important part of peace-keeping, in a wider and
non-military sense, would be the orderly and agreed restructuring of 'iilternational economic relations through
global negotiations. I reported to the Assembly at length
onthlrt SUbject during the closing meeting of. the· thirtyfifty session yesterday.'
;
20. I would fail in my duties, however;'were fnotto
address today an urgent and very sincere appeal to the
Government of the United States to complete its eight-

month-long review of this vital iSSUe in the very near future and to return to consultations and the negotiating
table soon after the meeting of 22 Heads of State or 'Government from North and South, which will be held at
Cancun next month.

27. As
South di
tragic-i
ments fe
tional cc
~roded.

21. I am confident that the United States, in its review
of the world economy, will not overlook the mutual political benefits which a stable world economic system will
have for peaceful co-operation among nations on the basis
of equal partnership.

28. In
United r..
another I
my coun
many so
Often w
whether
one thin
dren-su

22. I fully share the view of the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, who recently stated that we
should all accept and take seriously and sincerely the reality of the South or the Third World as a political presence
on the world stage. Changes' in international institutions
and processes were inevitable, he said. He stressed that
the question was whether those changes were to be orderly, negotiated ones or imposed by disruption and
breakdown.

Di(
UNICEF
immuniz
that $SO(
a village
of a maj
main he
as 100,0
diagnosti
2~.

23. Let me add this. At times when it appears necessary
to have a strong lobby in certain capitals of the world for
major problems facing us all, it is deplorable that there
are so few in some important countries to lobby for the
Third World poor. Let this Assembly, therefore, remain
the prime mover of solutions for the plight of the many
millions of people who do not share in the benefits of the
modem world.
.'

24. During my tenure as President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, 'I have been privileged to
see at first hand the remarkably effective and valuable
work of the United Nations programmes and specialized
agencies in many parts of the world. Let m~ testify here
today that all of them do an outstanding job in their specific field of competence. But let me-pars pro to1Opay special tribute to one of them: the United Nations
Development Programme [UNDP]. This organization,
drawing on three decades of experience and the specialized technical expertise of the entire United Nations
system, is making a dramatic and indispensable contribution to the development efforts of the countries it serves.
2S. Less than two months ago, the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 19811S9 reaffirmed "the central
funding and co-ordinating role of the United Nations Development Programme in the field of technical co-operation". Yet at this moment, because of the failure of the
international community to meet the planning target of
voluntary contributions which this Assembly itself has approved [resolution 35/83], a failure compounded by unpredictable fluctuations in currency exchange rates, the resource base of UNDP, upon which its critically important
work for the next five years depends, is uncertain, to say
the least.
26. Governments-all Governments-have a serious responsibility to provide this proven institution, which they
themselves have created, with the resources it must have
if the international development effort is not to falter. I
therefore urgently appeal to all Governments to increase
their contributions to this unique mechanism of international co-operation, as well as to other United Nations
programmes and agencies, all of which are suffering setbacks because of fluctuating currency exchange rates.
,
/

30. Ma
States w
social fu
United r
Nations
President
31. All
our Assf
tude, I
experien
ment. T
even for
32.

Ou

tions-i~

tions, to
far too n
disease e
gical the
cal list.
,

33. Le
trate wh

.'....,

34. Th
tions in
and in (
year, the
main cOl
full wee

;:

,
i.

3S. Du
thirty-fit'
some 23
United r..
cover 33
the docu
eva alm(
end wou
two year

1st meeting-IS September 1981

27. As the momentum towards a truly effective NorthSouth dialogue intensifies, it would be ironic-indeed,
tragic-if the vitality of one of the most effective instruments for North-South co-operation which the international community has ever created were threatened Rlld
~roded.

28. In connexion with the necessary support for the
United Nation!: specialized agenr ies I would like to raise
another point. During my seven years as representative of
my country, I have had the privilege of being invited to
many social functions held by colleagues or delegations.
Often when I was myself the host 1 wondered, though,
whether som!.' of that money was always well spent, when
one thinks ef those many, many people-especially children-suffering from hunger and disease.
2~ .

Did you know that one single dollar given to
liNICEF instead would be enough to provide vaccine to
immunize 50 children against tuberculosis? Are we aware
that $500 would buy a kit of equipment and medicines for
a village pharmacy, and that $3,500, a fraction of the cost
of a major reception, wouid purchase the equipment for a
main health centre-often serving an area with as many
as 100,000 people-including basic clinical, surgical and
diagnostic instruments and vital drugs?
30. Maybe we could start a competition among Member
States willing to designate at least part of their funds for
social functions to UNICEF or any other humanitarian
United Nations programme, such as that of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The Acting
President will begin by making such a donation himself.
3! . Allow me now to reflect specially on the work of
our Assembly. While I look back with pride and gratitude, I must ted you-after 12 '"Ilonths of very specific
experience-that there is room f", r far-reaching improvement. There is reason in some fields for concern, and
even for complaint.
32. Our General Assembly-indeed, our United Nations-is being slowly suffocated by too many resolutions, too many meetings, too many subsidiary organs,
far too much documentation. In short, the United Nations
disease of elephantiasis must be attacked with strong surgical therapy to remove the patient speedily from the critical list.
33. Let me give you a few concrete examples to illustrate what I have in mind.
34. The total number of hours spent by the United Nations in meetings during 1980, both here at headquarters
and in Geneva, was equivalent to 1,170 full days. Last
year, the plenary session of the General Assembly and its
main committees lost 168 hours of meeting time-·or one
full week-simply through late starting.
35. During the September to December period of the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly a total of
some 236 million pages of documentation was printed at
United Nations Headquarters. Laid end to end this would
cover 33,000 kilometres, or four-fifths of the equator. All
the documents produced in 1980 in New York and Geneva almost reached the I billion mark, anct..Iaid end to
end would cover 270,000 kilometres. The prOduction of
two years would easily pave our way to themaoil.

3

36. Summary records were produced· for 354 meetings
of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. These
records required 4,602 staff-days, the average cost of a
record for one meeting was cn the order of $3,648. One
page of summary record costs more than the annual per
capita incoP'l~ in any of the least developed countries.
37. I do not want to be misunderstood. When I expose
some of the defects of our work, I do this because I am a
compassionate and dedicated believer in the United Nations. I know full well that I am furnishing fresh ammunition to cheap critics of our Organization. But they will go
on criticizing in My .:ase. What I seek is change. We are
responsible for this disease ourselves. .{ want the United
Nations to be strengthened. To be strong we have to be
effective. To be effective we must drastically cut out the
fat and fows on priorities. How can we attempt to manage crises in this world if we seem unable to manage our
own affairs? We should take a fresh look now at where fat
could be cut out, where activities could be streamlined
and how the daily avalanche of paper, which I am sure it
must be a horrendous task for delegations to cope withcan be reduced to a bare-and I mean "ba.--e"-minimum. Strict austerity appears to be required so that we do
not drown ill a self-created sea of paper.
38. I recognize that over the past few years we have
made some progress in rationalizing the work of our Assembly. Thanks to very constructive and fruitful c:ollaboration between delegat~ons and the Secretariat, a num~r
of modest refonns have been introduced. Nevertheless, it
is quite apparent to all of us that, with. the continued increase in membership, the further growth and the size of
our agenda and the inflation in documentation, a great
deal remains to be done.
39. Let me make a concrete proposal. In considering
how we might most successfully Come to grips with these
problems on a continuing basis, I suggest that there be an
l'lIInual meeting of the five most'recent Presidents of the
General Assembly, who would represent each geographical region. The purpose would· be that those who have
pre&ided over thtl work of this body would· examine current procedures in the light of their experience, with a
view to making recommendations for further improvements. This "Council of Presidents" should close!y cooperate with the Secretary-General of our Organization. It
does seem to me unfortunate that up to this time there has
been no consistent way to draw upon the experience of
fonner presiding officers when we· review, as we should
do continually, how our legislative performance might be
improved. This proposal provides a relatively easy way to
remedy that deficiency.
40. The Assemb!y might also wish lo consider requesting that this council of five Presidents suggest other measures that they . believe could invigorate the work of this
institution. There are, of GOUiSe, numerous groups of experts whose studies and recommendations are made available to the· United Nations. However, there· is .no systematic way in whkh the expertise of those individuals who
have had the invaluable personal experience of presiding
over the Assembly· can be brought into focus and shared
with the membership.
41. Another concern which I would like to share with
members is the noli-implementation of General Assembly
resolutions. We have seen an improvement in the !lumber

----------------------------

of resolutions adopted without a vote-that is, by consensus. It has drastically increased during the last 10 years
from 35 per cent to 59 ~r cent, but it is noteworthy that
some Member States fad to implement fully even those
resolutions for which they themselves have voted.
42. It is easy to blame the United Nations as an institution for such failures. It would be more appropriate, I
address criticism of the United Nations to the
think,
Governments of Member States instead. What the world
is expec!ing from its leaders, especially from those at the
helm of the most powerful Member States, is vision and
compassion, determination and dedication. We have been
talking so much and so often of the need for political
will. The time to act and to show such political will is
now; tomorrow may be too late.

.0

43. Permit me to close my remarks with a verse by an
eighteenth.cent9,ry theologist, a prayer which I hope will
guide us during the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly:
"God grant us the serenity to accept things we cannot change, the courage to change the things we can,
and the wisdom to know the difference between the
two."

AGENDA ITEM 106
Scale of assessments for the apportionme9t of the expenses oIt' the United Nations: report of the CommitteE on Contributions
44. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning
to the next item on our agenda, I should like, in keeping
with the established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A136/502, which contains
a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in
which he informs the Assembly that one Member State is
in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to
the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the
Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of that information?
It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentiais of representatives to the thirty-sixth
sesmon of the General Assembly ~
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee
45. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the
rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at
the beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting
of nine members.
46. Accordingly, it is proposed that for the thirty-sixth
session the Credentials Committee should consist of the
following Member States: China, Ghana, the Netherlands,
Niger, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America.
47. May I take it that the countries I have mentioned are
hereby appointed members of the Credentials Committee?

j

iimi!iliI
..

.'-

It was so decided (decision 36/301).

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
48. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite
members of the General Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
49. In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot and
there shall be no nominations. I remind the Assembly
that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
33/138, the President should be elected from an Asian
State.
50. Ballot papers are now being distributed. I request
representative!; to use only that ballot paper and to write
I on it the name of the person for whom they wish to vote.
Ballot pnpers containing more than one name will be declared invalid.
At the invitation of the Temporary President. Mr. La
Rocca (Italy), Mr. Gonzdlez Arias (Paraguay) and Mr.
Kamanda ~r.z Kamanda (Zaire) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
ReqUired majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh). . . . . . . . .
Mr. Koh ~Singapore)

152
I

151
I

150
76

.

64
46
40

51. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: No candidate,
as you will have seen and heard, has obtained the required majority on the first ballot. Therefore, in accordance with rule 93, the Assembly will proceed to a second
ballot, which shall be restricted to the two candidates obtaining the largest number of votes, namely, Mr. Kittani
of Iraq and Mr. Kaiser of Bangladesh. I request representatives to use only the ballot papers that are being distributed and to write the name of the person--and not of
the country-for whom they wish to vote. Ballot papers
containing names other than those of Mr. Kittani or Mr.
Kaiser will be declared invalid.
At the invitation of the Temporary President. Mr. La
Rocca (Italy). Mr. Gonzdlez Arias (Paraguay) and Mr.
Kamanda wa Kamanda (Zaire) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions: .
Number Of members voting:

--1

ilI:~<lO'>lI_""i:l><:OOBSIIilS5+Ol'lOi'·~¥iIIIlI. . . . .---lMli:h~..,.Iii1. .-I&B. .

General Assembly-Tbirty·slxth Session-Plenary Meetings

4

"

L:iIIl=

152
6
146

o

146

Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh) .
Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
.

52. The TEMPORARY PRE
unique situation. Rule 93 of th
..If in the second ballot the vot
a majority is required, the Pre.
the candidates by drawing lots
I shall therefore proceed acco

The Temporary President d"

53. The TEMPORARY PRE
ing been drawn by lot, Mr. Ism
President of the thirty-sixth ses
bly.
Mr. Ismat Kittani (Iraq) wt
thirty-sixth session of the G
361302).

54. I extend my sincere con
and I invite him to assume th
Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took the
Address by Mr. Ismat T. I
thirty-sixth session of t
55. The PRESIDENT (inter
should like; first and foremo
thanks and appreciation for thi
dence you have expressed in m
electing me at> President of thf
General Assemblv. I wish to a
to live up to this confidence
Assembly to the best of my [
56. It gives me great pleasu
press, on behalf of the Assem
as well, sincere thanks and a
von Wechmar for the efforts Ii
dency of the thirty-fifth sessio
and. of the special and emerge
past year, as well as for all thf
duties he performed.
57. As an Asian representat
gives me great pleasure to se
Romulo, the Foreign Minister
believe, President of the Secu
time, who was the first Presid
bly from the Asian continent.
58. I should also like to tal
with sorrow, the loss of the la
the General Assembly, the late
tory will record his meritoriou
of this Organization, especialh
the sea.
59. Two days ago, I review
made by the 10 Presidents of
have preceded me, and I reali
reviewing the items on the age
tice of expatiating on them. In

;i

\'

,

'

.neeting-15 September 1981

Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh)
Mr. Kittani (Iraq)

73
73

52. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: We are facing a
unique situation. Rule 93 of the rules of procedure states:
"If in the second ballot the votes are equally divided, and
a majority is required, the President shall decide between
the candidates by drawing lots".
I shall therefore proceed accordingly.

The Temporary Preside1lt drew lots.
53. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: His name having been drawn by lot, Mr. Ismat Kittani of Iraq is elected
President of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly.

Mr. Ismat Kittani (Iraq) was elected President of the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly (decision
36/302).

5

ample and delivering a lengthy sermon to the Assembly, I
believe it would be far preferable for us all to set to
work, in order that this session may be devoted to implementation and follow-up, rather than a session devoted to
repetitious and lengthy statements and resolutions. Everyone knows that most of the important issues contained in
the agenda have been exhaustively studied and that hundreds of resolutions concerning those issues have been
adopted year after year.
60. The General Assembly is not in need of new resolutions but rather a commitment to the resolutions it has
already adopted and to the implementation of those resolutions by translating them into concrete actuality, thereby
contributing to the principles and purposes of the United
Nations.
61. For example, do we need new resolutions concerning the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination and the establishment of
an independent State under the leadership of its sole legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO]?

54. I extend my sincere congratulations to Mr. Kittani
and I invite him to assume the Presidency.

Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took the Chair.
Address by Mr. Ismat T. Kittani, Presidf!1lt of the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly
55. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like; first and foremost, to express my sincere
thanks and appreciation for this honour and for the confidence you have expressed in me and my country, Iraq, by
electing me a~ President of the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. I wish to affirm that I will do my best
to live up to this confidence and to serve the General
Assembly to the best of my modest abilities.
56. It gives me great pleasure on this occasion to express, on behalf of the Assembly and on my own behalf
as well, sincere thanks and appreciation to Mr. Riidiger
von Wechmar for the efforts he exerted during his Presidency of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly
and. of the special and emergency sessions held over the
past year, as well as for all the related and unprecedented
duties he performed.
57. As an Asian representative in this high office, it
gives me great pleasure to see here among us General
Romulo, the Foreign Minister of the Philippines and, I
believe, President of the Security Council for the fourth
time, who was the first President of the General Assembly from the Asian continent.
58. I should also like to take this occasion to recall,
with sorrow, the loss of the last Asian to be President of
the General Assembly, the late Shirley Amerasinghe. History will record his meritorious contribution to the work
of this Organization, especially in the field of the law of
the sea.
59. Two days ago, I reviewed the opening statements
made by the 10 Presidents of the General Assembly who
have preceded me, and I realized that all· of them, when
reviewing the items on the agenda, had adopt~d the practice of expatiating on them. Instead of following, their ex-

62. Must we adopt new resolutions, studies and plans
concerning the illegal occupation of Namibia by an
apartheid regime in order to enable its people to exercise
its right to self-determination, to rid itself of foreign occupation and to preserve its territorial integrity?
63. At a time when there is an increasing number of
resolutions concerning disarmament, we are. witnessing
the beginning of a new nuclear arms race when the annual cost of armaments is nearly $600 billion, having thus
virtually doubled over the past five years.
64. Have we not exhausted the issue of the new international economic order with studies, conferences and resolutions? How long must we wait before taking positive
and realistic action to give effect to some of our decisions? In this regard in particular I promise to make special efforts in continuing the search for practical solutions
conducive to the success of the global negotiations so as
to ensure the attainment of the goals of the new international economic order.
65. The urgent need on this vital issue and on other
issues on the agenda is to secure the minimum requirement of the political will, based on goodwill and careful
consideration of the common interests of the international
community, in order to achieve the goals set out in the
resolutions of this Or~anization.
66. The convening of the present session of the General
Assembly coincides with the twentieth anniversary of two
major historic events, the first being the first Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade, and the second being the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV) on the
granting of independence to' colonial countries and peoples.
67. The General Assembly is meeting also at a time
when internation~ relations are at a critical and dangerous
stage. Instead of l\etente we see a return to the hateful
cold-war policy; instead of progress in dismmament we
see a new and dangerous arms race; and instead of the
new international economic order and an equitable and a

.

r----...-----------------------+¥-lUIIIIIII.~, lIJ.------1
General Assembly-Thirty-slxth Ses.~lon-Plenary Meetings

6

just law of the sea we see a weakening of the political
will that is needed to give effect to the resolutions on
which we have all agreed in this connexion. Moreover,
most of the burning political problems still await solution
in spite of the numerous resolutions adopeJ.

74. The PRESIDENT: I therefore declare the Republic
of Vanuatu admitted to membership in the United Nations.

83. In July this
part in the Securi
unanimous recomn
mitted to members
ticularly happy to \
General Assembly'~
the Prime Minister
Ambassador of Vat

The delegation of the Republic of Vanuatu was escorted
to its place in the General Assembly hall.

68, Let us aim resolutely at working together rather than
just talking, in order to make this session successful and
to coqtribute actively to lessening international tension,
consolidating peace and security in the world and solving
political and economic problems.

75. The PRESIDENT: It is a great pleasure for me to
welcome a new Member of the United Nations, the Republic of Vanuatu, which is represented here today by Mr.
Waiter Lini, the Prime Minister of Vanuatu.
76. The admission of a new Member to the United Nations is always an occasion of great pride and joy for the
world community. The Organization has already grown to
more than three times its original membership and is
coming close to attaining universality. The participation of
a large number of new States in the United Nations has
helped considerably in the evolution of a global perspective on various problems and the common resolve for
their solution.

69. Lastly, allow me to make a personal observation. I
have spent more than a quarter of a century working in
this Organization, as a representative of my country, Iraq,
and in the Secretariat. This long association has increased
my faith in the principles and purposes of the Organization. It has made me believe profoundly that the nonaligned movel1!ent, whose members make up the majority
of the membership of the United Nations and whose principles and purposes are in harmony with those of the Or~anization, offers the only means of realizing our aspirations.

84. As Members
the road to indepel
historical legacy 0
one, and the people
fast towards self-de
However, with the
Unity in Decembe
Constitutional COl
imously adopted a
Territory. The elec
were observed by
bassador Vunibobo,
Fiji to the United
election, by a swee
independence. It Wl
our French partners
people of Vanuatu,
30 July 1980 in pe

77. The admission of a new country which was formerly a colonial Territory is particularly gratifying because the United Nations has repeatedly affirmed the inalienable right of colonial peoples to self-determination
and independence, in accordance with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the twentieth anniversary of whose adoption we
are celebrating this year, as I stated earlier.

70. I promise that, as President of the General Assembly, I shall be guided by its noble human purposes and
principles. In conducting the proceedings I shall depend
on the co-operation of the Vice-Presidents and of Mr.
Kurt Waldheim, the Secretary-General, with whom, as
members know, I have worked in close association for a
number of years. The benefit of all this will be put at the
disposal of and used in the service of this Assembly.

78. Vanuatu is a small country, but it has much to contribute to co-operation and development in the South
Pacific and, I am sure, to the work of the international
community in strengthening international peace and security.

AGENDA ITEM 20
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

85. Vanuatu has (
diversity of· its tral
people will continu
nership and affecti
Kingdom. We war
State among our C
to membership of tI
nize its role as a m
of the Francophone

79. I am sure that I am reflecting the sentiments of all
Member States of the United Nations when I express my
satisfaction at the accession by the Republic of Vanuatu to
membership in the Organization.

71. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the procedure
followed in the past, I should now like to invite the General Assembly to consider the positive recommendation
by the Security Council for the admission to membership
in the United Nations of the Republic of Vanuatu.

86. Vanllatu is th
bringing a range
which we shall all
closely with Mr.
friends, with maD'
colleagues, confron
the aims and ideals
Nations.

80. Several representatives have expressed the desire to
speak on this occasion; and I shall now call on them.

72. This special procedure has been applied previously
in order to give States recommended by the Security
Council for membership in our Organization the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts favourably on their
requests, to participate from the outset in the work of the
session. If there is no objection, we shall proceed accordingly.

81. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Mr.
President, before I turn to the item on our agenda I
should like to express, on my own behalf and on behalf
'of my delegation, our most sincere congratulations to you
on your election to the presidency of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly. Your country and mine
share long historical ties, and you and I personally share
long ti~s of friendship. Nobody in my delegation has any
doubt that you will conduct our deliberations with
strength of character and great diplomatic expertise.

It was so decided.

73. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has recommended the admission of the Republic of Vanuatu to
membership in the United Nations, as stated in document
A!36/368. In this connexion, a draft resolution has been
submitted [A/36/L.l]. In addition to the countries listed in
that document, the following countries have become cosponsors of that draft resolution:. the Central African Republic, Guinea, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali,
Pakistan, Sierra Leone and Trinidad and Tobago [A/36/
L.lIAdd.l]. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts the draft resolution by acclamation?

82. I should like at the same time to express the warmest thanks of the United Kingdom delegation to your
predecessor in your office, Mr. von Wechmar. He comes
from a country which is a partner of mine in the European Community of Ten, and it has been a source of great
pride to all of us that he has held the presidency of the
General Assembly throughout the past year. He has been
a dynamic and forthright President throughout an exceptionally busy year of deliberations in the Assembly, and
his standing among all of us was, I think, best expressed
by the reception· given to him on this floor yesterday evening at the closure of the previous session. We all wish

The drqft resolution was adnpted (resolution 36/1).

/

him and his wife
attractive post to \

/

87. Mr. LEPRE"
French): Mr. Presid
warmly on your ele
to you and to wish

••
•••••
..

88. You represen
pleased to have tie
stantly continued to
nization is well esta
known to all. We h
proceedings, as you
with the desire to e
and that the interes
always prevail.
89. I also wish to
tions to your prede
his year of office h

1st meeting-IS September 1981

him and his wife all happiness and success in the very
attractive post to which they will shortly be going.
83. In July this year it gave me great pleasure to take
part in the Security Council proceedings leading to the
unanimous recommendation that Vanuatu should be admitted to membership of our Organization. So I am particularly happy to welcome to this chamber, following the
General Assembly's endorsement of that recommendation,
the Prime Minister of Vanuatu, Mr. Walter Lini, and the
Ambassador of Vanuatu, Mr. Barak Sope.
84. As Members of the United Nations are well aware,
the road to independence was not easy for Vanuatu. The
historical legacy of the Territory is a rich but complc;;.
one, and the people of Vanuatu could not always move as
fast towards self-determination as they sometimes wished.
However, with the formation of a Government of National
Unity in December 1978, the course was set, and the
Constitutional Conference in September 1979 unanimously adopted an independence Constitution for the
Territory. The elections held following that Conference
were observed by a United Nations Mission led by Ambassador Vunibobo, then the Permanent Representative of
Fiji to the United Nations. Mr. Lini was chosen in that
election, by a sweeping majority, to lead the Territory to
independence. It was naturally a proud day for us and for
our French partners in the condominium, as it was for the
people of Vanuatu, when independence was achieved on
30 July 1980 in peace and in unity.
85. Vanuatu has derived strength and richness from the
diversity of its traditions, and we are confident that its
people will continue to build on their strong ties of partnership and affection with France and with the United
Kingdom. We warmly welcome Vanuatu as the fortieth
State among our Commonwealth partners to be admitted
to membership of the United Nations, and we also recognize its role as a member of the South Pacific Forum and
of the Francophone Community.
86. Vanuatu is the 155th Member of our Organization,
bringing a range of experience and perspectives from
which we shall all benefit. We look forward to working
closely with Mr. Lini and his delegation, both as old
friends, with many close links to cherish, and as new
colleagues, confronted with the same task of promoting
the aims and ideals embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations.
87. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you most
warmly on your election to the important office entrusted
to you and to wish you sincerely all success in your task.
88. You represent a country with which France is
pleased to have ties of firm friendship which have constantly continued to develop. Your reputation in our Organization is well established, and your brilliant qualities are
known to all. We ha'/e no doubt that you will conduct our
proceedings, as you have stated in your inaugural speech,
with the desire to ensure that realistic solutions are found
and that the interests of the international community will
always prevail.
89. I also wish to express my gratitude an'd, congratulations to your predecessor, Mr. von Wechmar, Who during
his year of office has proved an extremely cap~le Presi-

7

dent, devoted, conscientious and impartial. I should like
to say to him, as a member of the European Community,
that we are proud of what he has accomplished. I also
wish him well in his future career and hope it will be
equally brilliant.
90. At its meeting held on 8 July 1981 [2291st meeting], the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
489 (1981), which recommended the admission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the United Nations.
91. This Assembly has just pronounced itself on that
recommendation, and my delegation is pleased that this
body has approved-again, unanimously-the candidacy
of the Republic of Vanuatu as a Member of the Organization.
92. Today Vanuatu is the master of its destiny, and
France knows Vanuatu well.
93. Nearly a century ago, France and the United Kingdom began their contacts with that Pacific archipelago
which was to become the Condominium of the New
Hebrides before acceding to independence in 1980.
Throughout that period, our three peoples have maintained a dialogue which, I am convinced, will continue in
the future.
94. I have evoked the period of the Condominium in
order the better to bring out the uniqueness of the new
State of Vanuatu: heir to two cultural traditions, the
Melanesian and the European, Vanuatu is set apart because it is bilingual, a fact that it was eager to enshrine in
its constitution. Respectful of their traditions, but also
anxious to develop further; the inhabitants of Vanuatu are
rightly proud of their country.
95. The international community need hardly be reminded of the importance of the birth of this new State
which is the 155th to join our Organization. The international community, moreover, has been regularly informed
about the process which in recent years led the New
Hebrides to full sovereignty. In this connexion, I should
like to recall that in November 1979 the General Assembly sent a mission to the Territory under the leadership of
Mr. Vunibobo, the former Permanent Representative of
Fiji. Mr. Vunibobo, whose talent and objectivity I salute
once more, was thus able to outline for our Assembly the
conditions in which legislative elections were held as a
prelude to accession to independence.
96. Like the United Kingdom, France is committed to
strict respect for the expressed will of populations. Our
international community, indeed, cannot live in peace unless each State is able to determine its own objectives and
to choose the type of society that suits it. My country
hopes to pursue and develop harmonious relations with
the new State, relations based on commitments entered
into in sovereignty.. I refer to the co-operation agreements
signed on 10 March 1981 which, in mutual interest and
respect for the rights of all parties, set out cultural, scientific and technical co-operation between France and Vanuatu. Finally, I should like to recal! the importance that
we attach to the joint declaration of the two Governments,
which refers inter alia to assurances given to their nationals who reside in either State.

8

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

97. Finally, I should like, today, on behalf of France, to
greet the leaders of the Republic of Vanuatu who are present in this Hall, in particular the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Walter Lini. I should like to
present to him my best wishes for success. May he rest
assured of our determination to continue, in full respect
for each other's sovereignty, the spirit of solidarity which
is so. vecessary in our time.

of nations as yet a
sacred right of peo
dence and as fresh
the ongoing proce
that the time is ne
their right to indep
ercise fully their
and become fullytions, and that we
and moving mom
public of Vanuatu

for the peoples still enslaved, in Africa and the world
over, that the enjoyment and exercise of the first of their
rights-their right to self-determination, freedom and independence, that gift of God of which no one can deprive
them indefinitely-brooks no delay.
106. The least that we as Africans can do is extend a
warm and fraternal welcome to the delegation of Vanuatu,
which we assure of our co-operation and at whose entire
disposal we place our respective countries. I am convinced that it will be able to find in the values of its
people, whose profound aspirations it reflects here, the
wisdom, the commitment and the determination to enable
it to play its full part in the struggle of the third world for
the establishment of a just and equitable world order.

98. I welcome the Republic of Vanuatu as the 155th
Member Qf the United Nations.
99.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I
call upon the representative of Algeria, who will
speak on behalf of tile African Group.

k10W

100. Mr. BEDJAOUI (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Sir, I take special pleasure in extending to you,
on behalf of the entire African Group, over which it is my
honour to preside this month, my warmest congratulations
on your election to the presidency of the thirty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. I should
like, on this occasion, to wish you full success in dealing
with the immense task and lofty burden just conferred on
you by the General Assembly.

115. In warmly c
gation of Vanuatu,
United Nations it
co-operation and fr
Group.

107. The delegation of Vanuatu is not without the
means to do this. Tempered by the experience of struggle,
imbued with a spirit open to dialogue, as it is generously
open to all the rest of the world, Vanuatu, that ancient
land, which has always been calleg by its inhabitants the
land of God, will find in this universal body the framework of natural solidarity that will enhance its contribution to the solution of the problems of our time.

116. The PRESH
now call upon the
cratic Republic, w
European States.

117. Mr. FLORH
terpretation from R
ily, Sir, on behalf (
election to the pre!
Assembly. We wisl
responsibilities.

108. Welcome, then, to this land of God, which has finally been regained by its sons.

101. We are deeply pleased by the decision which
brought you-a talented diplomat-to the presidency of
our Assembly whose workings you know so well. The
tribute thus paid you is at one and the same time a manifestation of the appreciation felt for your inestimable personal qualities and a guarantee of the success of our
work, since both your great experience and your knowledge of the United Nations have amply prepared you for
your high office.

109. The PRESIDENT (interpretat,ion from Arabic): I
now call upon the representative of Mongolia, who will
speak on behalf of the Asian Group.

118. I also have
cere gratitude to )
thirty-fifth session
eighth emergency s
cious leadership of
diplomatic talent ar
icant impact on thl

IlO. Mr. DASHTSEREN (Mongolia): First of all, on
behalf of the States Members of the Asian Group, in its
capacity as Chairman of that Group for this month, the
Mongolian delegation would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-sixth session of the United
Nations General Assembly.

102. It is also a tribute to Iraq, a brother country and a
member of the Non-Aligned Movement, a movement
which, since its emergence on the international scene, has
unceasingly worked for the consecration of the ideals contained in the United Nations Charter.

119. As the Chai
have the honour of
gratulating the dele
its admission to m
are certain that the
obligations involve
tion in a worthy n

Ill. I also wish to congratulate the outgoing President,
Mr. von Wechmar of the Federal Republic of Germany,
on his successful completion of his duties and the exemplary manner in which he conducted the business of the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the deliberations of the eighth emergency special session.

You take over today, Sir, from Mr. Riidiger von
who, with skill and talent, admirably and scrupulously fulfIlled his mandate during a session and a time
between sessions which were as trying as they were busy.
In that way, for a year, he left the strong mark of his
engaging personality on the life of our Organization. He
deserves recognition by the whole international community for his untiring efforts in the solution of the major
political and economic problems of our time. Our good
wishes will go with him as he reaches new diplomatic
horizons in the service of his country.
103.

Wechm~

112. My delegation has the honour and pleasure on behalf of the Asian Group of welcoming heartily and congratulating the delegation of the Republic of Vanuatu, a
sister country of our region, and through it the Government and people of Vanuatu on this happy occasion of its
admission to the United Nations. The admission of Vanuatu to the United Nations is another step forward towards
the implementation of the principle of universality of this
Organization.

104. The African Group has a right to be glad to welcome Vanuatu into the great United Nations family, for
while it is geographically distant from Africa, Vanuatu is
none the less very close to it by reason of their joint
destiny. Along with Africa, Vanuatu is rediscovering the
light of history, a history which has for too long been
thwarted.

1l3. The members of the Asian Group wish the people
of Vanuatu full success in their independent national development, prosperity and social progress. We also wish
the delegation of Vanuatu successful and fruitful participation in the activities of the United Nations. We are confident that Vanuatu will make its own valuable, positive
contribution to the work of our Organization and to
achieving its noble aims.

105. The admission of Vanuatu as the 155th State Member of the United Nations brings our Organization closer
to universality and is a confirmation of the shrinking of
the areas of colonial and racial domination in the world.
By the same token it symbolizes the irreversibility of the
vast movement of the liberation ~f peoples and proclaims

Il4. We ~elcome the proclamation of independence of
the Republic of Vanuatu and its admission to the family
,
/

120. We note wit
admission of the R
tions marks yet an
ination of colonial
towards the implen
the Gran~ng of In
Peoples, as emboc
1514 (XV).
....

..

121. The member
always firmly sUPI
provisions of that I
In this connexion
present States Mel
Members of the wo
ated. The admissio
Organization brings
of membership of t
122. Ever since it
of Vanuatu has bet
some legacy of its

"

1st meeting-IS September 1981

of nations as yet another victory, as a reaffirmation of the
sacred right of peoples to self-determination and independence and as fresh testimony to the irreversible nature of
the ongoing process of decolonization. We are confident
that the time is near when other peoples still deprived of
their right to independence and self-determination will exercise fully their inalienable right to self-determination
and become fully-fledged members of the family of nations, and that we shall soon witness other such happy
and moving moments as today's admission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the United Nations.
115. In warmly congratulating and welcoming the delegation of Vanuatu, I should like to assure it that at the
United Nations it will enjoy the full and whole-hearted
co-operation and friendship of the members of the Asian
Group.
116. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I
now call upon the representative of the German Democratic Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Eastern
European States.
117. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (interpretation from Russian): May I congratulate you heartily, Sir, on behalf of the Eastern European Group on your
election to the presidency of the United Nations General
Assembly. We wish you success in discharging your lofty
responsibilities.
.
118. I also have the honour of extending our most sincere gratitude to your predecessor, the President of the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and of the
eighth emergency special session, for his skilful and judicious leadership of the work of both those sessions. His
diplomatic talent and dynamism undoubtedly had a significant impact on the work of those sessions.
119. As the Chairman of the Eastern European Group I
have the honour of and take great pleasure in warmly congratulating the delegation of the Republic of Vanuatu on
its admission to membership of the United Nations. We
are certain that the young State of Vanuatu will fulfil the
obligations involved in admission to the world Organization in a worthy manner.
120. We note with special satisfaction the fact that the
admission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the United Nations marks yet another step towards the complete elimination of colonial domination from the world and hence
towards the implementation of the historic Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, as embodied in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV).
121. The member& of the Eastern European Group have
always firmly supported the full implementation of the
provisions of that Declaration and will continue to do so.
In this connexion I would recall that two-thirds of the
present States Members of the United Nations became
Members of the world Organization only after it was created. The admission of the Republic of Vanuatu into our
Organization brings us closer to our goal of universality'
of membership of the United Nations.
122. Ever since it achieved independence, the Republic
of Vanuatu has been steadfastly overcoming the burdensome legacy of its colonial heritage and has now'Qegun a

9

new chapter in its history. We wish the people of the Republic of Vanuatu well in future. and we wish them an
enhancement of their sovereignty and independence.
123. On behalf of the Eastern European Group I wish to
assure the delegation of the Republic of Vanuatu of our
steadfast determination to co-operate with them in implementing the purposes and principles of the Charter of our
Organization.
124. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I
call now on the representative of Honduras, who will be
speaking on behalf of the Latin American Group.
125. Mr. CARIAS ZAPATA (Honduras): (interpretation
from Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, allow me, on
behalf of the Latin American Group, to congratulate you
most warmly on your well-deserved ~Iection as President
of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly. We
all know your wide experience in United Nations matters
and the important role your country has played in the activities of the Organization. We are therefore confident
that your leadership wm he successful, and we assure'you
of our full co-operation in the exercise of your great responsibilities.
126. We also greet and congratulate Mr. von Wechmar.
As President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, he was outstanding for his devotion and energy in
guiding our consideration of the complex items on the
agenda.
127. The countries of the Latin American Group wish to
welcome most cordially the new Member State of Vanuatu, whose admission was approved by the General Assembly a few moments ago on the recommendation made
by the Security Council last July. Vanuatu accedes to independence with the blessings not only of its immediate
neighbours but of the entire international community,
which appreciates the contribution that that new State can
make to our common endeavours, principally in the maintenance of peace and the growing development of economic co-operation.
128. Moreover, Vanuatu's experience as an archipelagic
State can certainly be helpful to us in our efforts to develop a better approach to problems related to the use of
the sea and its resources. Asa State achieving independence after a Franco-British condominium, Vanuatu will,
we know, contribute not only the legacy of its own people, but also the heritage of two other civilizations, thus
adding to the wealth of this crucible of cultures, the
United Nations.
129. The States of Latin America have a community of
interests with Vanuatu which they will strive to develop
further, and which they wish to underline on this occasion
of its delegation's initial attendance at the United Nation~,
in the conviction that these ties of friendship will be ~­
flected in ~tions and achievements of mutual benefit to
I
our countries.
130. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representative
of Denmark, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Western European and Other States.
131. Mr. ULRICHSEN (Denmark): Permit me first, Sir,
on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other

10

General Assembly-Tbirty·s1xth Session-Plenary Meetings

States. to congratulate )UU on )Uur assumption of the high
office of President of the General Assembly of the United
Nations at the thirty-sixth session. For many years we
have appreciated )Uur human and personal qualities which
have so clearly been demonstrated in )\)ur efforts and in
)\)ur concem for this organization. Your professional
qualifications in handling international problems and )Uur
exten~ive knowledge of this Organization provide a guarantee r1 )Uur achievement of success.

since its inception, should have first priority in the work
of this Organization until all the colonized and occupied
countries are freed, foremost among them Palestine and
Namibia. A just and comprehensive peace cannot prevail
in this world without, inter alia, recognition of the genuine and legitimate rights of peoples to live in independence as sovereign States, free from external interference
and in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of international law.

132. In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States it is my privilege and great
pleasure to extend a warm welcome to Vanuatu as the
155th Member'State of the United Nations. The Group of
countries for which I am speaking welcomed the application of Vanuatu for membership. Universality is one of
the basic principles of the United Nations; the admission
of Vanuatu to our Organization today can be seen as a
further step in Ahe fulfilment of this principle.

140. The Group of Arab States, in welcoming today the
admission of the Republic of Vanuatu to the international
family, hopes that the admission of this newly independent country will contribute to the aims of this Organization in ending colonialism and the occupation of the territory of others by force, and to the creation of a free
international community, more equitable and more peaceful, in which all peoples will enjoy liberty, equality and
justice.

133. It is in this spirit that the Group of Western European and Other States takes this opportunity to congratulate the Government and people of Vanuatu on their independence on 30 July 1980. We look forward to close cooperation with the delegation of Vanuatu in our efforts to
achieve the ideals and objectives of the United Nations
Charter which we all share.

141. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of the host country, the United Stlltes of America.

134. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of Sudan, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab
States.
135.

Mr. ABDALLA (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): Sir, it gives me great pleasure, on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, to convey to )UU warmest congratulations on )Uur election as President of the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session. The Group of Arab
States is fully confident that ~ur broad knowledge and
experience. in both the political and diplomatic arenas.,
coupled with your expertise and wisdom, will undoubtedly enable )UU to achieve the success and fruitful results
for. which we all hope at this session.
136; The Group of Arab States is also pleased to express its appreciation and gratitude to )Uur predecessor,
Mc. Riidiger von Wechmar, for the highly competent and
efficient manner in which he discharged his responsibilities in conducting the proceedings of the thirty-fifth
session.
137. The Group of Arab States is pleased to welcome
today the admission of the" Republic of Vanuatu to membership in the United Nations. We also welcome Vanuatu's pledge to adhere to the provisions and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
138. The admission. of the Republic of Vanuatu to the
international family as an independent, sovereign country
is proof that this family is advancing towards universality
and the complete elimination of imperialism, and is realizing the legitimate and basic right of peoples to achieve
self·determination, independence and territorial integrity
in keeping with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to. Colonial· Countri~ and Peoples which was
adopted in 1960.
139. The process of ending imperialism, which has
been one of the major preoccupatiorlS of this Organization

"~CI"'--"""----

also become a
United Nations
tributor to the

148. It is witl
extends to the
tions, our warn
come to this bQ

149. The PRE
of the Solomon

150. Mr. BU(
may I take thi
you, Sir, on yo
session of the
confidence in }1
other colleague!
distinguished A
thanks for the
von Wechmar.

151. Three ye
welcomed by' tl1
Member State c
uatu takes on t
fact that five Cl
side the period
pace of world c
able.

142. Mrs. KIRKPATRlCK (United States of America):
First, I desire to note that, although today's election
seemed uncertain, its outcome was in fact never in doubt.
We were confronted by three such excellent candidates
that the Umted Nations was certain to be the winner.
143. Secondly, I should like to extend to our new President of this General Assembly the warm congratulations
and best wishes of the United States and to express our
confidence that he will disch~ge that office with the skill
and dedication for which he is so very well known in this
body.

152. Solomon
Vanuatu. As ne
and Solomon I
boundary, but
heritage with 11
historical links
and the cane f
mid-nineteenth
own. It is my l
close and speci

144. Next, I should like also to extend' my Government's congratulations, and especially our gratitude, to
the outgoing President, who performed the duties to this
office with such energy and distinction.
145. Finally, I am pleased, on behalf of the Government
of the United States, to welcome Vanuatu to the General
Assembly. I know that the commitment in the constitution
of the Republic of Vanuatu to freedom and democratic
government will make it a valued 155th Member of the
United Nations. I am confident that the long-standing
friendly relations between our two peoples will be
strengthened by our endeavours here.
146. National independence, self-government and democracy are the great values that may be enjoyed by a
people. Their attainment is a proud and joyous moment,
not only for the people concerned, but for all who value
freedom and self-determination. The United States shares
this proud moment with the people of Vanuatu, wishes
them well and welcomes them to membership in this international body.

153. Today's c
and Solomon I
now, inspired b
own nations in
other Pacific ne
encouraged by
day by the inte

.

i

154. The islan
island States of
special problem
tions and envil'
open, and thus
make no excuse
but we do expec
States and hope
ture.

......

...
..

c

147. In recent years, a number of new nations from the
Pacific region have achieved membership in the United
Nations. They have brought the unique perspectives of
their geography and cultural traditions, and also a commatment to democracy, development and world peace,
which has measurably strengthened this Organization. We
are all aware of the impressive roles played by Pacific
nations in ~ajor United Nations bodies and in United Nationspeace;.keeping efforts. We know that Vanuatu will

...__IIIIIfil'"

155. Small as
great world, ani
pledged to live I
and ideals coml
able Organizatio
156. At this ju
inform you of

~

1st meeting-IS September 1981

also become a strong defender of the principles of the
United Nations Charter and an active and valuable contributor to the work of the United Nations.
148. It is with very great pleasure that my Government
extends to the people of Vanuatu our deep congratulations, our warm best wishes and our most sincere welcome to this body, to New York and to the United States.
149. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of the Solomon Islands.
150. Mr. BUGOfU (Solomon Islands): Mr. President,
may I take this opportuI1ity first of all to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election as President at this thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly. Solomon Islands has
confidence in your ability and experience, and joins with
other colleagues in endorsing your leadership of this very
distinguished Assembly of nations. We extend also many
thanks for the leadership of the outgoing President, Mr.
von Wechmar.

,
'j

j

,',

11

country. We have a neWly elected Prime Minister and a
new Cabinet which at this very moment is settling down
to new challenges' and the responsibilities of Government.
May I give to this honourable Assembly the assurances 'Of
my new Prime Minister and Government, that Solomon
Islands' foreign policy remains a sensible and practical
one, with the aim of improvement where necessary and
suitable. The overriding aim of our foreign policy is the
wish to be friends with all nations.
157. We continue to pledge our full support for the
preservation and maintenance of world peace aneJ brotherly love. As we said in this great Assembly three years
ago, we in Solomon Islands do not ~lieve in, the, use of
arms as a means of achieving compromise in conflicts.
We believe, however, that we have good common sense
and balance of mind sufficient to allow us to contribute
constructively and independently towards pea~e aneJ har-'
mony in the world should we be required to do so. Peace
and brotherly love offer the only true hope and salvation
for small island States such as ours', and we are aiming to
cultivate those qualities.'
' ,

151. Three years ago my country, Solomon Islands, W'IS
welcomed by this august body as' the youngest and 150th
Member State of this great family of nations. Today Vanuatu takes on the title of the 155th Member State. The
fact that five countries have ioined this world forum inside the period of three years shows in many ways the
pace of world change which we must all accept' as inevitable.

158. In welcoming Vanuatu, may we remind the Assembly that for small island States peace is the only sure
weapon for survival. The islands of the Pacific have a
perpetual reminder of that, being islands of a "peaceful
ocean". May we faithfully live up to that name.

152. Solomon Islands extends a very warm welcome to
Vanuatu. As next-door neighbours in the Pacific, Vanuatu
and Solomon Islands do not only share a common sea
boundary, but more significantly, we share a common
heritage with regard to race, history and religion. Our
historical links with the past took us both to the cotton
and the cane fields of Queensland and Fiji during the
mid-nineteenth century, to build nations other than our
own. It is my country's wish that we maintain this very
close and special relationship with Vanuatu in future.

160. Mr. BOLE (Fiji): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to
conveyto you on behalf of my own delegation our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the post of
President of the thirty-sixth session ,of the General Assembly.
'.

153. Today's ceremony is a reminder that we in Vanuatu
and Solomon Islands have both come of age and must
now, inspired by freedom and independence, build our
own nations in an atmosphere of peace and harmony with
other Pacific neighbours and the world at large. We are
encouraged by the acclaim and goodwill shown here today by the international community.
154. The islands of the South Pacific region, like other
island States of the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean, have
special problems which are peculiar to small island situations and environments. Our economies are small and
open, and thus are vulnerable to outside influences. We
make no excuses or,apologies for inhabiting these islands,
but we do expect greater understanding from larger nation
States and hope they will respect our way of life and culture.
155. Small as.we are, we are nevertheless part of the
great world, and by joining the United Nations we have
pledged to live up to the same obligations, responsibilities
and ideals common to all Member States of this honourable Organization, as contained in the Charter. ,
156. At this juncture, may I also take the oppol:tunity to
inform you of the recent change' of 'government in my

159. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of Fiji, who has asked to address the Assembly on behalf
of the South Pacific countries.

161. I also wish to congratulate our outgoing President
on his outstanding. performance in presiding over the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
162. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak
on this auspicious occasion' on behalf of the, six members
of the South Pacific Forum who are, Members- of the
United Nations. They are Western Samoa, New Zealand,
PapuaNew Guinea, Solomon Islands, Australia and my
own country,Fiji.
163. We have just witnessed an' historic and memorable
event-the admission of the Republic of Vanuatu as the
155th Member of the United Nations. The occasion is a
significant landmark in the history of the young Republic,
as from today independent Vanuatu will assume its rightful place in this community of nations.
164. In a wider context,theaccessidn of Vanuatu today
represents the'abiding faith and confidence of an everwidening net of nations in the' valuable toleswhic::h the
United Nations'continues to play as the'gliardianof peace
and security and the guarantor of freedom, .equality and
the rights of people the world over. That :trend of increasing universality of the United Nations'auglirs'weU;iil our
view,' for the future of this world body, which 'in recent
years' has been increasingly threatened by the'confronta~
tional nature and deterioration' of international' relations.

\

1%

GenenI Assembly-1bIrty·sIxth, Session-Plenary Meetings

165. To be.. sure. nations•. particularly small nations.
seek membership in. the United Nations because it alone
can .provide that neutral. umbrella of peace and security
that is so vital and necessary for their own much-needed
socio-economic development andordedy political evolu.
tion.
166. ..lnWelcoming the Republic of Vanuatu as a Member of the' United Nations we acknowledge the very real
and effective role played by the United Nations, through
its Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In- .
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. in encouraging the emergence of Vanuatu as an independent nation.
In thatconnexion. we are proud to have been associated
with the work: of that Committee and no less proud to
have been members of the South Pacific community of
nations. which provided moral· support for the decolonization of Vanuatu. i'\
167. In saying that. we are not unaware of the positive
contributions made by the administering Powers-the
United Kingdom and France-in their efforts to resolve
satisfactorily the problems connected with Vanuatu's
unique history and dependent status. Through discussions
and sound judgement. Vanuatu's independence was
achieved, like that. of its independent neighbours in the
South Pacific. in a peaceful way. the Pacific way.
168. The principal credit for the peaceful transition of
Vanuatu to independence must of course go to. its chief
architect...:...its Prime Minister. Mr. Waiter Uni. He is a
chief and a leader in his own right. by education and
training a man of peace and by his family background a
man who grew up in the service of his people. It comes.
therefore. as no surprise that the independence movement,
which· he led from· its birth and which was strongly supported by the people ·of Vanuatu. Wc1S able to achieve its
goal. in the face of a confused historical inheritance, in
the peaceful way that it did.
169. Prime Minister Lini's background. in the view of
the nations that I represeilt, and his experience and training equip him well for the difficult task on which he has
already embarked in building a new nation. They have
also given him a perspective ~nd the parochialism of
his national boundaries.
170. Before this solemn occasion today on which the
country has become the newest Member of the United
Nations, Vanuatu was already.a member of the Commonwealth. a member of the South Pacific Forum and a member of various other South Pacific organizations, in which
it is already making an important contribution.
171. Vanuatu's membership of the South Pacific Forum
and other international organizations in the South Pacific
is of special significance to our region. as, apart from the
fact that it re-establishes traditional links and affinities
among South Pacific countries, it adds a new dimension
and strength to regional organizations in their efforts to
resolve their conunon problems.
172. As a Member of the United Nations. Vanuatu, we
zrecertain. will i)ring a voice that is distinctly ftesh.a
voice based on its unique cultural. experience and history.
to the resolution of the problems whicll confront us here
in the United· Nations. VanUal!J's voice is a Pacific voice

and an island voice which we hope W\n, serve to direct
United Nations attention perhaps more than has been the
case before to the special problems of the Pacific and
other island developing nations.
173, In conclusion. may I therefore, on behalf of Western Samoa. New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands. Australia and my country. Fiji, most
warmly welcome Vanuatu into this community of nations.
174. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now hear
a statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Vanuatu.
175. Mr. LINI (Vanuatu): Mr. President, I wish to take
this opportunity fIrSt to congratulate you on your election
to your high office and to thank you for welcoming my
delegation. and in doing so I should also like to thank
your predecessor, Mr. Riidiger von Wechmar, for the excellent manner in which he has carried out his duties.
176. I also. wish to take this opportunity to thank the
Security Council for having favourably considered our ap- .
plication in July and submitting it to this thirty-sixth se&sion of the General Assembly.
177. I wish to thank all those Member States which
have sponsored our application, particularly our former
Administrating Powers, France and the U,nited Kingdom,
and alsg Algeria. which has spoken to welcome us,
Mongolia, the German Democratic Republic, Honduras,
Denmark, Sweden, the United States, the Solomon Is..
lands and Fiji.
178. My delegation is deeply honoured and thankful for
the many kind words expressed by various representatives
at this, Vanuatu's historic occ!lsion. It is with pride, humility and gratitude that I stand before the Assembly in
the name of the people of Vanuatu, and the fact that I do
so at a moment when our young republic takes its place
as a State Member of the United Nations is an additional
source of pride and appreciation, and I am indeed grateful
for the opportunity to address the Assembly at this particular hour.
179. The Assembly has before it an agenda that is
wholly representative of the spirit, principle and commitment of the Charter of this great Organization, which has
since its birth been the hope for the emancipation of
countless numbers of the human race. From such a high
and honourable duty I should not wish to detain negotiations and it is my intention, therefore, to be brief in what
I have to say.
180. Iilitially, I wish to confIrm that my presence here is
of some personal significance, for it was before this Organization's Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Iildependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples that on two occasions I was granted permission to
appear in order to present a case for the decolonization of
my country. The chief concern and assistance of that
Committee is widely regarded in Vanuatu as h~\ving made
a fundamental contribution towards achieving the political
freedom of our people, and that fact I gladly acknowledge
now. Because Qf this the United Nations has a very special place in our affections and esteem-the principle rea-

13

1st meeting-IS September 1981

son why we regard our membership as the most significant event since achieving nationhood.
181. The difficult nature of our national birth gave rise
to expressions of concern by a significant number of
countries represented in this Assembly, and I would take
this occasion to record the debt of gratitude we owe to
them. To some significant degree, the experience of
Vanuatu as the final steps down the long and difficult
road to independence were taken may, I respectfully suggest, contain within it an object lesson which is totally in
keeping with the essential reasons for the very existence
of this council of nations, which a free Vanuatu now so
proudly joins.
182. We are a small country located in the vastness of
the world's greatest ocean, far removed from the mainstreanl of international attention. It was principally because of this that we fell prey to the divisive, antidemocratic and selfish attention of those who would have
interrupted our progress, our political and constitutional
advancement. Such negative influences may well have
succeeded but for the acts of assistance constituting a collective concern of high honour which we were given by
our friends in the region.
183. It was a classic example of a unity of purpose, of
coming together in the interest of the peace and wt;lfare of
a people and a region-surely, as I remarked, the essence
of the task the United Nations was formed to carry out. If
at times of crisis the strong assist those who often,
through no fauh of their own, are unable adequately to
meet the situation, then and only then will it be possible
for the weak to become strong and collectively, if not
individually, to stand free and able to render assistance
themselves when any given circumstance demands it.
184. We live at an uncertain time and in an uncertain
world. So much will depend upon the success you, Mr.
President, personally enjoy in your high office and, indeed, on the degree of unity of purpose generated by this
Assembly. You, Sir, and the Members here assembled,
can rely upon the constant prayers and good wishes of the
people of Vanuatu in your endeavours. We realize, of
course, that even earnestly delivered prayers are often assisted by practical actions. It is said that God helps those
who help themselves, a belief to which not unnaturallygiven my background-I personally subscribe. We are a
small nation and a recent arrival in the family of nations,
both facts of which we are most mindful. But as we take
our place in the world and, in so doing, assume our national and international obligations, we would like to believe that we may be able on occasion to make a contribution, however modest, to the work of this Organization
and to the deliberations of this Assembly. For, small as
we are, and as new. to the council of the international
community as we may be, we hold our convictions and
our principles with both sincerity and confidence.
185. Our difficult colonial past has also prompted in our
national experience many concerns, and, with all humil-

ity, there may be occasions when a mutual benefit may be
derived from those concerns being voiced here. It is the.
fact that some of our concerns are regional, based on support for what we in Vanuatu regard as a natural expectation held by those Pacific peoples still subject to colonial
rule. Their right to be granted a free and unfettered political determination is a principle we shall not abdicate. We
shall not forget that this principle is supported by this
Assembly on every available opportunity, just as we shall
advocate and strive with equal conviction to ensure that
our Pacific Ocean be free from nuclear contamination
through the practice of the dumping of nuclear waste or
the testing of nuclear devices.
186. On the international scene, we shall give support
with all the conviction at our command to the debate
which has become known as the North-South dialogue,
believing as we surely do that much depends-both in
terms of justice and of international welfare-on the future relationship that will exist between the manufacturing
countries and industrialized society and those who supply
the basic raw materials upon which industrialized society
so vitally depends.
187. May I again suggest, with respect, that no organization is better placed than the United Nations and its
agencies to create an awareness that much depends on the
future relationship between manufacturing nations and the
raw material-producing nations. But the world must turn
away from concepts of dominance and dependence to the
reality of inter-dependence and to the imperatives of
change that this produces. May I again suggest that the
improvement in the quality of the welfare of so many
who desperately need it de~nds on a practical recognition by industrialized society that it is in no one's longterm interest for national profit to be pursued at the expense of international poverty. The continuance of such a
circumstance can only result in the inflan1ffiable structures
of injustice mounting higher and higher-dread structures
which do not allow half the world to earn a decent living,
patterns of consumption that strain and pollute the world's
resources and economic systems and which benefit the
few at the expense of the many.
188. In putting forward SI 'ch concerns as and when we
are able, we would hope h all sincerity that we shall be
making a contribution to this Organization, to which we
owe so much, while at the same time upholding and furthering the high purpose of its calling. I should like to
thank the Assembly for listening so kindly and so courteously to what I have had to say.

The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

NCJrES
I See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Plenary Meetings. 1l4th meeting, paras. 3-29.
