United Nations

A/52/PV.77

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

77th plenary meeting
Thursday, 18 December 1997, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

A/52/626/Add.2, recommends the adoption of three draft
resolutions.

Reports of the Second Committee
The President: This afternoon the General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Second Committee on
agenda items 95 to 101 and 12. I request the Rapporteur of
the Second Committee, Mr. Rae Kwon Chung of the
Republic of Korea, to introduce the reports of the Second
Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea), Rapporteur of the
Second Committee: I have the honour, as Rapporteur of the
Second Committee, to introduce to the General Assembly
the reports of that Committee. On 19 September 1997, at its
4th plenary meeting, the General Assembly allocated to the
Second Committee eight agenda items: agenda items 12 and
95 to 101. This is reflected in document A/52/252.
Today, the Assembly has before it the report of the
Second Committee on item 95, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, which is contained in documents
A/52/626 and A/52/626/Add.1 to Add.4. Document
A/52/626 contains the introduction to the item. In paragraph
14 of document A/52/626/Add.1, the Second Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of two
draft resolutions under sub-item (a), “Financing of
development, including net transfer of resources between
developing and developed countries”.
Under sub-item (b), entitled “Trade and development”,
the Second Committee, in paragraph 14 of document

97-86782 (E)

In paragraph 7 of document A/52/626/Add.3, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (c),
“Science and technology for development”.
In paragraph 7 of document A/52/626/Add.4,
submitted under sub-item (d), entitled “External debt
crisis and development”, the Committee recommends to
the Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution.
The General Assembly also has before it the report
of the Second Committee on item 96, entitled “Sectoral
policy questions”, which is contained in document
A/52/627. Paragraph 25 of that document contains one
draft resolution and paragraph 26 contains one draft
decision recommended for adoption by the Assembly.
Under item 97, “Sustainable development and
international economic cooperation”, the Assembly has
before it the report of the Second Committee, contained
in document A/52/628 and Addenda 1 to 9.
Document A/52/628 contains the introduction to the
item and a list of documents before the Committee.
In paragraph 9 of document A/52/628/Add.1, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (a),
entitled “Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

international economic cooperation for development through
partnership”.

Document A/52/629 contains the introduction to the
item and a list of documents before the Committee.

Under sub-item (b), entitled “Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the 1990s”, the Second Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 9 of document
A/52/628/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.

Under sub-item (a), entitled “Implementation of
decisions and recommendations of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development”, the report
contained in document A/52/629/Add.1 indicates that no
draft proposals were submitted under this sub-item.

In paragraph 8 of document A/52/628/Add.3, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (c),
entitled “Population and development”.

Under sub-item (b), entitled “Implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa”, the Assembly has
before it one draft resolution recommended for adoption,
which is contained in paragraph 12 of document
A/52/629/Add.2.

In paragraph 6 of document A/52/628/Add.4, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (d),
entitled “International migration and development, including
the convening of a United Nations conference on
international migration and development”.
In paragraph 9 of document A/52/628/Add.5, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of three draft resolutions under sub-item (e),
entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”.
In paragraph 10 of document A/52/628/Add.6, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of two draft resolutions under sub-item (f),
entitled “First United Nations Decade for the Eradication of
Poverty”.
In paragraph 8 of document A/52/628/Add.7, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (g),
entitled “Women in development”.
In paragraph 7 of document A/52/628/Add.8, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (h),
entitled “Human resources development”.
In paragraph 7 of document A/52/628/Add.9, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution under sub-item (i),
entitled “Cultural development”.
The General Assembly also has before it the report of
the Second Committee on item 98, entitled “Environment
and sustainable development”, which is contained in
documents A/52/629 and addenda 1 to 8.

2

In paragraph 8 of document A/52/629/Add.3,
submitted under sub-item (C), entitled “Protection of
global climate for present and future generations of
mankind”, the Second Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution.
In paragraph 7 of document A/52/629/Add.4,
submitted under sub-item (d), entitled “International
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction”, the Second
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of one draft resolution. In paragraph 8 of the
same document, the Second Committee recommends to
the Assembly the adoption of one draft decision.
In paragraph 6 of document A/52/629/Add.5,
submitted under sub-item (e), entitled “Convention on
Biological Diversity”, the Second Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of one draft
resolution.
In paragraph 6 of document A/52/629/Add.6,
submitted under sub-item (f), entitled “Implementation of
the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”, the
Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of one draft resolution.
In paragraph 10 of document A/52/629/Add.7,
submitted under sub-item (g), entitled “Special session for
the purpose of an overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of Agenda 21”, the Second Committee
recommends to the Assembly the adoption of two draft
decisions.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Finally, in paragraph 2 of document A/52/629/Add.8,
which was submitted under item 98 as a whole, the Second
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 99, entitled “Operational activities
for development”, the Assembly has before it the report of
the Second Committee, contained in document A/52/630.
The Second Committee recommends to the General
Assembly three draft resolutions, contained in paragraph 19
of that document, and one draft decision, which is
contained in paragraph 20.
The Assembly also has before it the report of the
Second Committee under item 100, entitled “Training and
research: United Nations Institute for Training and
Research”, which is contained in document A/52/631.
Paragraph 10 of that document contains one draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the General Assembly.
The Assembly has before it document A/52/632,
which contains the report of the Second Committee on item
101, entitled “Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied
Syrian Golan over their natural resources”. One draft
resolution is recommended to the Assembly for adoption in
paragraph 10 of that report.
Finally, the Assembly has before it the report of the
Second Committee on item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, for which the Assembly has
before it document A/52/625. Paragraph 20 of that
document contains one draft resolution and paragraph 21
contains 5 draft decisions recommended by the Committee
for adoption by the Assembly.
I should like to inform the General Assembly that,
during this session, the Second Committee adopted 30 draft
proposals.
Before concluding, I should like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Second
Committee for their contribution to the work of the
Committee and to thank the Chairman, Mr. Oscar de Rojas,
and the two Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Hans-Peter Glanzer and
Mr. Adel Abdellatif, for their efforts in successfully
completing the work of the Committee. My thanks also go
to the members of the Secretariat for their assistance and
endeavours.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
Mr. Rojas (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): As a result of informal consultations that took
place yesterday under your authority, Sir, it is my
pleasure to inform the Assembly that the delegations that
participated in the work of the Second Committee agreed
to introduce some additions to the draft resolutions
recommended for adoption by the General Assembly and
to which the Rapporteur of the Committee has just
referred. I will now indicate what these changes are.
(spoke in English)
In the reports which are being considered by the
plenary of the General Assembly, we should change the
following: In the six draft resolutions, to which I will
refer to one by one, wherever the phrase “sustained
economic growth and sustainable development” appears,
the following phrase should be added immediately after
it:
“in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and recent United Nations conferences”.
I will now indicate in which draft resolutions this
should be done.
The first draft resolution is draft resolution II,
contained in paragraph 14 of document A/52/626/Add.1.
It appears on page 10 of the English text. This draft
resolution deals with item 95 (a), entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: Financing of
development, including net transfer of resources between
developing and developed countries”. The addition should
be made in the fifth preambular paragraph.
The second draft resolution is the one contained in
paragraph 7 of document A/52/626/Add.4, which appears
on page 8 of the English text. Additions should be made
in the thirteenth preambular paragraph, on page 9; in
operative paragraph 2, also on page 9; and in operative
paragraph 20, on page 12. This draft resolution deals with
agenda item 95 (d), entitled “Macroeconomic policy
questions: External debt crisis and development”.
The third draft resolution deals with agenda item 96
(a), entitled “Sectoral policy questions: Industrial
development cooperation”, and is contained in paragraph
25 of document A/52/627. The phrase appears in the
fourth preambular paragraph, on page 15 of the English
text.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The fourth draft resolution refers to agenda item 97
(a), entitled “Sustainable development and international
economic cooperation: Renewal of the dialogue on
strengthening international economic cooperation for
development through partnership”. The draft resolution
recommended for adoption is contained in operative
paragraph 9 of document A/52/628/Add.1, and the phrase
appears in operative paragraph 2, on page 5 of the English
text.
The fifth draft resolution deals with agenda item 97
(g), entitled “Sustainable development and international
economic cooperation: Women in development”. The draft
resolution is contained in paragraph 8 of document
A/52/628/Add.7. The phrase should be added in the third
preambular paragraph, which appears on page 6 of the
English text.
Finally, the sixth draft resolution refers to item 97 (h),
entitled “Sustainable development and international
economic cooperation: Human resources development”. The
draft resolution is contained in paragraph 7 of document
A/52/628/Add.8. The phrase appears in the fifth preambular
paragraph, on page 5.
The President: Representatives have heard the
statement by the representative of Venezuela. It is my
understanding that the oral amendments submitted by the
representative of Venezuela to six of the draft resolutions
before the Assembly this afternoon are acceptable to the
General Assembly, and that we can proceed later during
this meeting to the adoption of those draft resolutions, as
orally amended by the representative of Venezuela.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Second Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that,
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Second
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Second Committee. This means that
where a recorded vote was taken, we will do the same,
unless the Secretariat has been notified otherwise. I
should also hope that we may proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Second Committee.
Agenda item 95
Macroeconomic policy questions

If I hear no objection, we will proceed accordingly.
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to inform the members
that the representative of Luxembourg has expressed a
desire to make a statement in connection with the report of
the Second Committee on agenda item 12, entitled “Report
of the Economic and Social Council”, which is contained
in document A/52/625.
May I take it that the General Assembly, bearing in
mind rule 66 of the rules of procedure, agrees to discuss
that report when the General Assembly takes up agenda
item 12?
It was so decided.

4

Report of the Second Committee (Part I)
(A/52/626)
The President: The Assembly will now consider
part I of the report of the Second Committee on agenda
item 95, entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of part I of the report in document
A/52/626?
It was so decided.
(a) Financing of development, including net transfer
of resources between developing and developed
countries

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Report of the Second Committee (Part II)
(A/52/626/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 14 of part II of its report
contained in document A/52/626/Add.1.
The Assembly will first turn to draft resolution I,
entitled “Global partnership for development: high-level
international intergovernmental consideration on financing
for development”.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/179).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “Global
financial flows and their impact on the developing
countries”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft resolution II, as orally amended by the
representative of Venezuela?
Draft resolution II, as orally amended, was adopted
(resolution 52/180).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in explanation
of position.
Mr. Hapsoro (Indonesia): My delegation is
particularly pleased that the draft resolutions contained in
document A/52/626/Add.1, on “Macroeconomic policy
questions”, which we have just adopted, represent a further
step by the General Assembly towards the implementation
of agreements reached.
With reference to draft resolution II, adopted as
resolution 52/180, however, my delegation would like to
underline that all countries can become vulnerable in the
course of the liberalization of their external economic and
financial regimes, regardless of their stage of development
and whether or not they are developed or developing
countries. The globalization of financial markets can create
new risks of instability, with the potential to aggravate the
volatility of short-term capital flows and adversely affect
the international financial system.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
We have witnessed that the capacity to fine-tune
volatility in the short term through macroeconomic
management has little impact in itself. As the movement
of large volumes of funds between markets across
national borders can take place rapidly, we sincerely
believe that government policy has a critical role to play
and represents a potent means for avoiding extremes in
business cycles.
During the past six months, sharp fluctuations in
international finance and stock markets have negatively
affected the world, and particularly the development
process of the developing countries. We have noted that
the Bretton Woods institutions have taken the necessary
steps to overcome the crisis, but it seems that these steps
have had little positive effect. We are very pleased that
the General Assembly has already voiced its concerns this
year. It is imperative to strengthen multilateral
cooperation to offset or prevent any future negative
impact on development.
Less than a week ago, the World Trade Organization
reached agreement on and adopted a finance pact with
far-reaching impact. The negotiations, involving 102
countries, sealed a global financial-services pact that will
liberalize trillions of dollars' worth of trade in the
banking, insurance and brokerage sectors. In this regard,
we are fortunate that resolution 52/180 mentions that the
promotion of capital account liberalization should be done
only in an orderly and flexible manner, so as to enable
individual Member countries to tailor their capital account
liberalization to the circumstances pertaining to each of
their countries.
These resolutions are without doubt an example of
constructive negotiation and cooperation on the part of all
groups and delegations. Although the process was arduous
and difficult, all sides ultimately exercised flexibility and
displayed a willingness to negotiate and make the
necessary compromises in order to reach consensus.
As coordinator for this item within the Group of 77,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to
the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Second
Committee, who facilitated the process leading up to
adoption of the resolutions. In addition, we would like to
express our sincere thanks to the entire membership of the
Group of 77 and China for their support and
encouragement during the deliberations.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): In explaining its
position on draft resolution I in document

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
A/52/626/Add.1, entitled “Global partnership for
development: high-level international intergovernmental
consideration on financing for development”, just adopted
by consensus as resolution 52/179, the Philippine delegation
wishes to emphasize the following points. First, it is the
understanding of my delegation that the Bureau of the
Second Committee will immediately undertake informal
consultations with Member States and the Secretariat on the
most appropriate dates for a two-day resumed session of the
Second Committee during the fifty-second session of the
General Assembly.
Secondly, my delegation would prefer that the
resumed session of the Second Committee be convened as
soon as possible. And, thirdly, the success of the work of
the ad hoc open-ended working group, which will be
convened during the fifty-third session of the General
Assembly, will depend to a large extent on the required
inputs that will be determined during the two-day resumed
session and on the index report of the current themes that
the Secretary-General will identify after a careful and
thorough examination of all the reports requested. Needless
to say, my delegation attaches great importance to the index
report referred to in paragraph 5 of the resolution.
Allow me also to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Oscar de Rojas of Venezuela for a splendid
performance as Chairman of the Second Committee and to
express our abiding gratitude for his stewardship of the
Committee. We have given him more work in the
resolution we have just adopted, but we are confident that
he will lead us to a fruitful outcome of the resumed session
of the Second Committee.
Ms. King (United States of America): The United
States would like to explain its position on draft resolutions
under agenda items 95 (a), 95 (d), 96 (a), 97 (a), 97 (g) and
97 (h).
We are deeply convinced that economic development,
social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of
sustainable development, which is the framework for our
efforts to achieve a higher quality of life for all people.
Equitable social development that recognizes empowering
the poor to utilize environmental resources sustainably is a
necessary foundation for sustainable development. We also
recognize that broad-based and sustained economic growth
in the context of sustainable development is necessary to
sustain social development and social justice.

6

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
We would like the record to reflect that this is our
position on draft resolutions under all six aforementioned
agenda items.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, I would like, on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, to express our appreciation to Ambassador Oscar
de Rojas, Chairman of the Second Committee, and his
Bureau for the way they have been guiding the work of
the Committee for the last eight weeks, and in particular
with respect to the resolution of the matter on which we
have just taken action. I wish also to thank you,
Mr. President, for the way in which you have guided the
work of the General Assembly.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Betty King, the new representative of the
United States to the Economic and Social Council, and to
assure her of our cooperation in furthering the work of
that Council — and in particular of the Second
Committee.
As members may recall the Second Committee failed
to conclude its work on Friday, 5 December 1997, owing
to lack of agreement between the United States delegation
and the Group of 77 and China on six draft resolutions
which contained references to the concept of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. This was
regrettable to all of us, and forced the Committee to take
decisions by votes. However, we are glad that through the
diplomatic skills of Mr. Nikolai V. Tchoulkov, Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, we
were able to resolve the impasse, which led to the
consensus adoption of the six-plus-one resolutions as well
as the resolution on desertification. In this context, I
would like, on behalf of the Group, to thank
Mr. Tchoulkov for his efforts.
In spite of the adoption of the six resolutions by
consensus, the Group of 77 and China strongly maintain
that for any development process to be meaningful,
particularly in developing countries, economic growth
which is sustained over a period of time is crucial and
critical. This requires the support of developed countries
in terms of increased additional resources and transfer of
appropriate technology. Moreover, it is not always true
that sustainable development based on private-sector
initiatives should be the driving force towards attaining
rapid social development and environmental protection in
developing countries. In our view, sustainable
development objectives are attainable only if economic
growth is sustained in the medium and long term.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
To most developing countries, the sustainable
development approach, as emphasized by most of our
developed partners, is considered restrictive, limiting
economic growth to social development and protection of
the environment.
It is in this context that the Group of 77 and China
had a lot of difficulties in accepting the languages proposed
by the United States delegation. However, in the spirit of
compromise, and following the tradition in our Committee,
the Group of 77 and China have accepted the compromise
package, as proposed by the facilitator, so that all the
resolutions in stalemate could be adopted by consensus. In
this connection, the Group of 77 and China would like
strongly to reiterate their acceptance of the package at this
juncture, which would in no way prejudice future use of the
concept in our work.
Mrs. Hormilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation wishes to state its position on the six
resolutions amended today.
We wish to place on record our conviction that the
replacement, in the six resolutions adopted in the Second
Committee, of the concept of sustained economic growth
and sustainable development with a phrase from the
medium-term plan for sustained economic growth and
sustainable development — “in accordance with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions and recent United
Nations conferences” — limits that concept. This has been
a long-standing position of principle taken by the
developing countries.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
reaffirm the importance that we attach to the concept of
sustainable development. Economic development, social
development and protection of the environment remain
the three interdependent and mutually reinforcing aspects
of sustainable development, as agreed at the Copenhagen
Summit and reaffirmed most recently by the General
Assembly when it adopted the Agenda for Development.
The European Union wishes this statement to stand
as an explanation of vote on the other five resolutions
amended by the representative of Venezuela.
The President: We have concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 95.
(b) Trade and development
Report of the Second Committee (Part III)
(A/52/626/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of Part III of its
report.
The Assembly will first turn to draft resolution I,
entitled “Unilateral economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion against developing
countries”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

The wording that appears in the medium-term plan
was the outcome of difficult negotiations in the Fifth
Committee and imposes an interpretation at variance with
the concept of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development in the context of the aforementioned
resolutions. My delegation has nevertheless joined the
consensus of the General Assembly, although it recognizes
the importance of this in the area of international economic
cooperation as a means of mobilizing the commitment and
political will of all States in the promotion of development.
My delegation requests that this statement be taken as
an explanation on the other five resolutions amended here
today.
Mr. Meyer (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): The European Union joined the consensus on the
resolution entitled “Global financial flows and their impact
on the developing countries”. However, we would like to

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 109 votes to 1, with
50 abstentions (resolution 52/181).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nepal informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International trade and development”.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/182).

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 52/183).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 95?
It was so decided.
(c) Science and technology for development
Report of the Second Committee (Part IV)
(A/52/626/Add.3)
The President: We turn now to the draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the Second Committee in
paragraph 7 of Part IV of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/184).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 95?
It was so decided.
(d) External debt crisis and development
Report of the Second Committee (Part V)
(A/52/626/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of Part V of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Enhancing
international cooperation towards a durable solution to the
external debt problem of developing countries”. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution, as orally amended by the representative
of Venezuela?

The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Specific actions related to the particular needs and
problems of landlocked developing countries”.

The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 52/185).

The Second Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 95?

8

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97
Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (Part I)
(A/52/628)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of part I of the report of the
Second Committee contained in document A/52/628?
It was so decided.
(a) Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation for
development through partnership
Report of the Second Committee (Part II)
(A/52/628/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 9 part II of its report,
contained in document A/52/628/Add.1.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft resolution, as orally amended by the
representative of Venezuela?
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was adopted
(resolution 52/186).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia, who wishes to make a statement in
explanation of position.
Mrs. Djatmiko-Singgih (Indonesia): My delegation
would like to express its felicitations to all member
countries that actively participated in formulating the
resolution on renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation, as contained in
document A/52/628/Add.1.
This resolution not only establishes an important
landmark, as we have been advocating for more than three
years now, but also demonstrates the determination of the
international community to recognize that in promoting
development in the vastly changed process of globalization
and rapidly growing interdependence, there is no alternative

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
to a constructive dialogue based on the imperatives of
mutual interest and benefits, shared responsibilities and
genuine interdependence.
We believe that the much larger spirit of partnership
which has been manifested in numerous
intergovernmental forums over the past three years will be
further strengthened and more broadly embraced when
such a dialogue is held in the General Assembly.
Such a dialogue is expected to contribute to the
efforts to identify a number of key elements required to
respond to the challenges and opportunities emanating
from the process of globalization — notably, the trends
towards closer regional cooperation and integration,
growing interdependence, the mutually interdependent link
between peace and prosperity, the linkage between the
imperatives of the economic and social aspects of
promoting sustainable development and the recognition
that partnership for development is among the most
compelling challenges facing the world community.
It is now widely recognized that the trends towards
regional integration, interdependence and globalization,
while positive in themselves, could also at the same time
pose challenges which could have negative effects on
developing countries. It is therefore timely and
appropriate to launch a continued process of dialogue
among all the actors concerned.
In the international economic sphere, for example,
regional integration needs to be built upon the spirit of
mutual interdependence and transparency to prevent any
attempt at establishing inward-looking arrangements,
leading to closed trading blocs that could be misused as
tools for protectionism. Similarly, the growing
interdependence among nations exemplified by the
increasing reliance of developed countries on developing
countries' markets for export growth suggests the need for
dialogue to define the rules of the game on a more
participatory and democratic basis.
We consider the first dialogue at the fifty-second
session of the General Assembly to be a critical and
necessary step to ensure that the process of fulfilling the
commitments to cooperation for development moves
forward steadily. In this respect, we believe that
preparations for the dialogue should be undertaken well
in advance by the President of the General Assembly in
order to lead the first of a series of dialogues to a
successful conclusion.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Considering that process essential, my delegation will
stand ready to actively participate and will look forward to
having a fruitful discussion in the dialogue.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
(b) Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s
Report of the Second Committee (Part III)
(A/52/628/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 9 of part III of its report,
contained in document A/52/628/Add.2.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/188).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
(d) International migration and development,
including the convening of a United Nations
conference on international migration and
development
Report of the Second Committee (Part V)
(A/52/628/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 6 of part V of its report,
contained in document A/52/628/Add.4.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “International migration and development”.

The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/187).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/189).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 97?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 97?

It was so decided.
(c) Population and development
Report of the Second Committee (Part IV)
(A/52/628/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of part IV of its report,
contained in document A/52/628/Add.3.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

10

It was so decided.
(e) Implementation of the outcome of the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II)
Report of the Second Committee (Part VI)
(A/52/628/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 9 of part VI of its
report, contained in document A/52/628/Add.5.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote.

of poverty”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/194).

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/190).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution II,
entitled “Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000”,
which the Second Committee adopted.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (f) of agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
(g) Women in development

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/191).
The President: We shall now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “Follow-up to the United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the future role of
the Commission on Human Settlements”.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution III.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

Report of the Second Committee (Part VIII)
(A/52/628/Add.7)
The President: We turn now to the draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the Second Committee in
paragraph 8 of part VIII of the report. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
resolution, as orally amended by the representative of
Venezuela?

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 52/192).

The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 52/195).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (e) of
agenda item 97?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 97?

It was so decided.
(f)

First United Nations Decade for the Eradication of
Poverty
Report of the Second Committee (Part VII)
(A/52/628/Add.6)

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 10 of part VII of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “First
United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty”. The
Second Committee adopted draft resolution I. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/193).
The President: The Second Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “Role of microcredit in the eradication

It was so decided.
(h) Human resources development
Report of the Second Committee (Part IX)
(A/52/628/Add.8)
The President: We turn now to the draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the Second Committee in
paragraph 7 of part IX of its report.
The draft resolution, is entitled “Developing human
resources for development”. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as
orally amended by the representative of Venezuela?
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 52/196).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 97?

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
It was so decided.
(i)

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
Report of the Second Committee (Part II)
(A/52/629/Add.1)

Cultural development
Report of the Second Committee (Part X)
(A/52/628/Add.9)

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to take note of this report?
It was so decided.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of part X of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/197).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(i) of agenda item 97 and of agenda item 97 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 98
Environment and sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (Parts I and IX)
(A/52/629 and Add.8)
The President: We shall first consider part I of the
report of the Second Committee on agenda item 98,
document A/52/629. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of part I of the report of the
Second Committee on agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
The President: We now turn to the draft decision
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 2 of
part IX of its report, document A/52/629/Add.8.
The draft decision is entitled “Report of the United
Nations Environment Programme”. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to adopt the draft
decision?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(b) Implementation of the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee (Part III)
(A/52/629/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 12 of part III of its
report.
As the Secretariat has been notified that no separate
vote is requested on this draft resolution in the plenary,
may I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft resolution without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/198).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(c) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind
Report of the Second Committee (Part IV)
(A/52/629/Add.3)

The draft decision was adopted.
(a) Implementation of decisions and recommendations
of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development

12

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of part IV of its report.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

international community's commitment to act concertedly
and pragmatically to prevent, mitigate and redress the
devastating effects of this natural phenomenon.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/199).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(c) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(d) International
Reduction

Decade

for

Natural

Disaster

Report of the Second Committee (Part V)
(A/52/629/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of part V of its report,
contained in document A/52/629/Add.4, and on the draft
decision recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 8 of the same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“International cooperation to reduce the impact of the El
Niño phenomenon”, which the Second Committee adopted.
May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/200).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision,
entitled “Reports relating to the International Decade for
Natural Disaster Reduction”.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Ecuador, who wishes to make a statement in explanation of
position.
Mr. Izquierdo (Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation wishes to express its satisfaction
at the adoption of the resolution on international
cooperation to reduce the impact of the El Niño
phenomenon, which chiefly affects the coastal countries of
the Pacific Ocean, since the resolution reflects the

The adoption of this resolution, in the framework of
the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction,
is a timely contribution on the part of the United Nations
that will make it possible to reinforce the coordinated
efforts of States and of the bodies and organizations of
the United Nations system to put together a concerted
international strategy to tackle the negative effects of this
natural phenomenon. In particular, my delegation wishes
to highlight the establishment of the Inter-agency Task
Force, whose work will be especially important in
discharging the mandates that we have established by
adopting this resolution.
At the same time, I wish to thank all delegations for
their valuable cooperation throughout our negotiations
leading to agreement on the text of this resolution. Those
negotiations took place in a climate of partnership and
mutual understanding. We are certain that this cooperation
will continue in the future, and my delegation undertakes
to participate actively in the follow-up to this important
resolution.
Lastly, allow me to pay particular tribute to the
United Nations Development Programme, which has
provided Ecuador with important assistance in redressing
the effects of El Niño, which in recent days has been
causing serious damage in broad areas of Ecuadorian
territory.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(e) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee (Part VI)
(A/52/629/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 6 of part VI of its report,
contained in document A/52/629/Add.5. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

Second Committee in paragraph 10 of part VIII of its
report, contained in document A/52/629/Add.7.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/201).

The Second Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Implementation and follow-up to the outcome of
the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, including the outcome of the nineteenth
special session of the General Assembly for the purpose
of an overall review and appraisal of the implementation
of Agenda 21”.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(e) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(f)

Implementation of the outcome of the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft decision I was adopted.

Report of the Second Committee (Part VII)
(A/52/629/Add.6)
The President: The Assembly will now consider Part
VII of the report of the Second Committee on sub-item (f)
of agenda item 98, entitled “Implementation of the outcome
of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States” (document
A/52/629/Add.6).
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 6 of part VII of its report, contained in document
A/52/629/Add.6.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The President: The Second Committee adopted
draft decision II, entitled “Progress in the implementation
of conventions related to sustainable development”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 98 and of agenda item 98 as
a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 99
Operational activities for development

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/202).
Report of the Second Committee (A/52/630)
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(f) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
(g) Special session for the purpose of an overall review
and appraisal of the implementation of Agenda 21
Report of the Second Committee (Part VIII)
(A/52/629/Add.7)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the

14

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 19 of its report
contained in document A/52/630 and on the draft decision
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 20
of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Operational activities for development of the United
Nations”.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “United Nations Institute for Training and
Research”.

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/203).
The President: The Second Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Southern African Development
Community”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/204).
The President: The Second Committee adopted draft
resolution III, entitled “Economic and technical cooperation
among developing countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 52/205).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision,
entitled “Documents relating to operational activities for
development”.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 99?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 100
Training and research: United Nations Institute for
Training and Research
Report of the Second Committee (A/52/631)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 10 of its report contained
in document A/52/631.

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/206).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 100?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 101
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian
Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/52/632)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 10 of its report contained
in document A/52/632.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Georgia, Grenada, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Paraguay, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Swaziland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan
The draft resolution was adopted by 137 votes to 2,
with 14 abstentions (resolution 52/207).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nepal informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour; the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 101?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 96
Sectoral policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (A/52/627)

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
in document A/52/627 and on the draft decision
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 26
of the same report. The Assembly will then proceed to
consider draft resolution A/52/L.70.
We turn first to the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Second Committee, entitled “Industrial
development cooperation: Second Industrial Development
Decade for Africa”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft resolution, as orally amended by the
representative of Venezuela?
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 52/208).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision,
entitled “Documents relating to sectoral policy questions”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: the Assembly will next consider the
draft resolution contained in document A/52/L.70, entitled
“Business and development”.
I give the floor to the representative of Venezuela to
introduce the draft resolution.
Mr. De Rojas (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/52/L.70. The draft is not new to
the members of this Assembly, particularly those who
took part in the debates in the Second Committee,
because the text before the Assembly, which my country
has the honour to sponsor, is in fact a consensus text that
was discussed and negotiated at length in the Second
Committee under the guidance of Vice-Chairman Adel
Abdellatif. Mr. Abdellatif presented this same text to the
Committee for consideration on the last day of our work,
but at that time the Committee decided not to take action
on it. That is why today I have the honour to introduce
the same text to the plenary of the General Assembly for
consideration.

Draft resolution (A/52/L.70)
The President: The Assembly will first take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 25 of its report contained

16

I should like once again to express, through you,
Mr. President, my thanks for the excellent work done by
Mr. Abdellatif in arriving at this consensus text. As this
will be the last statement that I will be making in plenary,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
I should also like to thank the other Vice-Chairman,
Mr. Glanzer, for the work that he, too, accomplished in the
negotiations on many of the draft resolutions that we have
adopted this afternoon. I should also like to thank the
Rapporteur, Mr. Chung, and all the facilitators who worked
so hard during discussions and negotiations on the various
resolutions.
I should also like in particular to thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation, which provided decisive help in
reaching the agreements that we have confirmed here this
afternoon. I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your own mediation on our behalf in recent days, in
particular yesterday. This encouraged us and enabled us to
get where we are today. Finally, I should like to thank all
the delegations that worked so hard in a spirit of great
cooperation, enabling us to achieve these results.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/52/L.70.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/210).
The President: We will now turn to the five draft
decisions recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 21 of its report.
Draft decision I is entitled “Graduation from the list
of least developed countries”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision I?
The draft decision was adopted.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?

The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Revision of the General Regulations of the World Food
Programme”.

Draft resolution A/52/L.70 was adopted (resolution
52/209).

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision II?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 96?

Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: Draft decision III is entitled “Report
of the Council of the United Nations University”.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Second Committee (A/52/625)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 20 of its report and on five
draft decisions recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 21 of the same report.

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision III?
Draft decision III was adopted.
The President: Draft decision IV is entitled
“Documents relating to the report of the Economic and
Social Council”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision IV?
Draft decision IV was adopted.

I shall put the recommendations of the Second
Committee to the Assembly one by one. After all the
decisions have been taken, representatives will again have
the opportunity to explain their votes or positions.

The President: Draft decision V is entitled
“Biennial programme of work of the Second Committee
for 1998-1999”.

We turn first to the draft resolution entitled “Report of
the Committee on Development Planning”.

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision V?

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Draft decision V was adopted.
The President: In accordance with the decision taken
at the beginning of this meeting, I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mrs. Lucas (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to take the floor on behalf of
the European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union — Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland,
Romania and Slovakia — and the associated country
Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country, member of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.
The General Assembly has just adopted the final
report of the Second Committee. We wish to take this
opportunity to make an evaluation, at the level of the
General Assembly, of the proceedings of the Second
Committee, since the European Union did not speak at the
close of those proceedings.
The European Union is of the opinion that we can
only address macroeconomic and development questions
effectively through consensus. We are pleased that a
compromise was finally found to allow us to adopt almost
all reports by consensus.
We would, however, like to flag our concerns with
regard to the latest developments within the Second
Committee, which was obliged to vote on a certain number
of resolutions other than those for which a vote is normally
required. We consider that it should have been possible to
reach compromises within the Committee. We are
particularly grateful for the efforts of the Bureau of the
Second Committee, as well as those of the delegation of the
Russian Federation and the President of the General
Assembly, to try to reach consensus on all points.
Allow me also to make some brief remarks regarding
the organization of the work of the Second Committee.
The European Union welcomes the organization by the
Chairman of the Second Committee, in accordance with
resolution A/50/227, of the round tables and panel
discussions in which first-rank guests took part, in
particular those which brought together representatives from
the Second and Third Committees. Holding such events as
close as possible to the consideration of the relevant point
should allow delegations to draw the greatest possible
benefit. It would be worth reflecting on the best way of

18

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
combining these round tables with the more traditional
debates in our Committee. The European Union would
like to stress the importance which it attaches to
maintaining the vocation of the General Assembly as the
principal forum for the discussion of major topical
questions. In this respect, we reaffirm our support for the
proposals of the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening
the importance of the work of the General Assembly.
The European Union would like to insist on the need
to maintain self-discipline in the work of the Second
Committee in order to guarantee that it be finished within
the necessary time limits. The work of the Second
Committee cannot take place without a firmer approach
with regard to the organization and management of the
progress of our sessions. The experience of the past two
years has in fact clearly shown in this regard how
important it is that member States and the Bureau respect
deadlines for the submission of draft resolutions. The
European Union welcomes the chance that we have had
to discuss with our partners the aims which we hope to
achieve through various resolutions before entering into
a paragraph-by-paragraph reading. We hope that a similar
approach can be adopted systematically for an increasing
number of resolutions in the coming years, including
before the formal of submission of draft resolutions or
even before the official start of the work of the
Committees.
The European Union considers it important not to
lose sight of the substance and added value of the
different resolutions submitted by the Second Committee,
for on this hangs to a large extent the credibility of the
United Nations in the economic, social and related areas.
The possibilities offered by combining different
resolutions and increasing the number of so-called
omnibus resolutions should be further explored. We regret
the recent tendency to introduce separate resolutions on
subjects that require an integrated and overall approach.
It is essential that delegations have sufficient time after
the debates to consider the various draft resolutions
adequately. In this context, we applaud the initiative taken
by the Group of 77 to circulate, in advance, tables giving
details of all forthcoming informal meetings. It is
important that we continue to rationalize the work of the
Second Committee, including through a regular
examination of the periodicity of agenda points.
In conclusion, the European Union would like to
thank all delegations for their cooperation. Our thanks go
also to all the members of the Bureau of the Second

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Committee, as well as to the facilitators and members of
the Secretariat for their support.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of the
chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council
allocated to the Second Committee?
It was so decided.

77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Second Committee before it.
Statement by the President
The President: From this podium, I would like to
commend the Second Committee for the very important
work it has undertaken at this and at previous sessions,
not to mention under my chairmanship of the Second
Committee exactly 10 years ago.
I think that the Committee at this session has made
a very remarkable contribution to the process of
consensus-making, which is a feature of this session of
the General Assembly. Thanks to cooperation among
many delegations — the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation was mentioned
a few times — the Group of 77 and the United States
delegation, as well as to the entire membership, a
consensus was reached on very important resolutions
which the General Assembly has just adopted. This is a
very important contribution to the overall activities of the
General Assembly, especially on important issues
pertaining to economic development.
I should also like to take this opportunity to
commend Ambassador Rojas for his chairmanship of the
Second Committee. I have maintained almost daily
contact with him on various issues and his activity has
resulted in today's adoption of all the resolutions and
decisions of the Second Committee.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

19
