Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting with deep concern the unsatisfactory social
situation in many parts of the world,
Convinced that the activities of the United Nations
in the social field should, above all, be concentrated
on measures aimed at accelerated economic and social
development, particularly of developing countries,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council a_nd
the Social Commission, when considering the role which
the United Nations should play in the social field, to
bear in mind, inter alia, the following general principles:
(a) The responsibility of the Council, as set forth
in Articles 55 and 58 of the Charter of the United
Nations:
(i) To promote higher standards of living;
(ii) To promote full employment and conditions of
economic and social progress and development ;
(iii) To promote solutions of international economic,
social, health and related problems;
(iv) To promote international cultural and educational co-operation;
( v) To make recommendations for the co-ordination
of the policies and activities of the specialized
agencies;
( b) The necessity to direct the main efforts of ~he
United Nations in the social field towards supporting
and strengthening independent social and economic
development in the developing cou_ntries, with fu_ll
respect for their permanent sovereignty over their
natural resources, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962;
( c) The interrelated character of economic and social
factors and the basic requirement that economic and
social development should go together with a view to
promoting better standa_rds of life. in_ large: freedom.
the importance of planning for achieving this end and
the role of Governments in promoting balanced and
sound economic and social development ;
( d) The necessity for mobilizing national resources
and encouraging creative initiatives of all peoples for
the achievement of social progress ;
( e) The significance of adequate structural social
and economic changes for the achievement of social
progress;
(f) The necessity for the widest possible utili~ation of the experience of the developed and developing
countries with varying economic and social systems;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the specialized agencies and in the light of relevant
discussions and decisions of the Social Commission, the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, to prepare, for submission by the Council to
the Assembly at its twenty-first session, a draft longrange social programme of the United Nations and a
report on the implementation of Assembly resolution
1916 (XVIII);
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
co-operation with the specialized agencies, to submit
proposals in respect of vital social problems on which
the General Assembly might appropriately take action
and make recommendations in accordance with Article
13 of the Charter ;
4. Decides to consider at its twenty-first session the
possibility and advisability of preparing a declaration
on social development-based on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the specialized

39

agencies and on the resolutions o~ the Ge~eral ~ssembly and the Economic and Social . Co~ncil-whi~h
would lay down broad lines for the obJe~ti~es o_f social
development and for the means of achieving it, an~,
for this purpose, requests the Secreta_ry-General, . in
co-operation with the specialized agencies, to provide
the relevant documentation, data and any other appropriat<c information.
1390th plenary meeting.
7 December 1965.
2036 (XX). Housing, building and planning in the
United Nations Development Decade
The General Assemblv,
Noting that in count;ies throughout the world inadequate housing is one of the most urgent problems
necessitating immediate solution.
Recognizing that the housing problem can be successfully solved only by mobilizing the efforts and resources
of the nations,
Recognizing further that social reforms aimed at accelerating social and economic development ha_ve an
important part to play in the successful solution of
the housing problem.
1. Recommends that :VIemher States should:
(a) Assume a major role in the solution _of the
housing problem in every country and, to this e!ld,
make provision in their national development plannmg
for the necessary activities and resources ;
( b) Establish for this purpose central and other
organizations or bodies in charge of housing and town
and country planning and empowered with the necessary authority ;
( c) Take all necessary measures to develop a bujlding materia~ industry utilizing local raw m~tenals
to the maximum. and to promote or establish, as
appropriate, building design and construction organizations which will improve efficiency, lower costs and
establish designs and standards that are appropriate
to the relevant cultural. social and economic requirements;
( d) Prepare and implement programmes for training
architects, construction engineers and workers in sufficient numbers to carry out national development
programmes ;
( e) Bring about conditions in the spheres of land
ownership and land use by basic reforms, if such conditions have not already been achieved, that will ensure
a speedy and rational solution of housing and industrial
construction problems, harmonious town and rural
development, the elimination of speculation in plots of
land and a more equitable use of housing resources in
the interests of the whole population:
2. Recommends that international assistance to developing countries in the field of housing, building and
planning, whether multilateral or bilateral, should be
directed towards the financing of housing, the establishment of a national or. if necessary. State building
materials and components industry and of national or,
if necessary, State building design, construction and
financing organizations. the training of national cadres
of architects and construction engineers and workers,
the establishment of national bodies in charge of
housing construction and town building. and the
planning and execution of emergency programmes in
urban and rural areas and pilot projects contributing
to the earliest possible solution of the housing problem;

40

General AHembly-Twentieth Se88ion

3. Suggests that the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the executive secretaries of the regional
economic commissions, prepare biennial progress reports
on the application of the present resolution;
4. Invites the Committee on Housing, Building and
Planning to work out, on the basis of those reports,
additional practical and effective measures for the
implementation of the above recommendations and the
solution of the housing problem.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2037 (XX). Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect
and Understanding between Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling that under the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations the peoples have declared themselves
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war,
Recalling further that in the Charter the United
Nations has affirmed its faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and nations,
Reaffirming the principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 9 the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 10 the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 General Assembly resolution 110 (II) of 3 November 1947
condemning all forms of propaganda designed or likely
to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace, the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 12 and General
Assembly resolution 1572 (XV) of 18 December 1960,
which have a particular bearing upon the upbringing
of young people in a spirit of peace, mutual respect
and understanding among peoples,
Recalling that the purpose of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is to
contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among nations through education, science and
culture, and recognizing the role and contributions
of that organization towards the education of young
people in the spirit of international understanding, cooperation and peace,
Taking into consideration the fact that in the conflagrations which have afflicted mankind it is the
young people who have had to suffer most and who
have had the greatest number of victims,
Convinced that young people wish to have an assured
future and that peace, freedom and justice are among
the chief guarantees that their desire for happiness will
be fulfilled,
Bearing in mind the important part being played by
y01111g people in every field of human endeavour and
the fact that they are destined to guide the fortunes
of mankind,
Bearing in mind furthermore that, in this age of
great scientific, technological and cultural achievements,
the energies, enthusiasm and creative abilities of the
young should be devoted to the material and spiritual
1dvancement of all peoples,
9 Resolution 217 A (III) of to December 1948.
1 0 Resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.
11 Resolution 1904 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963.
12 Resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959.

Convinced that the young should know, respect and
develop the cultural heritage of their own country and
that of all mankind,
Convinced furthermore that the education of the
young and exchanges of young people and of ideas
in a spirit of peace, mutual respect and understanding
between peoples can help to improve international
relations and to strengthen peace and security,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples and calls upon Governments, non-governmental organizations and youth
movements to recognize the principles set forth therein
and to ensure their observance by means of appropriate
measures:
Principle I
Young people shall be brought up in the spirit of
peace, jm;tice, freedom, mutual respect and understanding in order to promote equal rights for all human
heings and all nations, economic and social progress.
disarmament and the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Principle II
All means of education. including as of major importance the guid,mce given by parents or family.
instruction and information intended for the young
should foster among them the ideals of peace, humanity,
liberty and international solidarity and all other ideals
which help to bring peoples closer together. and acquaint them with the role entrusted to the United
Nations as a means of preserving and maintaining
peace and promoting international understanding and
co-operation.
Principle I II
Young people shall be brought up in the knowledge
of the dignity and equality of all men, without distinction as to race, colour, ethnic origins or beliefs, and
in respect for fundamental human rights and for the
right of peoples to self-determination.
Principle IV
Exchanges. travel, tourism, meetings, the study of
foreign languages. the twinning of towns and universities without discrimination and similar activities
should be encouraged and facilitated among young
people of all countries in order to bring them together
in educational, cultural and sporting activities in the
spirit of this Declaration.
Principle V
National and international associations of young people should be encouraged to promote the purposes of
the United Nations, particularly international peace and
security, friendly relations among nations based on respect for the equal sovereignty of States, the final
abolition of colonialism and of racial discrimination and
other violations of human rights.
Youth organizations in accordance with this Declaration should take all appropriate measures within
their respective fields of activity in order to make their
contribution without any discrimination to the work
of educating the young generation in accordance with
these ideals.
Such organizations. in conformity with the principle
of freedom of association. should promote the free
exchange of ideas in the spirit of the principles of this
