A /67/PV.92

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

92nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 24 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Agenda item 6 (continued)
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly
Election of one Vice-President of the
General Assembly for the sixty-eighth session
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 6 to proceed
to the election of one Vice-President of the General
Assembly for the sixty-eighth session, in accordance
with rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
Members will recall that, at its 88th plenary
meeting, on 14 June 2013, the Assembly elected 21
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the sixtyeighth session.
In a letter dated 8 July 2013, I have been informed
by the Chair of the Asia-Pacific Group that the AsiaPacific States have endorsed Timor-Leste to fill the
vacancy following the resignation of Uzbekistan as a
Vice-President of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session.
In accordance with paragraph 16 of decision 34/401,
the election of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly by
secret ballot will be dispensed with when the number

of candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled. We shall proceed accordingly.
Since there is only one candidate for the one seat
to be filled by the Asia-Pacific States, I declare TimorLeste elected Vice-President of the Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session. I congratulate Timor-Leste on its
election.
I wish to remind members that, following
the election of the Chairpersons of the six Main
Committees, at a later date, the General Committee of
the General Assembly for the sixty-eighth session will
then be fully constituted in accordance with rule 38 of
the rules of procedure.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 6.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/67/L.75)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 14, jointly
with agenda item 9, entitled “Report of the Economic
and Social Council”, at its 28th plenary meeting, on
22 October 2012.
Members will also recall that, under agenda
item 14, the Assembly adopted resolution 67/18 at

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-40495 (E)

*1340495*

A/67/PV.92

its 43rd plenary meeting, on 28 November 2012, and
resolution 67/250 at its 65th plenary meeting, on
21 February 2013, and marked the global launch of
the International Year of Quinoa at its 64th plenary
meeting, on 20 February 2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Singapore to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.75.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): I have the privilege to
introduce, under agenda item 14, draft resolution
A/67/L.75, entitled “Sanitation for All”, which
designates 19 November as World Toilet Day in the
context of “Sanitation for All”.
I am sure that there will be laughter among the
press and the public when it is reported that the United
Nations is declaring a World Toilet Day, initiated by
Singapore, no less. But the amusement at our expense
is well worth it if, after putting a lid on their jokes, the
world’s media go on to report, and the general public
goes on to learn, that 2.5 billion people still do not have
proper sanitation, that 1.1 billion people still defecate
in the open, and that ending open defecation will lead
to a 35 per cent reduction in diarrhoea, which results in
more than 750,000 deaths of children under 5 years of
age every year — that is to say, in the three minutes it
takes me to deliver this statement, four children under
five years of age will die of diarrhoea.
The media and the public will learn that, without
safe and private toilets, women and girls face the threat
of violence when they go out of their homes to relieve
themselves and that girls are reluctant to attend school
if there are no proper toilet facilities. They will also
learn that every dollar spent on sanitation brings $5.50
in return by keeping people healthy and productive,
that poor sanitation costs countries 0.5 to 7 per cent
of their gross domestic product, and that the economic
gains globally from investing in sanitation amount to
about $260 billion per year.
Their laughter is therefore welcome, especially if
they recognize the prevailing and unhealthy taboo that
prevents an open and serious discussion of the problems
of sanitation and toilets globally. We first need to seize
the world’s attention, through humour and a catchy
phrase like World Toilet Day, before we can inform and
educate.
Small States like Singapore know that if you want
to change the world today, instead of many years or
decades later, you have to start small. You have to find
a pivotal issue, such as toilets, by focusing all your
2

attention and efforts on which you can achieve many
disproportionate and positive outcomes in terms of
health, gender equality, economic prosperity and the
personal dignity of millions of the world’s poorest
people. In that regard, we see toilets as the gateway to the
broader challenge of sanitation in all its upstream and
downstream aspects. That is why the draft resolution
encourages all Member States and stakeholders to
approach the sanitation issue in a much broader context
and to encompass all its aspects. That is also in line
with the Secretary-General’s appeal to Member States
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, as well
as the Deputy Secretary-General’s recent Call to Action
on Sanitation.
I would like to take a moment to explain how
Singapore became involved with toilets and sanitation.
It was largely due to a Singaporean social entrepreneur,
Mr. Jack Sim, the founder of the World Toilet
Organization. In 2001, Mr. Sim, also proudly know as
“Mr. Toilet”, established the World Toilet Organization
to provide a global network for toilet associations
and others involved in the toilet and sanitation sector.
It now has 534 members from 86 countries. At the
non-governmental level, World Toilet Day is already
celebrated in many countries.
Conceptually, Mr. Sim’s solutions to the toilet
problem appeal to us. Among other things, he pioneered
the “SaniShop”, a self-sustaining, market-based
initiative that empowers local communities to build and
sell single-pit latrines to their community members. It
is that kind of sustainable, market-based and bottomof-the-pyramid approach to solving global development
challenges that Singapore is happy to advocate at the
intergovernmental level.
Through the simple draft resolution before the
General Assembly today, we will have an international
platform to shine a spotlight, collaborate on special
events and develop further synergies on the issues
of toilets and sanitation. We hope that the initiative
to commemorate World Toilet Day in the context of
“Sanitation for All” on 19 November will be taken up
at the local, national, regional and international levels
by all stakeholders in a manner appropriate to their
priorities, needs and particular circumstances.
I would like to thank all Member States for their
constructive participation and support during the open
and transparent consultations. Their many proposals,
suggestions and interventions made the draft resolution
more robust and helped to accommodate the interests
13-40495

A/67/PV.92

of different participants. We are deeply grateful to the
120 sponsors of the draft resolution, many of whom
signed on early, trusting in Singapore’s stewardship
of the negotiations. The cross-regional sponsorship
underscores the universal recognition of the need
to act on the pressing global challenge of toilets and
sanitation. In that spirit, the sponsors respectfully call
on all Member States to support the draft resolution.
Before I conclude, I would like to make an
oral correction to paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/67/L.75, which should read as “Decides to designate
19 November as World Toilet Day in the context of
Sanitation for All”. I would like to reassure Member
States that that is simply a return to the exact phrasing
that was agreed upon during the negotiations on the
draft resolution. I apologize for the error made in the
production of the document. I also apologize for the
errors in the translations of the draft resolution. We are
working with the Secretariat to correct them.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.75, entitled
“Sanitation for All”, as orally corrected.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.75: Barbados,
Belgium, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Guyana,
Iceland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Senegal,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Viet Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.75, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/67/L.75, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 67/291).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

Ms. Kim (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join today’s consensus on the
resolution on World Toilet Day in the context of
“Sanitation for All” (resolution 67/291). We would like
to thank Singapore in particular for sponsoring the
resolution and contributing to better awareness and
action.
Water is fundamental to the world’s development
goals, including health, economic growth, food
security, gender equality and conflict mitigation.
We recognize that inadequate and improper
sanitation undermines public health, contributes to the
spread of preventable diseases and leaves marginalized
populations more vulnerable. The United States
strongly supports the goal of universal access to safe
drinking water and sanitation.
As we have said before, Governments should seek to
expand access, especially for underserved populations.
Governments should develop and implement national
policies and strategies where needed and commit
sufficient resources so that they will be able to advance
towards that goal as quickly as possible.
We read the resolution’s references to the right to
safe drinking water and sanitation in accordance with
our 20 September 2010 statement at the Human Rights
Council in Geneva and our 27 July 2011 statement in
New York before the General Assembly.
The United States hopes that this resolution will
also lead Governments to take concrete action to reduce
the number of people without sustainable access to safe
drinking water and basic sanitation, and we again thank
Singapore for its leadership on this issue.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brunei
Darussalam.
Mr. Ismail (Brunei Darussalam): I have the honour
to make some brief remarks on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
ASEAN is committed to enhancing the well-being
and livelihood of its peoples, and therefore welcomes
the adoption of resolution 67/291. Its adoption by
consensus, as well as the large number of sponsors it
enjoyes, underscores both the widespread recognition
that the lack of sanitation is a major concern for the

13-404953

A/67/PV.92

global community and the importance of providing
access to basic sanitation services.
Accordingly, it is timely for the United Nations
to designate 19 November as World Toilet Day in the
context of “Sanitation for All”. We hope that World
Toilet Day will contribute to promoting even greater
awareness of the need for clean water and sanitation
and to accelerating progress on the sanitation target
contained in the Millennium Development Goals. By
observing this international day, the global community
can focus its efforts on hygiene promotion, the provision
of basic sanitation services, sewerage and wastewater
treatment and redouble efforts to improve the plight of
the 2.5 billion people in developing countries who still
lack access to improved sanitation facilities.
ASEAN is committed to ensuring that its cities
and urban areas are environmentally sustainable,
while meeting the social and economic needs of its
peoples. That includes intensifying individual and
collective efforts to improve the availability and
quality of sanitation within ASEAN, as well as sharing
experiences, expertise and technology on waste and
water management. While recognizing that clean
water, hygiene, sanitation and waste management have
implications for infectious diseases, ASEAN continues
to emphasize the need to strengthen regional capacities
to monitor and address the potential of the spread of
communicable and infectious diseases in the world.
In that regard, we appreciate the ongoing work
of the United Nations and other intergovernmental
organizations to provide basic sanitation to millions
around the world. We hope that the sanitation gap
will be narrowed in order to realize the goals of the
campaign “Sustainable Sanitation: the five-year drive
to 2015”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan): Allow me to deliver this
statement on behalf of Finland, Hungary, Thailand and
Tajikistan, the four countries of the Steering Committee
of the Group of Friends of Water.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Permanent Mission of Singapore for introducing the
topical resolution on “Sanitation for All” (resolution
67/291). The question at hand is very important. As
the Millennium Development Goals Report 2013 shows,
accelerated progress and bolder action are needed
in the area of sanitation. The question is even more
4

timely given the ongoing discussions on the sustainable
development goals and the post-2015 development
agenda. The Steering Committee hopes that the issue of
water, with its many aspects, will be given the priority
and importance it deserves in the future development
agenda.
The Steering Committee of the Group of Friends
of Water has organized a number of side events in
preparation for and as a follow-up to the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development. Throughout
those discussions, some messages were clear: access to
safe drinking water and to sanitation are inseparable;
access to safe drinking water and sanitation is a human
right; and integrated and efficient water management
and sanitation is a catalyst for a more sustainable
economy.
We must work to end the practice of open defecation
worldwide. If water is life, then sanitation is dignity.
In many countries, the costs of inadequate sanitation
for public health and national economies account for
several percentage points of loss of gross domestic
product. Investments in sanitation and hygiene bring
returns in the areas of health, productivity, education,
jobs and tourism. Civil society and the private sector
are important partners in the promotion of smart and
pro-poor solutions.
The water agenda needs to be broad and go beyond
the Millennium Development Goals. Not only do we need
to secure water, sanitation and hygiene for everyone,
but we also need to address questions on water resource
management, water quality, wastewater, resource
efficiency, disaster risk reduction and preparedness
for water-related disasters, and the protection of water
resources and water-related ecosystems.
The countries members of the Steering Committee
are organizing international events in order to discuss
water and sanitation matters. The second Asia-Pacific
Water Summit was held in Chiang Mai, Thailand, on
19 and 20 May this year; the High-level International
Conference on Water Cooperation will be held on
22 August, in Dushanbe; and the Budapest Water
Summit will be held in Budapest from 8 to 11 October.
We will be sharing their outcomes with Member States.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Poulsen (European Union): The European
Union and its member States would like to reaffirm
their commitment to the global comprehensive agenda
13-40495

A/67/PV.92

on water and sanitation priority, in particular in our
development cooperation. Indeed, water and sanitation
are at the core of the three dimensions of sustainable
development and therefore a crucial issue to tackle in
order to achieve sustainable development as well as
poverty eradication in a comprehensive manner.
This agenda is complex and has many dimensions,
all of them equally important, from access to safe
drinking water, sanitation and hygiene for all, which
is required for providing basic living standards and
well-being, to the sustainable management of our water
resources, which is also a driver for inclusive and
sustainable growth.
Another element that we consider important for the
overarching framework for post-2015 is equity, equality
and justice. The European Union and its member States
would also like to reiterate their position concerning the
proclamation of international days, years and decades,
which must be consistent with the international
guidelines we have collectively agreed in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1980/67 and reaffirmed twice
in General Assembly resolutions 53/199 and 61/185.
While we will join the consensus today, we will
continue to actively defend and respect the Economic
and Social Council guidelines on future proclamations
and give priority to the efficiency and cost-effectiveness
of the work of the General Assembly, in support of its
revitalization.
Finally, as noted by the representative of Singapore,
the text that we have adopted today needs to be corrected
to fully reflect the text agreed in the negotiations. We
also trust that all versions in other languages will also
be brought into line with the corrected English text.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 120
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/311)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.74)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.74.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.74,

on multilingualism. Introduced for the first time in
1995, the resolution on multilingualism was originally
launched at the initiative of the group of francophone
countries before gradually becoming the concern of a
majority of delegations regardless of their linguistic
or regional group. Reviewed every two years, the
draft resolution reaches completion after a six-month
process that has gradually enabled multilingualism to
be strengthened within the Organization.
(spoke in English)
I would like to commend the hard work and
commitment of all the delegations involved in the
negotiations, working in a very positive spirit of
openness and flexibility, and to express my sincere
appreciation to those who agreed to sponsor the text we
have before us today. I would also like to acknowledge
the role of the Coordinator for Multilingualism, as
well as the collaboration and decisive contribution to
the process of the Secretariat, through the Department
of Public Information and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.
(spoke in French)
The United Nations was created in response to
the need to ensure lasting peace, brotherhood and
cooperation. In order to achieve that goal, equality
among Members was established as a fundamental
principle, and multilingualism naturally emerged as an
essential factor in the implementation of that principle.
Based on the 2012 report of the Secretary-General on
multilingualism (A/67/311) and, to a certain extent, on
the work of the Committee on Information, this year
the draft resolution has made some genuine progress.
Regarding its form, we note and welcome its
division into paragraphs following clearly identified
chapter heads that display to perfection the diverse
aspects covered. That diversity is very much related
to a concern for complementarity, because the draft
resolution, depending on the case, reaffirms, strengthens
or complements the provisions for the various areas of
the work of the United Nations, including information
centres, conference services and the documentation and
management of human resources and language service
staff training.
In its essence, the draft resolution emphasizes
the fundamentals — parity between the six official
languages and the importance of equitable treatment in
order to guarantee that all Member States can express
themselves and ensure that their views are promoted

13-404955

A/67/PV.92

in a language that suits them. Among other essential
elements, it also stresses the importance of respecting
the timely distribution of official United Nations
documents in the six official languages, as well as the
crucial role of multilingual communication through
the United Nations information centres and within its
peacekeeping operations.

Inspection Unit on multilingualism in United Nations
entities, contained in document JIU/REP/2011/4, which
noted the absence of a road map for multilingualism at
the system-wide level. In addition, on issues of human
resources the text continues to encourage multilingual
diversity in recruitment and the importance of ensuring
continuing training of staff in the official languages.

The importance of parity is reaffirmed in taking
into consideration the evolution of the means of
communication that the United Nations makes available,
particularly Internet sites and social networks. In
that regard, the text of the draft resolution requests
that the Secretary-General assess its implementation
thoroughly in his next report on multilingualism, for
non-official languages as well as the official ones.
In this way the draft resolution takes note of the
efforts that the Organization is making with regard
to other languages, in accordance with its concern for
facilitating information-sharing with local populations
and adapting to the evolution of the multilateral context.

(spoke in English)

(spoke in Spanish)
Another point that should be emphasized and that
is highlighted in the text is the celebration of language
days. With that initiative, adopted in 2010, the United
Nations symbolically dedicates one day to each of the
six official languages in order to raise the international
community’s awareness of their history, culture and use
and, in so doing, to promote multilingualism and cultural
diversity. Thus, the French language is celebrated on
20 March, International Francophonie Day; Chinese is
celebrated on 19 April; English on 23 April, William
Shakespeare’s birthday; Russian on 6 June, the day on
which the anniversary of the birth of the great Russian
poet Alexander Pushkin is commemorated; Spanish on
12 October, the customary day for celebrating Hispanic
traditions; and Arabic on 8 December, the date in 1973
on which the General Assembly designated Arabic the
sixth official language (see resolution 3191 (XXVIII)).
While welcoming the celebration of these days, the
draft resolution also attaches importance to the role of
associations and of cooperation with other international
organizations, institutions and Member States in
achieving the goals that have been set.
(spoke in French)
The draft resolution also encourages the SecretaryGeneral to make further efforts, with the agreement of the
heads of the Secretariat, to achieve a coherent approach
system-wide, with reference to the report of the Joint

6

In the area of language services, during the
negotiations, delegations did not fail to express concern
about the working conditions of the interpreters and
translators in the Albano building. They are indeed
essential to the functioning of multilingualism, and
I commend their hard work. However, given the
constructive dialogue that has been initiated between
the language staff and the Department of Management,
for the time being the delegations have agreed not to
include recommendations on the issue in the draft
resolution, in hopes that sustainable solutions for
improving the working conditions will be found.
(spoke in French)
If I had to sum up its content, I would say that
draft resolution A/67/L.74 reaffirms the principles of
multilingualism at the United Nations, commends the
progress achieved, indicates the challenges to be met
and encourages the efforts that must be made to address
them. Multilingualism cannot be effective without
the contribution of every partner. The Secretariat,
Member States, institutions and entities, all of us have
a responsibility we must take, and I remain convinced
that today the General Assembly will confirm its
commitment by adopting by consensus, as is its
tradition, the text that I have the honour to submit for
its consideration.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.74, entitled
“Multilingualism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
on the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/67/L.74: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Chad, Croatia, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,

13-40495

A/67/PV.92

Hungary, India, Kazakhstan, Libya, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova,
Rwanda, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.74?
Draft resolution A/67/L.74 was adopted (resolution
67/292).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/67/L.59/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly considered, in a joint debate,
agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda
item 13, at its 25th, 26th and 28th plenary meetings, on
17 and 22 October 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Fiji to
introduce draft resolution A/67/L.59/Rev.1.
Mr. Navoti (Fiji): I have the honour to introduce,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the draft
resolution on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa, as contained in document A/67/L.59/Rev.1,
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 63. The Group of 77
and China would like to thank all delegations for their
constructive contribution to this draft resolution. The
Group also conveys its appreciation to member States
that have sponsored the draft.
At the outset, we commend the African countries,
the African Union and subregional organizations on the
progress they continue to make in conflict prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. While recognizing that the primary
responsibility for peace, security and development in
Africa lies with the African countries, we stress the

need for support from the United Nations system and
partners in order to harness Africa’s vast opportunities
and effectively address its challenges with a view to
making further progress towards the goals of a conflictfree Africa and achieving sustainable development. In
that regard, particular attention needs to be paid to
addressing the challenges of eradicating poverty and
unemployment, especially among the youth.
We welcome African-led initiatives to strengthen
political, economic and cooperative Governments, such
as the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance and the African Peer Review Mechanism.
We call upon the United Nations system and Member
States to assist African countries and regional and
subregional organizations, upon their request, in their
ongoing efforts to promote constitutional order and
the rule of law, enhance good governance, continue to
fight against impunity and in the holding of free, fair,
inclusive and transparent elections.
We further call on the United Nations system to invite
Member States to assist African countries emerging
from conflict, upon their request, as appropriate, in their
efforts to build national capacities, including through
national security sector reform strategies, the delivery
of basic public services, providing for the safe return
of internally displaced persons and refugees, and the
launching of income-generating activities, particularly
for young people and women.
We recognize the need for African countries
to make continued efforts to create an enabling
environments for inclusive and sustained economic
growth and development, and for the international
community to continue efforts to increase the flow
of new and additional resources for financing for
development from all sources — public and private,
domestic and foreign — to support the development
efforts of African countries.
Finally, we call upon the United Nations system and
Member States and bilateral and multilateral partners
to deliver expeditiously on their commitment to ensure
the full and speedy implementation of the provisions
of the Political Declaration on Africa’s development
needs.
I have been informed that there is a need for an oral
correction on the draft as submitted. In that respect, I
call attention to paragraph 24 of the draft resolution, as
contained in document A/67/L.59/Rev.1. In the second
line of that paragraph, the comma appearing after the

13-404957

A/67/PV.92

word “request” should be removed so that phrase reads
“upon the request as appropriate”.
On that note, the Group of 77 and China look
forward to the adoption of the draft resolution, as orally
corrected, by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/67/L.59/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”, as orally corrected.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the sponsors listed on the
draft document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/67/L.59/Rev.1: Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,

8

Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the United States
of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.59/
Rev.1, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/67/L.59/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 67/293).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the consideration of draft resolution
A/67/L.57/Rev.1, submitted under sub-item (a)
of agenda item 63, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, is postponed for one week
in order to allow for some further consultations to be
conducted on the proposal.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

13-40495
