A/56/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

105th plenary meeting
Thursday, 27 June 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Shobokshi
(Saudi Arabia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski, President of the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly
The Acting President: Before we take up the
items on our agenda for this morning, it is my sad duty
to inform members of the Assembly of the death on
Thursday, 20 June 2002, of a former President of the
General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Stanislaw
Trepczynski of Poland.
Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski had a long and
distinguished career as a noted diplomat of his country,
having served in various capacities, including as its
Ambassador and as its Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
As President of the twenty-seventh session of the
General Assembly, Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski played a
prominent role in this Organization and made a major
contribution towards the achievement of the objectives
set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and to the people of Poland and to the bereaved family
of Mr. Trepczynski.

(Republic of Korea)

I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Stańcyzk (Poland): On behalf of the
delegation of the Republic of Poland and of the
bereaved family of the President of the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski, I wish to extend our warm
gratitude to this body for the fitting tribute it has just
paid to its former President, a prominent Polish
diplomat. The nineteenth of September this year will
mark the thirtieth anniversary of his election to the
high office of Assembly President. Alas, he did not live
long enough to observe the occasion.
Stanislaw Trepczynski represented the generation
in Poland which had gone through the ordeal of the
Second World War and the tribulations of post-war
reconstruction in the aftermath of the post-Yalta order.
Throughout his life, he was a person of uncommon
qualities. In many respects, he was ahead of his time.
Raised and educated in the multi-ethnic and
multinational environment of Poland's second largest
city of Lodz, he always preached and practised
tolerance in an intolerant world. His basic professional
maxim was to promote dialogue and seek agreement on
contentious issues.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-44548 (E)

*0244548*

A/56/PV.105

In his capacities as President of the General
Assembly, Poland's Deputy Foreign Minister,
Ambassador to Rome and, subsequently, President of
the Polish National Committee for the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Stanislaw Trepczynski
made an outstanding contribution to international
cooperation and to better understanding among nations
in a world of grim realities. Following his retirement,
he never abandoned his active involvement in United
Nations affairs. He enthusiastically joined the periodic
meetings of former Presidents of the General Assembly
until a disabling illness took its terrible toll. Indeed, he
firmly believed that the experience of the Assembly's
past and future Presidents could make a long-term and
sustainable contribution to improving and streamlining
the functioning and effectiveness of this principal
organ of the United Nations.
Stanislaw Trepczynski will no longer be able to
join fellow Presidents to call for a better and stronger
United Nations. His professional legacy in defence of
this Organization, however, will last and remain for
posterity. The eminent French author Jean Cocteau
once said that “time is a system of folds which only
death can unfold”. President Trepczynski’s untimely
death unfolded a special fold in the annals of his
national and international civil service.
Once again, I wish to thank the Assembly for its
dignified gesture in commemorating its former
colleague and a devout friend of the United Nations.
Earthquake in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The Acting President: Next, I should like, on
behalf of all the members of the General Assembly, to
extend our deepest sympathy to the Government and to
the people of the Islamic Republic of Iran for the tragic
loss of life and extensive material damage that have
resulted from a recent earthquake.
May I also express the hope that the international
community will show its solidarity and respond
promptly and generously to any request for help.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/56/780/Add.7)
The Acting President: In a letter contained in
document A/56/780/Add.7, which has just been
distributed, the Secretary-General informs the

2

President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/56/780 and addenda 1 to 6, Afghanistan
has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
on agenda items 120 to 123, 133, 134(a) and (b), 135 to
138, 139(a), 141, 142, 144, 146, 147, 149 to 151, 154
to 156, and 158.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Santiago Wins of Uruguay, to introduce the reports
of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Wins (Uruguay), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to
present to the General Assembly the reports of the
Fifth Committee on the work it did during the second
part of its resumed session, in the context of the fiftysixth session of the General Assembly. During the
resumed session — held from 13 to 31 May and on 17
June 2002 — the Fifth Committee held seven formal
meetings as well as a number of informal ones.
In keeping with General Assembly resolution
49/233 of 23 December 1994, the resumed session of
the Fifth Committee was primarily devoted to the
consideration of questions related to the financing of
peacekeeping operations and peacekeeping. The Fifth
Committee considered 19 issues relating to the
financing
of
peacekeeping
operations
and
peacekeeping.
In paragraph 6 of the report contained in
document A/56/651/Add.1, submitted under agenda
item 120 and entitled “Financial reports and audited
financial statements, and reports of the Board of
Auditors”, particularly sub-item (a) concerning United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.

A/56/PV.105

Paragraph 6 of the report contained in document
A/56/653/Add.2 submitted under agenda item 122,
entitled “Programme budget for the biennium 20002001”, the Committee recommends the adoption of a
draft resolution entitled “Relationship between the
treatment of perennial activities in the programme
budget and the use of the contingency fund”, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 15 of document A/56/736/Add.2 —
which was submitted under agenda item 123, entitled
“Proposed programme budget for the biennium 20022003” — the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly adopt five draft resolutions. Those
draft resolutions are as follows: draft resolution I,
entitled “Conditions of service and compensation for
officials other than Secretariat officials: members of
the International Court of Justice, judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda and ad
litem judges of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia”; draft resolution II, entitled
“Estimates in respect of matters of which the Security
Council is seized”; draft resolution III, entitled
“Strengthening the security and safety of United
Nations premises”; draft resolution IV, entitled
“Implementation of the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 56/242”; and draft resolution V,
entitled “Conference and support services extended to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)”. The
Committee adopted those five draft resolutions without
a vote.
In paragraph 18 of document A/56/989, which
was submitted under agenda item 133, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”, the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly adopt five draft resolutions, which the
Committee adopted without a vote. Those draft
resolutions and decisions are as follows: draft
resolution I, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”; draft resolution II,
entitled “Progress in the implementation of the field
assets control system: a module of the field mission
logistics system”; draft resolution III, entitled
“Instances for which the United Nations is entitled to
restitution as the result of non-compliance with statusof-forces or other agreements”; draft resolution IV,
entitled “The concept of strategic deployment stocks

and its implementation”; draft resolution V, entitled
“Support account for peacekeeping operations”.
In paragraph 19 of the same document the
Committee recommends two draft decisions, which it
adopted without a vote: draft decision I, entitled
“Write-off of contingent-owned equipment at
liquidated missions”; and draft decision II, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
I would like to inform the General Assembly that
the Fifth Committee adopted all the draft resolutions
pertaining to the financing of peacekeeping operations
without a vote, with the exception of the draft
resolution proposed in connection with agenda item
134 (b), entitled “Financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
Also with regard to the financing of the
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations, reports
of the Fifth Committee have been introduced in
connection with the following agenda items: agenda
item 134 (a) and (b), entitled “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force; United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”; agenda item 135,
entitled Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo”; agenda item 136,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor”; agenda item 137,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea”; agenda item 138, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola”; agenda item 139 (a), entitled “Financing of
the activities arising from Security Council resolution
687 (1991): United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission”; agenda item 141, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”; agenda item
142, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara”; agenda item
144, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force”; agenda item 146,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Protection
Force, the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia, the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force and the United Nations Peace
Forces headquarters”; agenda item 147, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Somalia
II”; agenda item 149, entitled “Financing of the United

3

A/56/PV.105

Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”; agenda item
150, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia”; agenda item 151,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Haiti”; agenda item 154, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina”;
agenda item 155, entitled “Financing of the Untied
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium and the
Civilian Police Support Group”; agenda item 156,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti”; and agenda item 158, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
With regard to agenda item 134 (b), entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/56/722/Add.1. In paragraph
11 of that report, the Committee recommends that the
Assembly adopt a draft resolution that the Committee
adopted by a vote of 111 to 2. In separate votes, the
Committee decided to retain the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 13.
Finally, in paragraph 5 of the report contained in
document A/56/734/Add.2, which was submitted under
agenda item 121, entitled “Review of the efficiency of
the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations”, the Committee recommends that the
Assembly adopt the draft decision contained in
document A/C.5/56/L.85, entitled “Action taken on
certain items”, which pertains to matters whose
consideration the Committee recommended be deferred
to the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
As we conclude the resumed part of the fiftysixth session of the General Assembly, I would very
much like to thank all delegations for their cooperation
and support. I would also like to convey my gratitude
to all the members of the Secretariat for their valuable
contribution to the work of the Committee. My special
thanks go to the Secretariat team assigned to the Fifth
Committee, for their selfless efforts. I also wish to
thank the members of the Bureau and my colleagues at
the Permanent Mission of Uruguay.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it

4

that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee, and are reflected in the
relevant officials records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise. That means that where a recorded
vote or separate vote was taken, we will do the same. I
should also hope that we may proceed to adopt without
a vote those recommendations that were adopted
without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 120
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/651/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

A/56/PV.105

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/233 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 120.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/734/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 5 of its report.
The draft decision is entitled “Action taken on
certain items”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/653/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Relationship
between the treatment of perennial activities in the
programme budget and the use of the contingency
fund”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/284).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 122.

Agenda item 123 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/736/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the five draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 15
of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Conditions of service and compensation for officials
other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice, judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda and ad
litem judges of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
56/285).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Estimates in respect of matters of which the
Security Council is seized”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
56/274 B).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Strengthening the security and safety of
United Nations premises”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
56/286).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Implementation of the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 56/242”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
56/287).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Conference and support services extended to

5

A/56/PV.105

the Counter-Terrorism Committee in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)”. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution V without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
56/288).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 123.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/989)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the five draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 18
of its report and on the two draft decisions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 19
of the same report.
We turn first to the five draft resolutions. Draft
resolution I is entitled “Financing of United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
56/289).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Progress in the implementation of the field
assets control system: a module of the field mission
logistics system”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted without a vote
(resolution 56/290).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Instances for which the United Nations is
entitled to restitution as the result of non-compliance
with status-of-forces or other agreements”. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
56/291).

6

The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “The concept of strategic deployment stocks
and its implementation”. The Fifth Committee adopted
draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
56/292).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled
“Support
account
for
peacekeeping
operations”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution V without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
56/293).
The Acting President: We turn next to the two
draft decisions. Draft decision I is entitled “Write-off
of contingent-owned equipment at liquidated
missions”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision
I without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision II is
entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/973)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a

A/56/PV.105

vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/294).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 134.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
(b) Financing of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/722/Add.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 11
of its report. The draft resolution is entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
I first call on those representatives wishing to
make statements in explanation of vote before the
voting.
Mr. Bonavia (Malta): I wish to refer to the votes
taken at the 60th meeting of the Fifth Committee, held
on Monday, 17 June 2002, on the fourth preambular
paragraph and on operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of
the draft resolution entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”. My delegation
would like to point out that it inadvertently voted in
favour of those paragraphs when, in fact, it was our
intention to abstain. In the circumstances, my
delegation kindly requests the Assembly to take note of
this statement and to reflect my delegation’s intentions
in the official records. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to state that it aligns itself with
the explanation of position made after the vote in the
Fifth Committee by the delegation of Spain on behalf
of the European Union and associated countries.
Mr. Adam (Israel): The introduction of four
politically motivated paragraphs in this draft resolution
and the discussion that followed it in the Fifth
Committee on that matter force my delegation to
explain our vote in the General Assembly.
By now, members surely know Israel’s position
with regard to the incident that occurred at Qana in
April 1996, in which the Hizbullah organization
launched attacks on Israel from a position less than 300

metres from the United Nations camp. Hizbullah
launched the attack from that particular spot knowing
full well that their actions endangered civilians and
international personnel in the area. Israel had warned
the United Nations repeatedly of the dangers of that
situation, but no action was taken, either by the United
Nations or by the Government of Lebanon, to put an
end to those illegal practices. The ensuing tragedy that
occurred at Qana was the direct result of the fact that
Hizbullah terrorists launched attacks on Israel from
close proximity to the United Nations installation in
complete disregard for the danger they posed to
civilians located there.
There is no precedent whatsoever for a particular
Member State bearing sole financial responsibility for
damage sustained by United Nations forces in the
context of peacekeeping operations. In every other
case, we have acted in accordance with the General
Assembly principle of collective responsibility and
absorbed such costs within the general budget for
peacekeeping operations. We should not act differently
in this case.
Despite this obviously selective treatment of
Israel, year after year these same initiatives are
introduced in the administrative and budgetary
Committee with the same transparent political
motive — pinning both the blame and the cost for Qana
squarely on Israel. Meanwhile, the dangerous
circumstances that gave rise to that incident in the first
place continue to threaten regional peace and security.
More than six years after the incident in Qana,
Hizbullah terrorists continue to launch unprovoked
assaults across the Blue Line in clear defiance of the
principles of international law, Security Council
resolutions and the calls of the General Assembly. On
12 March, terrorists breached the Blue Line and killed
six Israelis on the northern highway. On 30 March,
Hizbullah fired dozens of mortar rounds and anti-tank
missiles across the Blue Line. On 31 March, four
terrorists approached the security fence from the
Lebanese side of the border and opened fire with
rocket-propelled grenades and automatic rifles. On 2
April, Hizbullah terrorists launched mortar, anti-tank
and anti-aircraft fire from south Lebanon across the
Blue Line, and a Katyusha rocket launched by
Hizbullah fell just north of the city of Kiryat Shmona.
On 9 April, Hizbullah terrorists fired anti-aircraft
rockets, Katyusha rockets and mortar shells, and a
number of civilians and military targets in northern

7

A/56/PV.105

Israel were hurt. Anti-aircraft fire was directed at
civilians in the northern Israeli town of Shlomi, and a
Katyusha rocket landed in the village of Ein Kuniya,
causing serious damage and forcing many area
residents to spend the night in bomb shelters.
Provocations such as that happened at the beginning of
the week. And the list goes on.
So long as Hizbullah’s unprovoked cross-border
attacks persist, Israel has no choice but to take
necessary measures in exercise of our legitimate right
to self-defence. These are measures undertaken not
only to defend Israel, but to help to deter a further
escalation that could threaten the stability of the
region.
The Government of Lebanon meanwhile, in clear
violation of resolutions of the Security Council, refuses
to fulfil its obligations to reassert its effective authority
in south Lebanon and to prevent its territory from
being used as a base for terrorist operations. Hizbullah
enjoys virtually unhindered freedom of movement and
action and is granted safe harbour on Lebanese
territory, a situation that imperils not only Israeli
civilians, who are the intended targets of Hizbullah, but
also Lebanese civilians and international personnel in
the area.
Just as in the days prior to the Qana incident in
1996, Israel has repeatedly drawn the attention of the
United Nations and the international community, and is
doing so here now, to the danger of further escalation
in south Lebanon and to the complicity of the
Governments of Lebanon, Syria and Iran in funding,
assisting and supporting Hizbullah’s activities. Letters
detailing the dangerous potential of the situation in
south Lebanon have been circulated by our Permanent
Representative to Member States and are posted on our
Mission’s Internet site. Our Foreign Minister has both
publicly and privately called for action to alleviate this
situation. To date, our appeals have fallen on deaf ears.
Those who are truly concerned with protecting
the lives of civilians and United Nations personnel,
with upholding peace and security and with
contributing to the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in the Middle East will stop politicizing the
deliberations of the Fifth Committee and will instead
bring pressure to bear on the relevant authorities in the
region and compel them to end their support for acts of
violence aimed at civilians.

8

Israel calls again on the Governments of Syria
and Lebanon to comply with the will of the Security
Council and with the principles of international law, to
allow the deployment of Lebanese armed forces up to
the Blue Line, to ensure the return of the effective
authority of the Government of Lebanon in the area
and to prevent the launching of terrorist attacks from
Lebanese territory. Only through a complete
repudiation of terrorist tactics, both on the ground in
south Lebanon and here in the Assembly, will we be
able to restore hope for the peoples of the Middle East.
My delegation will therefore vote against the four
one-sided, politically motivated and unprecedented
paragraphs and against the whole draft resolution under
consideration today regarding the budget of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). My
delegation has no reservations regarding the figures for
personnel and for budget allocations to UNIFIL.
However, we do indeed reservations regarding the way
UNIFIL fulfils its mandate. I would like to stress that
Israel pays its full assessment to UNIFIL, as we do for
all other peacekeeping operations, and will continue to
do so.
Finally, since this will be my last statement on
Fifth Committee matters, allow me to thank the
Secretary of the Fifth Committee, Mr. Joseph AcakpoSatchivi, and the Deputy Secretary, my dear colleague
and friend Nora Benary, who have assisted my
delegation so gracefully and who have escorted me in
my four years here. I wish to thank all my colleagues
on the Committee and to wish them all the best and
much success.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presence in the Chair. We are very proud and happy
that you are presiding over our work today.
Israeli logic would have it that it is necessary to
kill civilians, occupy other people’s territories,
dislodge and kill the original inhabitants, and bring in
diaspora Jews to live there.
According to Israel, this logic is justified by
divine law. But seemingly, it is not logical to
implement United Nations resolutions and the
principles of justice and international law that have
been adopted and ratified under the United Nations
Charter. Among the rights recognized by the Charter,
the right to national resistance against foreign
occupation is paramount. We would like to remind the

A/56/PV.105

representative of Israel that the Secretary-General, in
his recent report to the Security Council, said that
continued Israeli violations of the Blue Line by land
and air had reached an incalculable number and, in his
eyes, constituted provocation. Furthermore, Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) also states it is illegal to
occupy territories by force. That principle is also
endorsed in the Charter. Therefore, occupying the
territories of others poses a threat to international peace
and security and to the safety of civilians, but cannot
put a halt to legal acts of resistance against such
occupation.
The representative of Israel tries on every
occasion to involve the Assembly in a political debate
when dealing with financial and legal matters. In order
to prevent Israel from pulling the wool over our eyes
on the matter to be voted on today, a matter on which
the Fifth Committee has adopted a draft resolution, my
delegation would like to clarify the principles on the
basis of which it, as well as the Group of 77 and other
countries that voted in favour of the draft resolution,
did so: to request Israel to provide compensation to the
United Nations, not to Lebanon, due to its deliberate
attack against the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) camp in Qana, Lebanon, on 18
April of 1996.
First of all, we would like to remind the
representative of Israel that on 25 April 1996 the
General Assembly adopted resolution A/50/22 C
entitled “The Israeli military attacks against Lebanon
and their consequences”, the ninth and tenth
preambular paragraphs of which state that the General
Assembly was
“Gravely concerned ... at actions that
seriously threaten the safety of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and impede the
implementation of its mandate, in particular the
incident that occurred on 18 April 1996 in which
shelling resulted in heavy loss of life among
civilians at a site of the Interim Force,”
and that it was
“Taking into consideration the statement of
the International Committee for the Red Cross ...
in which it firmly condemned the shelling of
civilians who had taken refuge in an Interim
Force base ...”.

That resolution characterized the attack by Israel
in Qana as a unique act. The attack was condemned by
the International Committee for the Red Cross. In that
resolution, the General Assembly
“Considers that Lebanon is entitled to
appropriate redress for the destruction it has
suffered and that Israel is responsible for such
compensation;” (para. 7)
and
“Requests the Secretary-General to dispatch
a special technical mission to the area to study
and prepare, within one month’s time, in
cooperation with the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, a report on the human and
material losses and damage resulting from the
recent and ongoing hostilities”. (para. 8)
Thus, Israel’s criminal responsibility in attacking
Qana has been made quite clear. First, it was indicated
that it was a premeditated act to bomb the United
Nations base in Qana. The General Assembly
specifically made this point in its resolution. On the
basis of the letter dated 7 May 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, the matter is quite clear. The letter
begins as follows.
“I have the honour to transmit to members
of the Security Council the report submitted to
me by my Military Adviser, Major-General
Franklin van Kappen, following his mission to
Lebanon and Israel. My decision to send the
mission was taken in the light of the tragic events
that took place at Qana on 18 April 1996, in
which more than 100 Lebanese civilians were
killed in the headquarters of the Fijian battalion
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL).
“... As indicated in the report, while the
possibility cannot be ruled out completely, the
pattern of impacts in the Qana area makes it
unlikely that the shelling of the United Nations
compound was the result of technical and/or
procedural errors. For their part, the Israel
Defence Forces maintain that the incident was
due to a sequence of operational mistakes and
technical failures, compounded by chance.
“I view with utmost gravity the shelling of
the Fijian position, as I would hostilities directed

9

A/56/PV.105

against any United Nations peace-keeping
position. But this incident is all the more serious
because civilians, including women and children,
had sought refuge in the United Nations
compound at Qana.” (S/1996/337, p. 1)
It is quite clear from the Secretary-General’s
letter that it was a premeditated act on the part of Israel
to bomb the compound in Qana. Furthermore, under
international law, criminal and financial responsibility
stems from this act. The Secretary-General’s letter
could find no justification for Israel’s shelling of Qana.
Furthermore, the selective nature of Israel’s
actions was not accepted by Lebanon, the States
members of the Group of 77 or the other States that
supported the resolution in the Fifth Committee. The
Secretary-General made a very specific point, saying,
as I indicated earlier, that he regarded the attack as
being no different from any other attack against a
United Nations peacekeeping site; thus Israel’s claim
of bias on his part is unjustified. The attribution of
criminal responsibility is based on the provisions of the
resolution relating to attacks against United Nations
personnel, the first paragraph of which refers to
premeditated crimes carried out by States parties. Israel
was thus responsible for those acts, and should be
judged accordingly.
Finally, the draft resolution adopted by the Fifth
Committee, which is now before us, stipulates that
Lebanon should be compensated. That issue has been
dealt with in another forum. I would like to reiterate
that Lebanon will continue to demand compensation
and financial reparations for the crimes perpetrated by
Israel against it. The United Nations should also be
financially compensated, in accordance with the
provisions of the draft resolution before us, which was
adopted by the Fifth Committee. For five years, such
resolutions have demanded that Israel make such a
payment.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the next speaker, may I remind representatives that
explanations of vote should not exceed 10 minutes.
Mr. Nakkari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
General Assembly.
As my delegation did not explain its position in
the Fifth Committee, we would like to do so now. Once

10

again, the General Assembly is reaffirming its position
with regard to the responsibility borne by those who
attack the United Nations. The representative of
Lebanon spoke eloquently about that issue, and we
fully support his statement. The bombing of the United
Nations compound at Qana was a premeditated act. The
occupying Power should therefore be held responsible
for its actions and should compensate the United
Nations.
Furthermore, with regard to incursions across the
Blue Line, it seems strange that the representative of
the Israeli occupying forces should refer to others
taking such actions, while ignoring the fact that his
troops cross the Blue Line day after day. The report of
the Secretary-General indicates that such incursions
across the Blue Line constitute dangerous acts of
provocation by Israel.
Anyone who follows this matter will notice that
statements made by the Israeli representative in this
connection are contradictory. On one occasion they
claimed that Hizbullah bombed Israel from Qana and
on another occasion that the bombs originated from an
area 300 metres away from Qana. This indicates that
the arguments used by those representatives are mere
pretexts to justify their attacks on the United Nations.
We urge delegations to vote in favour of the
paragraphs at issue and of the draft resolution as a
whole so that we can send a clear and explicit message
to the Israeli occupation forces that they must respect
the United Nations. The Israeli operation did not stop
after the bombardment of Qana. The failure to deter
Israel has enabled the occupying forces of that entity to
believe that the United Nations condones attacks on the
safety and security of United Nations personnel. Even
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is affected: members of its staff are arrested,
tortured and persecuted in other ways, even though
they are working in their official capacity. The
UNRWA High Commissioner and other United Nations
officials have confirmed this fact in press releases.
Israel showed no respect for the sanctity of Qana,
which was the site of the first miracle performed by
Jesus Christ. However, neither that fact, nor the fact
that it served as a United Nations headquarters,
deterred Israel.
The Israeli representative’s claim that Israel is
seeking peace is contradicted by its letter dated 14 June

A/56/PV.105

2002 addressed to the Secretary-General, which was
circulated as a document both of the General Assembly
(A/56/983) and of the Security Council. It tried there to
distort the provisions of Security Council 242 (1967). I
consider it strange that the representative of the Israeli
occupation forces talks about respect for Security
Council resolutions, given that Israel has not abided by
the provisions of any such resolutions. Even the factfinding mission that was supposed to be dispatched to
the Palestinian territories to investigate Israeli
massacres was not allowed access. Israel has so far
failed to implement the provisions of more than 60
Security Council resolutions. The reason for that
failure is quite clear. Israel has demonstrated its
disrespect for those resolutions and for that body.
The views expressed by the Prime Minister of
Israel in The New York Times provide further evidence
that that entity has no desire for peace. Those views
run counter to United Nations principles.
Once again, that entity is violating all
international resolutions. It does not hesitate to violate
holy places and to prevent others from exercising their
right to resistance and to getting rid of that dirty
occupying force. All those who oppose its policies, it
accuses of terrorism.
When the Israeli Government declares that it
desires peace and implements the relevant Security
Council and other United Nations resolutions, that will
undoubtedly be the right way to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the region that takes into
consideration the legitimate rights of its inhabitants.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which was
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 11
of its report (A/56/722/Add.1).
A single separate vote has been requested on the
fourth preambular paragraph and on operative
paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution. There
appears to be no objection to that request.
I shall now put to the vote the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 13, on
which a single separate vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay.
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution
were adopted by 74 votes to 2, with 46
abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Bahrain
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour, and the delegation of France that it
had intended to abstain.]

A recorded vote has been requested.

11

A/56/PV.105

The Acting President: I now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 121 votes to
2 (resolution 56/214 B).
[Subsequently the delegation of France informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted.

12

Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the work of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as it carries out a
very difficult and important mandate. However, the use
of General Assembly funding resolutions to pursue
claims against a Member State is not procedurally
correct. We oppose General Assembly resolution
56/214 and similar earlier resolutions because they
contain sections which require a Member State to pay
for costs associated with United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Those resolutions were not consensus
resolutions.
Since shortly after the inception of the United
Nations the procedure which has been followed is that
the Secretary-General presents and pursues the
settlement of claims against a State or States. This
procedure has been applied in the past with regard to
the Middle East and continues for peacekeeping-related
damage claims in the Balkans. Using a funding
resolution to legislate a settlement is inappropriate. It
also politicizes the work of the General Assembly’s
Fifth Committee, and should be avoided both now and
in the future.
The Acting President: A number of delegations
have asked to speak in the exercise of the right of
reply. I remind members that, in accordance with
decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of
reply shall be limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to five minutes for the second, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tootoonchian (Islamic Republic of Iran): In
exercising the right of reply, I will not speak at length.
Having listened to Israel today, I am rather amazed. It
should be recalled that 102 Lebanese civilians —
children, the elderly and women — were killed in
Israel’s attack against Lebanon and the international
force’s compound. Such acts of violation of
international law and the terrorizing of innocent people
have been continuously perpetrated by Israeli forces.
They are committed against people living under
occupation, only because of their national resistance in
the exercise of their right of liberation from foreign
occupation.
Israel’s misleading allegations are aimed at
stigmatizing the heroic national resistance and to
legitimate struggle in Lebanon as terrorism. These are
not new allegations. The Lebanese people who are
characterized by Israel as terrorists have compelled

A/56/PV.105

Israel to withdraw from their territory. In fact, they
have been defending their national soil against an
occupying Power and, in doing so, have been supported
by the international community.
Mr. Adam (Israel): Indeed, I am amazed, I must
say, to hear an Iranian speaking about terrorists and
terror. This is amazing. If I were Iranian, I would not
take the floor on this issue. Iran is the most dangerous
force in the Middle East, and indeed in the entire
world. We have all seen it, and we see it today. They
initiate, harbour, finance and launch terror groups in
Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and Gaza, and indeed
the entire world.
Read my lips, ladies and gentlemen: Iran poses
the biggest threat to the world.
Mr. Tootoonchian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
will not speak again to explain all the aspects of this
issue. I think that the result of today’s vote shows who
is the biggest threat to peace and security in the world.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 134.
Agenda item 135
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/977)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/295).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 136
Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/715/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution is entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/296).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 137
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/714/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/250 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/988)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

13

A/56/PV.105

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 139
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)
(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/980)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution is entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/297).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 139.
Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/712/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/251 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 141.
Agenda item 142

14

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/990)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/298).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 142.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/981)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/299).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 146
Financing of the United Nations Protection Force,
the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia, the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force and the United Nations Peace
Forces headquarters
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/978)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

A/56/PV.105

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/500).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia II
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/974)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/501).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 147.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/982)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/502).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 149.
Agenda item 150

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/976)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/503).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 150.
Agenda item 151
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/987)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/504).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 154
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/979)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/505).

15

A/56/PV.105

The Acting President: We that thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 154.
Agenda item 155
Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium and the Civilian Police Support
Group
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/991)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

Agenda item 158 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/713/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/252 C).

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 158.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/506).

The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
that were before it.

The Acting President: We that thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 155.
Agenda item 156
Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in
Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/986)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/507).
The Acting President: We that thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 156.

16

Agenda item 22 (continued)
Final review and appraisal of the implementation of
the United Nations New Agenda for the Development
of Africa in the 1990s
Draft resolution A/56/L.79
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.79, entitled
“Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General
Assembly for the Final Review and Appraisal of the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.79?
Draft resolution A/56/L.79
(resolution 56/508).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 22.

A/56/PV.105

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work:
reopening of the consideration of agenda item 108
Letter dated 18 June 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the General
Assembly (A/56/985)
The Acting President: As indicated in the
footnote to document A/56/985, in order for the
General Assembly to take the required action requested
in document A/56/985, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 108, entitled “Social
development, including questions relating to the world
social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons
and the family”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 108?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In order for the General
Assembly to act expeditiously on the request contained
in document A/56/985, may I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of item?
It was so decided.

paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 56/38 it is
stated that, on 5 December 2002, which has been
designated as International Volunteer Day for
Economic and Social Development, two plenary
meetings at the fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly would be devoted to the outcome of the
International Year of Volunteers and its follow-up.
As further indicated in document A/56/985, due
to the fact that the date designated for the two plenary
meetings in resolution 56/38 coincides with an official
holiday of the United Nations in the year 2002, the
Permanent Representative of Japan to the United
Nations requests the President of the General Assembly
to take the necessary steps to set an alternative date for
the meetings. It has been suggested that the two
plenary meetings be held instead on Tuesday, 26
November 2002.
If there is no objection, may I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to hold the two plenary
meetings of the International Volunteer Day for
Economic and Social Development on Tuesday, 26
November 2002?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 108?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 108 (continued)

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

Social development, including questions relating to
the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family
Letter dated 18 June 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the General
Assembly (A/56/985)
the

The Acting President: In document A/56/985,
General Assembly was informed that in

17
