240

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and progressive development of the principles and norms
of international economic law relating in particular to the
legal aspects of the new international economic order' ' ,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General25 and
the study prepared by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research entitled "List of existing and evolving
principles and norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order concerning the economic relations among States, international organizations and other
entities of pyblic international law, and the activities of
transnational corporations" 26 and its compendium 27 and of
the views submitted by some States in response to General
Assembly resolution 35/166, 28
Taking note, in particular, of the recommendation that
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
should complete the study by preparing the analytical study
on the progressive development of the principles and norms
of international law relating to the new international economic order, in accordance with paragraph l (b) of resolution 35/166,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
l. Takes note of the study prepared by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research; 26
2. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to prepare tht: study referred to in the fifth
preambular paragraph above and to complete it in time for
the Secretary-General to submit it to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session;
3. Urges Member States to submit relevant information
with respect to the study not later than 31 July 1982;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional commissions, the
United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and
other relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in this field, as determined by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, to submit relevant information and to co-operate fully with the Institute
in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
study made by the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research for its consideration, on a priority basis, under the
item entitled "Progressive development of the principles
and norms of international law relating to the new international economic order'' to be included in the provisional
agenda of that session.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/108.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination
and Wider Appreciation of International Law 29 and the recN36/143 and Add. I and 2.
N36/143, sect. II.
27
UNITAR/DS/4.
2
• See N36/143/Add.1 and 2.
,. N36/633.
25

20

ommendations made to the Secretary-General by the Advisory Committee on the United, Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at all
universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States at
the bilateral level to provide assistance in the teaching and
study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to give further
support to the Programme and to increase their activities to
promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities
which are of special benefit to persons from developing
countries,
Recalling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it is
desirable to use as far as possible the resources and facilities
made available by Member States, international organizations and others,
I. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in 1982
and 1983 the activities specified in his report, including the
provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships each in 1982 and
1983, at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) A minimum of one scholarship each in 1982 and
1983 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship
on the Law of the Sea, 30 to be financed by the voluntary
contributions specifically made for the endowment of the
Fellowship as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs
9 and 10 below;
(c) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country who will he invited to the regional courses to be organized in 1982 and
1983;
and to finance the above activities from provisions in the
regular budget and also voluntary financial contributions
which would be received as a result of the requests set out
in paragraphs 9 and 10 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his constructive efforts to promote training and assistance
in international law within the framework of the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
in 1980 and 1981;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, in particular for the efforts
made to support the teaching of international law;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Institute for Training and Research for its participation in the
Programme, particularly in the organization of regional
courses and in the conduct of the fellowship programme in
international law sponsored jointly by the United Nations
and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Egypt for providing host facilities for the regional training
and refresher courses held at Cairo in 1981;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy
of International Law for its valuable contributions to the
Programme by enabling international law fellows under the
sponsorship of the United Nations and the United Nations

'

0

See sect. II. resolution 36179.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Institute for Training and Research to attend its annual international law courses and providing facilities for seminars
organized by the Institute in conjunction with the Academy
courses;
7. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by
the Hague Academy of International Law to the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law and calls upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable consideration to the appeal of the
Academy for adequate assistance to solve its financial
problems;
8. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion
of courses on international law in the programmes of legal
studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme and to invite periodically Member
States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions
towards the financing of the Programme or otherwise assisting in its implementation and possible expansion;
10. Reiterates its request to Member States and to interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States which
have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1982 and 1983 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the
execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December /981

36/109.

Measures to prevent international terrorism
which endangers or takes innocent human lives
or jeopardius fundamental freedoms and study
of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery,
frustration, grievance and despair and which
cause some people to sacrifice human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972, 311102 of 15 December 1976, 32/147 of 16 December
1977 and 34/145 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling also the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 31 the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, 32 the Definition of Aggression 33 and the
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, -~ 4
Deeply concerned about continuing acts of international
terrorism which take a toll of innocent human lives,
31

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 2734 (XXV).
33
Resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex.
34
A/32/144, annexes I and II.
32

241

Convinced of the importance of international co-operation
for dealing with acts of international terrorism.
Reaffirming the principle of self-determination of peoples
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of all peoples under colonial and racist
regimes and other forms of alien domination, and upholding
the legitimacy of their struggle. in particular the struggle
of national liberation movements, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and of the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
Having re-examined the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on International Terrorism to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session. 1 ~
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General. 11'
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Re-endorses the recommendations submitted by the
Ad Hoe Committee on International Terrorism to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session relating to practical
measures of co-operation for the speedy elimination of the
problem of international terrorism; n
3. Calls upon all States to observe and implement the
recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the implementation of the above-mentioned recommendations and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session;
5. Decides to include the item in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-eighth session.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December /981

36/110.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States".
Deeply concerned about the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life. and especially about the growing tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs. and about the escalation of
the arms race. which gravely endanger the independence
and security of States, as well as international peace and
security.
Taking into account the need to exert utmost efforts in
order to settle any situations and disputes between States
exclusively by peaceful means and to avoid any military
action and hostilities. which can only make more difficult
the solution of existing problems.
Also taking into account the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States,
Considering that the adoption of a declaration on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States could contribute to the elimination of the danger of recourse to force
or the threat of force and. therefore, to the strengthening
of international peace and security.
"Official Records o{the Cinwral Assemhfr. Thirfl•-fimrth s,,ssio11, S11p
plement No 37 (A/34/37).
0
'
N.,61425.
" Official Records of the General Assemh/_\·. Thirtv-fourth Se.r.,-io11, Supplement Nr> 37 (A/34/J7). para 11 ~
