S/PV.7683

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7683rd meeting

Thrusday, 28 April 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre/Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi/
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Prystaiko
Mr. Rycroft/Mr. Meek
Ms. Power/Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Toro-Carnevali

Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12001 (E)
*1612001*

Ukraine

S/PV.7683

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Ambassador
Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine; and Ambassador Martin Sajdik,
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ambassadors
Apakan and Sajdik, who are joining today’s meeting
via video-teleconference from Kiev.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: As the conflict in the eastern
Ukraine enters its third year, the Security Council is
meeting today with both a sense of urgency and hope.
The continued failure to fully implement the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements has served to underscore the crucial need
to make progress towards a political settlement of
the conflict.
Since the Security Council last considered the
situation in Ukraine, on 11 December 2015 (see
S/PV.7576), some positive developments have been
registered. Not least among them was the fact that the
ceasefire was largely respected during the last weeks
of 2015. A second development was the commitment
announced at the beginning of March this year, in
the framework of the security working group, on the
implementation of additional sectorial agreements on
demining in priority areas, as well as the prohibition of
military training in proximity to the contact line — all
encouraging steps.
2/28

28/04/2016

The meeting of the Foreign Ministers of France,
Germany, the Russian Federation and Ukraine on
3 March and the continued investment of time and
political capital by all the relevant actors have also been
instrumental in efforts to bridge prevailing differences
and keep the focus on concrete milestones towards the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. Regular
meetings of the Trilateral Contact Group and its four
working groups — on political affairs and security,
humanitarian and economic matters — continue to be
central in that regard.
As the Council is well aware, on 14 April the
Ukrainian Parliament voted for the appointment of a
new Prime Minister, Mr. Volodymyr Groysman. The
new Government’s commitment to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements has been widely welcomed.
Such commitment is expected to be converted into
further concrete actions.
Those developments are highly valuable in their
own right. However, those positive steps forward
continue to be heavily undermined to some extent by
an overall precarious and unsustainable situation in
the conflict area. The total number of conflict-related
casualties continues to increase, and now stands at
more than 30,700, including more than 9,300 killed
and almost to 21,400 injured since the beginning of the
conflict, in mid-April 2014. The latest tragic incident,
which occurred on 27 April when at least four civilians
were killed and at least eight were injured by shelling
in the village of Olenivka, near the city of Donetsk,
is a stark reminder of the high human cost of the
continued conflict.
While some of the recent civilian casualties have
been caused by indiscriminate shelling, most are caused
by landmines, booby traps and other explosive remnants
of war, which continue to represent the biggest threat
to civilian life and security, underscoring the urgent
need for extensive mine clearance and mine-awareness
actions on both sides of the contact line.
We are pleased that Ambassadors Apakan and
Sajdik are joining us, despite the late hour in Kyiv.
We look forward to hearing their assessments of the
security situation in eastern Ukraine, and wish to thank
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission for continuing
to dutifully carry out its mandate in what is often a
challenging and dangerous environment.
The Special Monitoring Mission’s role in eastern
Ukraine remains instrumental. In order to carry out its
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

mandate, the Mission must urgently be granted full and
unfettered access, including to the border, as stipulated
under the Minsk agreements. All efforts to hinder
such access should be condemned, and although the
restrictions are happening on both sides of the contact
line, according to statistics provided by the Special
Monitoring Mission, they seem to take place more
in rebel-held areas. Efforts to harass, intimidate and
especially to perpetrate violence against the Mission
must be deplored, and must cease immediately.
Fighting is still being reported daily, with a
sustained period of escalation witnessed over recent
weeks and months at levels not seen since the intense
phase of the conflict in August 2014. The frequent
clashes are also coupled with increased presence and
use of proscribed heavy weaponry, with more such
weapons now being reported outside of storage sites.
In addition to these sobering developments, there is a
lack of systemic mine action and reportedly high levels
of military readiness and preparedness. This precarious
situation should not be allowed to persist because it will
create fertile ground for a further deterioration of the
situation. All parties must immediately cease hostilities
and implement in earnest their commitments under the
Minsk agreements, as well as those made since then in
the Trilateral Contact Group and its Security Working
Group.
Clearly, an improvement in the security situation
would be crucial to creating an environment conducive
to progress in the political sphere. Of note are the
ongoing negotiations in Minsk and among Normandy
partners related to modalities for holding local
elections in rebel-held areas of Donetsk and Luhansk
under Ukrainian law and as per international standards.
We hope that ensuing political, technical and legal
divergences can soon be overcome. All concerned
should find common ground and take immediate steps
to live up to the commitments they have undertaken
on other bedrock political issues, including amnesty
and special-status constitutional changes, as well as on
exchange of prisoners.
The situation in Ukraine is also grave on the
humanitarian front. More than 3 million people
remain in need of humanitarian assistance, especially
those close to the contact line and in areas beyond
Government control. The ongoing suspension by the
de facto authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk provinces
of almost all operations of the United Nations and and
international non-governmental organizations since

S/PV.7683

July 2015 is of great concern. Undue bureaucratic
impediments deprive hundreds of thousands of people
access to urgently needed essential services, supplies
and other protection activities.
This is further compounded by the decision of the
Ukrainian Government to suspend social payments,
including pensions, to an estimated 600,000 displaced
people, pending verification of their status. While the
legitimate right of the Government to combat fraud
is understandable, it is important to put in place a
transparent system that provides clear information
about the criteria for any cancellation of benefits and
proper communication to those concerned. It is also
important that the freedom of movement of civilians
be ensured and that they have sustained and safe access
across the contact line. As a result of the recent closure
of and failure to open new checkpoints, many civilians
continue to queue for hours, often at night, in unsafe
locations just to access basic services or to visit families
and properties.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, through its
monitoring mission in Ukraine, continues to monitor
and report on the situation of human rights throughout
the country and to make recommendations to all parties
to the conflict. There are a number of pressing human
rights concerns. The question of missing persons and
the need to create a mechanism by which all parties
to the conflict exchange information and cooperate
to establish the whereabouts of those who have gone
missing in the conflict zone remains critical. In
Crimea, isolation from mainland Ukraine continues to
grow, with deepening concerns for the human rights
situation in the peninsula. The recent decision to ban
the activities of the Mejlis, the representative body of
the Crimean Tatars, are of particular concern.
On a positive note, on 29 December 2015, the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine published a national
human rights action plan. This is a welcome step, as
the document is a road map for addressing systemic
human rights challenges and conflict-related matters,
and envisages a list of actions to be taken by different
State institutions pursuant to the national human rights
strategy. It is of paramount importance that the plan
be implemented. However, nearly four months after its
adoption, not all activities envisaged during that period
have been implemented.

16-120013/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

The Secretariat continues to cooperate closely
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and remains ready to support, as requested and
deemed helpful, the complex and challenging mandate
entrusted to OSCE in Ukraine. We commend the vital
contributions of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
the Trilateral Contact Group and its four working
groups, and the Normandy four leaders, as well as other
diplomatic partners, for their efforts towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
In coordination with local and regional
organizations, the United Nations also continues to
carry out critical and effective work in the humanitarian,
human rights, reconstruction and reconciliation
spheres, aimed at responding to the urgent and longerterm needs of the affected population in Ukraine.
Ultimately, however, progress in the peace process
will depend on the political will of the parties and
on their readiness and willingness to find a peaceful
resolution to the conflict through tangible deeds, both
on the ground and at the negotiating table. The United
Nations remains committed to supporting a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in a manner that fully upholds
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I wish to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council regarding
the situation in Ukraine.
Violence in eastern Ukraine is once again reaching
a peak. The fighting around some hotspots varies in
intensity over time. Days of relative calm are followed
by periods of intense escalation. Just recently, from
11 to 17 April, the Mission has observed particularly
intense violence between Avdiivka and Yasnuvata, to
the north of Donetsk. This was the highest level of
violence observed since August 2015. Armed violence
also continues to take place around the cities of Zaitseve,
Horlivka, Svitlodarsk and Debeltseve. An upsruge in
ceasefire violations has also taken place in the south of
Donetsk region and in Luhansk region. Heavy weapons
are in frequent use.
The Special Monitoring Mission is also finding an
increasing number of weapons missing from permanent
storage sites and from known weapon-holding areas.
4/28

28/04/2016

Many of those facilities are completely abandoned. Our
observations suggest that many of those weapons are in
use at the contact line.
There are about 700 civilians living in and around
the contact line. They are suffering. In that context, I
should also underline the recent tragedy that took place
in Olenivka. That is the reason we need the cessation
of hostilities and a full and sustainable ceasefire, for
the settlement of the problem as well as to lessen the
suffering of the people.
Direct attacks against the Special Monitoring
Mission and its assets happen with impunity for the
perpetrators. Serious security incidents have taken place
recently. Therefore, we have temporarily imposed some
restrictions on our patrolling. Impunity for people who
threaten or violenty mistreat the Special Monitoring
Mission, or who violate its freedom of movement, must
end.
The inaction of those who have committed to
the ceasefire to withdraw weapons and to protect
the Special Monitoring Mission presents a direct
challenge to the letter and the spirit of the Minsk
agreements. It undermines efforts made towards
stabilization and normalization and endangers their
further implementation. The Joint Centre for Control
and Coordination (JCCC) could be instrumental in
addressing those challenges. However, the Mission’s
monitoring shows that the JCCC still has not
significantly increased its effectiveness.
The Special Monitoring Mission has been adapting
its operations to the chaning situation and has further
expanded its presence on both sides of the contact
line. We have increased the number of locations from
where we conduct our monitoring, and have increased
our efforts to monitor the border areas not under the
control of the Government. The Special Monitoring
Mission is now operating out of 13 bases, on both sides
of the contact line. More bases are needed, including
in non-Government-controlled areas. The Special
Monitoring Mission is ready to engage, but needs
reassurances on safety and security from those in
effective contol in the respective locations. Currently,
the Mission has 700 monitors from 47 countries,
with the aim of further expansion. Such expansion in
number and geographical reach is accompanied by an
expansion in technical capabilities, including unarmed
aerial vehicles, satellite imagery and cameras in certain
sensitive areas.
16-12001

28/04/2016

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

Human suffering as a result of the conflict is
increasing. The number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as a result of the conflict remains one of the
main problems. The plight of IDPs serves to underline
the urgency for the sides to continue the peace process.
Focused work on gender issues has been a priority for
the Special Monitoring Mission. In the conflict area,
women, older persons and children are suffering.
Women throughout the country appear to be quick
in self-initiation and demonstrate a resilient attitude
towards the challenges in difficult humanitarian
situations.
All civilians in the conflict area face great
difficulties when attempting to cross the contact line.
That disproportionately affects — I repeat — older
persons, children and women. During recent months,
several of the few official crossing routes have been
closed for short or expanded periods. The closure of
checkpoints in Luhansk region considerably limits the
possibilities for people to reach their places of work,
use the services of hospitals and reach family members.
Throughout the country, the Special Monitoring
Mission is continuing its cooperative relationship
in humanitarian matters with the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF to ensure the
effective coordination of efforts on the ground.
Armed formations along the contact line are
standing too close together, and have recently moved
even closer in some locations. That represents a violation
of the Minsk agreements and must not continue.
Disengagement is a necessity in the current situation.
Military formations need to move further apart to stop
the cycle of violence. Increased dialogue across the
contact line and confidence-building measures can
complement initiatives for disengagement.
Allow me to repeat: a sustainable ceasefire is of
central importance to the further implementation of the
Minsk agreements. In that context, I should say that
Ambassador Sajdik, in cooperation with the Special
Monitoring Mission, is working on a truce for the festive
season and the upcoming Orthodox Easter holiday. We
believe that will be an occasion for the sides to show
visible and decisive action for tranquillity and a full
ceasefire.

Attacks the Special Monitoring Mission must stop.
All signatories to the Minsk documents must live up
to their commitments to safeguard and ensure the
safety and security of the civilian Special Monitoring
Mission. And the JCCC needs to act in line with the
responsibilities assigned to it. Over the past week, I
addressed three letters to the signatories of the Minsk
package of measures in that regard. In close cooperation
with the Trilateral Contact Group, the Special
Monitoring Mission will continue to work towards the
stabilization and normalization of Ukraine, on the basis
of the principles and commitments of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sajdik.
Mr. Sajdik: First of all, I would like to thank
China, in its capacity as President, for having invited
Ambassador Apakan and me to brief the members of
the Security Council about our common efforts for a
peaceful solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
On 27 February 2015, my predecessor, Heidi
Tagliavini, briefed this body (see S/PV.7395) on
the results of the 15 February Minsk summit of the
Normandy Four, namely, the Presidents of France,
Russia and Ukraine and the German Chancellor.
Ms. Tagliavini also briefed the Council on the Minsk
agreements. Since then, the Minsk process continued
on track with the aim of implementing the agreements
by the end of 2015. We did not succeed in living up to
that ambitious target, but we have made considerable
progress in the four areas covered by the agreements,
namely involving, security, political, humanitarian and
economic issues. The main achievement of our efforts
is that we have succeeded in substantially reducing the
number of victims, both military and civilian, especially
last autumn with the ceasefire starting on 1 September,
the beginning of the school year.
Under the outstanding leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, important decisions in the security field were
reached, such as on the withdrawal of heavy weapons
and on demining. The implementation of those decisions
by the sides of the conflict, as we have just heard,
unfortunately leaves ample room for improvement.
Ceasefire violations have lately reached alarming
numbers, as we also have just heard from Ambassador
Apakan. That needs to stop now. Ahead of the upcoming

16-120015/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

Orthodox Easter holidays, the sides really need to fully
respect the ceasefire. Secure conditions must be created
for the people living in proximity to the hostilities as
well as for all those who will cross the line of contact
during the upcoming holidays.
In the political field, work is being concentrated
on the modalities for local elections in the certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast and on amnesty.
The corresponding laws, which have to be adopted
by the Ukrainian Parliament, will directly impact all
actors involved. That will of course demand further
efforts, but most of all it will demand a willingness
by all participants to compromise. The elections will
have to be held in a secure environment — a secure
environment before and during, but also after the
elections. Repeated severe cases of intimidation against
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) with no
apparent consequences for the perpetrators have cast
a shadow on the impartiality of local security forces
in the certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast,
which is a precondition for the holding of elections that
correspond to OSCE standards. In the humanitarian
and economic spheres, we have achieved some progress
in the release and transfer of detainees as well as in the
rehabilitation of railway and water-supply systems.
But there is still a long way to go, especially as to
unhindered humanitarian access, including in particular
for United Nations entities and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. One aspect of the
Minsk agreements is still waiting for an appropriate
answer — the full restoration of the territorial integrity
of Ukraine and the re-establishment of sovereign
control over the Ukrainian side of the State border with
the Russian Federation in the Donbas region.
Many issues of Minsk are intertwined. What we
therefore need is a package for a sustainable solution
to the conflict. I believe the examples I mentioned here
show that Minsk works and that further progress is
possible, and will be possible with the firm political
backing of the Normandy Four and other important
actors.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Sajdik for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
6/28

28/04/2016

I welcome to the Security Council Mr. Vadym
Prystaiko, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Chief of Staff of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine.
Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for responding to our request to convene
today’s meeting. I would also like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your successful presidency of the Security
Council this month and to thank for your constructive
and effective work. My only regret is that this meeting
could not be held on Friday so that my Minister could
make it to New York from Beijing, which he is currently
visiting, to address the Council.
I am pleased to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations and its States Members that took part in
the General Assembly meeting held a few days ago (see
A/70/PV.92) to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary
of the sad day when the Chernobyl disaster occurred.
Our prayers go to the families of those who died or who
were otherwise affected by the tragedy in Ukraine,
Belarus, Russia and far beyond our borders.
Two days ago, I was at the Chernobyl station and
witnessed the signing by the representative of the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) and our Ministry of Energy, in the presence of
the President of Ukraine, of the additional agreement
to permit the international community to gather the
resources needed to finalize the Chernobyl project. I am
happy to report that the new confinement — the biggest
moving structure ever built by humankind — is close
to completion. In November, it will start rolling over
the station, thereby effectively sealing off the remnants
of the reactor and preventing further radioactive
contamination. Ukrainians are deeply grateful to all
donor nations, the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the Group of Seven, the European
Union, the EBRD, industry and international
organizations for bringing efforts and resources
together and striving to turn the page on the biggest
technological disaster in our history. This is a great
achievement, and we do believe that, by such concerted
efforts, we will be able to resolve all outstanding issues,
regardless of how impossibly complicated they might
seem at the moment.
Unfortunately, this is not the only issue that brought
me here today. As if the land of Ukraine had not suffered
enough already, as Council members know, we have
been struggling for more than two years against the
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

aggression of our neighbour and our formerly brotherly
nation, the Russian Federation. As we have heard today
from the briefers — and I am grateful to the Secretariat,
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine for familiarizing
the Council with the state of affairs on the ground — over
30,000 Ukrainians have fallen victim to the hostilities
in Donbas, with approximately 10,000 killed and 21,000
wounded. More than 1.7 million Ukrainians have had to
leave their homes and have become internally displaced
persons. Every day Ukrainian families lose a son, a
father, a husband, a brother. Every day Ukrainian men
and women are wounded, often becoming physically and
psychologically handicapped for the rest of their lives.
On 23 April, just the other day, four Ukrainian
soldiers were killed and five were wounded as a result
of shelling by militants. Last night, we witnessed the
tragic deaths of three civilians. There were also seven
wounded; they were probably caught in cross-fire. That
incident will have to be properly investigated. Ukraine
has already invited OSCE monitors to the site.
This war is very hybrid in nature, but it is very real in
terms of spilled blood. It is claiming victims regardless
of their ethnicity or the languages they speak. They are
Ukrainians, Russians, Greeks, Germans, Poles, Jews;
all of us are the victims.
But there is one particular nation whose fate is
again at stake — the Crimean Tatars. This indigenous
population of the Crimean peninsula is again suffering,
as it did 60 years ago, from Moscow’s brutal grip.
Then it was Stalin, now it is the new Great Leader.
People are disappearing. The only representative
body — the Mejlis — was banned by occupation forces
under the false pretext — one that has become very
widespread — that it was engaged in extremist activity.

S/PV.7683

they can be accused of conducting extremist activity,
prosecuted and re-expelled from Crimea. More than
130 criminal trials against Crimean Tatars have been
held, and 21 Crimean Tatar representatives have been
kidnapped — 9 are still missing and 3 were recently
found dead.
I am calling today on the Security Council to
demand that the Russian Federation restore the rights of
the Crimean Tatars, ensure that the sham justice meted
out by the Crimean courts and Prosecutor’s Office be
halted, abrogate its decision to ban Mejlis, and, in a
broader sense, just get off our lands in Crimea and the
east of Ukraine.
I would like to be absolutely clear: I am humbled
by the sheer magnitude of the attention given by the
Security Council to the Ukrainian issue. As a matter
of fact, we do not want the Russian aggression against
Ukraine to be transformed into yet another item on the
Council’s agenda where, despite regular debates, we
see no tangible progress towards a settlement. Since
taking our seat in the Council, the Ukrainian delegation
has demonstrated the utmost restraint in bringing up
this subject. But as has already been mentioned by the
briefers today, the security situation is not improving,
and the Minsk agreements are not being implemented.
I am here today to provide the international community
with the relevant information on the actual state
of affairs on the ground and help to create impetus
for a genuine political process aimed at finding a
sustainable, peaceful solution to the conflict. Ukraine
is convinced that it can be settled only on the basis of
the Minsk agreements. I would like to emphasize a
couple of the most important points.

Incidentally, a couple of days ago, a Russian citizen
and resident of Moscow had her time in jail extended
for having been so extremist as to have Ukrainian
books in her possession. That is a serious crime indeed,
given that the detainee is a director of the only official
Ukrainian library in Moscow.

Since all sides, including Russia, committed to the
ceasefire, after some ups and downs the situation along
the line of contact has recently deteriorated, as we have
heard. Only this week, between 19 and 26 April, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission reported about 500
cases of ceasefire violations by illegal armed groups,
indicating that the intensity of fighting was at a level
that had not been seen since August 2014, a time when
Russian troops massively invaded Ukrainian territory.

But back to Crimean Tatars, whose homes are being
raided and whose unique culture and language are being
endangered once again. Tatar leaders warn that the
ban potentially threatens more than 2,000 members of
some 250 central and local Mejlis structures, which are
traditionally elected by Crimean Tatars. At any time,

Russia’s proxies in Donbas are still presenting
major obstacles to the ability of the Special Monitoring
Mission to access all the areas under their control and
to verify the ceasefire and withdrawal of weapons. I
would like to remind the Council that full and safe
access for the Monitoring Mission throughout Ukraine,

16-120017/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

including along the Ukrainian-Russian State border,
and the creation of a security area along that border,
were stipulated in the original Minsk agreement of
September 2014, something that our Russian colleagues
have tended to forget recently. The Special Monitoring
Mission reported that 95 per cent of all the freedom-ofmovement incidents during this period were instigated
by militants. Specifically, on 7 April, a Monitoring
Mission vehicle was hit by bullets near Snizhne and
Mission observers were threatened at gunpoint in the
village of Smile. On 9 April, a Monitoring Mission
patrol came under militant fire in Zhovanka. On
18 April, in the city of Donetsk, militants threatened to
fire on OSCE monitors and detain them, and that is the
least of the problems. On 25 April Mr. Zakharchenko,
the leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s
Republic, publicly threatened to shoot OSCE observers
if a police mission were deployed in certain areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
We are extremely concerned about the fact that
illegal armed groups have continued to shell Ukrainian
armed forces’ positions and civilian sites, especially
in places located near the agreed areas for demining.
Despite such provocations, we are fully committed to
completing the demining of all the agreed-on priority
areas, and we are grateful to the United Nations
demining experts planning to help. On a personal
note, I recently saw an 11-year-old boy from the small
Ukrainian town of Mariupol, in southern Ukraine, who
is currently being treated in a Montreal hospital and
taken care of by Canada’s Ukrainian community. He
was on a walk with his brother and a couple of friends
and picked up a strange object that cost him three limbs.
He is not just recovering in hospital, he does not know
yet that he now has no younger brother.
Another serious matter is the restoration of
damaged economic and social infrastructure in order
to provide livable conditions for local civilians on both
sides of the contact line. The repairs of the damaged
facilities, including water pipelines, can be done only
after we have ensured that the security situation has
genuinely de-escalated and provided personal safety
guarantees for the repairer personnel. Along with that,
we remain deeply concerned about the continuing
exacerbation of the humanitarian situation owing to the
unwillingness of the illegal armed groups in Donbas to
lift their blockade of the activities of the international
humanitarian organizations in the region.
8/28

28/04/2016

After months of negotiations, there are still 120
Ukrainians being held captive in Donbas whom we
cannot get out, regardless of the all-for-all formula that
appeared to have been agreed on by everybody. Even
the International Committee of the Red Cross has not
been allowed to visit them, nor has it been permitted
to search for some 800 missing persons. Médecins
Sans Frontières has been accused of espionage and
banned from the region by the Russian proxies, despite
the Russian Federation’s promise to put additional
pressure on the illegal groups to let that international
humanitarian organization into the region. Yesterday,
we barely managed to get our Vice-Speaker of
Parliament into Minsk; she was leading a working group
on humanitarian issues of the Trilateral Contact Group
in Minsk but was banned by Russia for five years, a
ban that Belarus supported. And this despite the fact
that Belarus offered its capital for peace talks. We are
carefully collecting the evidence of these crimes, and
we will use it later on. One of these collections makes
for very bad reading, with a lot of bad pictures, but our
delegation will circulate the information.
There are no signs of positive change in the
difficult security front, either. Russia has organized
and deployed in Donbas a 34,000-strong hybrid
military force consisting of regular Russian troops as
well as foreign and local militants. Russian generals
and military officers are providing direct commandand-control of that illegal military entity, which is
impressively heavily armed. Specifically, as of now
the terrorists have at least 470 tanks, 870 armoured
combat vehicles, 450 tube artillery systems and 190
multiple launch rocket systems, operated by so-called
disgruntled miners. That is more than most NATO
members have in their regular armed forces, and yet
it was allegedly acquired in local hardware stores.
The last time I checked, one could hardly buy a decent
knife in a hardware store, let alone multiple launch
rocket systems and jet flamethrowers — which, by the
way, are not to be found in the stores of the Ukrainian
armed forces.
We would greatly appreciate it if the Russian
Federation would take the lead and kindly offer to safely
store their beloved separatists’ deadly toys on Russian
territory, verifiable by the OSCE, thereby removing
another stumbling block in the way of a long-awaited
peace, with the aim of showing real interest in the
Minsk process and bringing a lifting of the sanctions
closer. I do not want take up too much of the Council’s
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

precious time, so our Permanent Mission will be happy
to provide members with the information I have here,
which will be made available later.
The Russian proxies are systematically ruining the
social and economic infrastructure of Donbas, once
Ukraine’s industrial powerhouse. They are dismantling
entire factories and taking them to Russia. Vast reserves
of coal in Donbas are also being stolen and transported
to Russia. Ukraine has lost more than 20 per cent of
its gross domestic product as a result of the Russian
aggression. And that is on top of the economic war that
the Russian Federation has effectively waged on us by
blocking our exports as well as the transit of goods to
Central Asian States and China. All of this, I should
remind the Council, is in contravention of the Budapest
Memorandum on Security Assurances, signed in 1994,
whereby the signatories promised not to exert economic
pressure on Ukraine.
We are totally committed to a political settlement.
Our experts have been to Minsk more than 30 times
in order to clarify how a political resolution can be
achieved and how we can rebuild our ruined economy,
revive the region and decentralize our political system.
I have no time today to discuss those issues, but I would
like to touch on one very key point, the elections, which
are not only essential to the peace process but are
becoming a reality. We have prepared every piece of
the necessary legislation and are ready to discuss their
modalities, as our leaders agreed on in Minsk.
What we need, in order to kick-start the election
process, in accordance with OSCE standards and in
conformity with Ukrainian law, as agreed to by our
leaders, is a better security situation on the ground. Let
us be reasonable. If there is no security, nobody will
hold or observe the elections. President Poroshenko
recently proposed deploying a police mission in Donbas,
which we believe would help to ensure a safe and secure
environment in Donbas, particularly in the context of
local elections. The status and mandate of the mission,
and its umbrella and composition, can be discussed
later. We are open to negotiations and will continue
to call on the international community, including the
United Nations and OSCE member States, to engage
constructively in putting the initiative into practice.
In conclusion, I would again like to draw the
Council’s attention to the issue of human rights. At least
11 Ukrainian citizens have become political prisoners
in Russia. They include a member of the Ukrainian

S/PV.7683

Parliament and of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko, a Ukrainian
film-director and native Crimean-Ukrainian citizens.
We approved a sanctions list against individuals
who took part in mock trials of Ukrainian political
prisoners in Russia, the so-called Savchenko-Sentsov
list. We expect that our international partners will join
that initiative.
The only thing we are interested in is achieving a
lasting, just and fair peaceful solution. That will not
be an easy task to accomplish, we know, but anything
short of it would be unacceptable to the Ukrainian
people, whose best sons and daughters already paid
the ultimate price in defending their homeland. We are
ready to do our part of the job, but I am afraid that the
keys to sustainable de-escalation and a subsequent longlasting settlement reside in Moscow. It is Moscow that
has to produce those keys and open the door to a better,
peaceful future without death, hatred or sanctions.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, the Special Representative in Ukraine
of the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine for their briefings. It is important that they
were all able to speak today in order to give the Security
Council a complete picture of the developments in
the situation on the ground on all fronts — political,
security, humanitarian and human rights.
For France, a settlement of the crisis in eastern
Ukraine remains more vital than ever. Together with
Germany, we have continued to work uninterruptedly
on mediation within the Normandy format with the
aim of achieving a full settlement to the crisis between
Ukraine and Russia in accordance with the framework
outlined in the Minsk agreements. Our goal continues
to be to ensure the restoration of Ukraine’s control
over all of its internationally recognized territory. That
also requires the re-establishment of its authority over
Crimea. On that point, our position is consistent with
international law and will not change.
Today, we are very concerned about the
deteriorating situation on the ground. The increased
pace of violations of the ceasefire, which have been
observed over several weeks, is accompanied by a
human toll that continues to increase, both among the
armed fighters and the civilian population. Since the

16-120019/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

beginning of April, regrettably, there have been more
than 20 deaths and 130 wounded in the Donbas area.
That ongoing low-intensity conflict, marked by regular
clashes in several localities, is unacceptable. It threatens
to undermine the main progress that we had achieved
since August, which was the end of large-scale fighting
and a decrease in the number of victims. It undermines
the credibility of efforts towards ensuring a negotiated
settlement. We must therefore do everything to put an
end to it. Otherwise, there is a serious risk that we could
be heading towards a worsening of the conflict, which
would be detrimental to all parties, not just to Ukraine.
As to the substance, the most recent events on the
ground serve to further substantiate our conclusion
that the Minsk agreements are the sole valid terms of
reference for a peaceful, long-term settlement. There is
no other solution. We regret, therefore, the fragmentary
implementation of those agreements, although they
constitute an international commitment in which the
provisions must be implemented by all parties. That
includes effectively respecting the ceasefire, which is
the only possible basis for making progress, as well
as implementing other measures provided for under
the Minsk agreements, in particular for constitutional
reform when it comes to decentralization and a special
electoral law for Donbas. Setting out a political horizon
is the best way to ensure that the security situation
remains stable. Consolidating the security situation
and implementing the political dimension of the Minsk
agreements are two topics that are at the basis of any
lasting settlement, and cannot therefore be decoupled.
Against that disturbing backdrop, we remain more
than ever committed, alongside our German partners,
to relentlessly pursue our efforts within the Normandy
format for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements and to do so without delay. The solutions
for progress are well known to us all.
In terms of security, it consists of the effective
implementation of the mechanisms discussed at the
most recent ministerial meeting in the Normandy
format, held in Paris on 3 March, for a consolidation
of the ceasefire. Besides the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, those include strengthening the role of
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination and
setting up a mechanism for preventing and resolving
incidents. Moreover, the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine should also be able to carry out
all of its mandate in an unimpeded and free manner.
10/28

28/04/2016

Threats to its operations and the integrity of its staff
are unacceptable.
On the political front, the revival of a positive
dynamic depends first and foremost on the early
adoption of a law on local elections in Donbas, which
should be organized within the context of Ukrainian
law and according to OSCE standards. Holding those
elections can be envisaged only if there is a stable
security environment. In our view, that could be
maintained by a complementary international presence
on the ground under the auspices of the OSCE. We,
together with the German presidency of the OSCE, are
currently considering that.
In humanitarian and human rights terms, it is vital
that humanitarian organizations immediately enjoy full
access, including safe and unimpeded to all territories
under separatist control. Unfortunately, that is still not
the case. We also recall the commitment made in Paris
on 3 March by the parties for the release by 30 April of
all prisoners and illegally detained individuals, which
in our view includes the case of Nadiya Savchenko.
We are concerned about the frequent allegations of
violations of human rights in Crimea, especially against
the Tatars and pro-Ukrainian militants. In that regard,
the decision of the Russian courts to include the Mejlis,
the representative assembly of the Crimean Tatars, on
the list of extremist organizations is a flagrant violation
of the freedom of expression, association and assembly.
It is also important that the neutral observation and
objective monitoring work being carried out by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other human rights organizations
can continue unimpeded throughout Ukrainian
territory, including in Crimea.
We are now at a decisive moment. We hope that the
parties will assume their full responsibilities to allow
the full implementation of the provisions of the Minsk
agreements. The inauguration of a new Ukrainian
Government, which has publicly demonstrated its
intention to make progress on this point, is an important
step. Following that, we, together with our German
partners, have multiplied our high-level contacts with
all parties to revive a dynamic of trust. Those contacts
continue as we speak. We call upon all members of the
Council to support those efforts in order to collectively
speak with one voice. We hope that, at last, sufficient
progress will be made in the coming days in order
to permit the convening of a new Normandy format
ministerial meeting as soon as possible.
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Minister
for his remarks. I join others in welcoming Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Sajdik back to the Security Council, and I
thank them for their sobering briefings today.
As those briefings have told us so clearly, the word
ceasefire is losing its meaning in eastern Ukraine.
Since the start of 2016, it has been broken thousands
of times. Those violations are causing almost daily
casualties. Weapons banned under the ceasefire
are being put to deadly use on the battlefield. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission personnel, charged
with monitoring the ceasefire, are being harassed and
threatened, and worse. People are dying, and those in
need are going hungry.
To illustrate how empty the word ceasefire has
become: just yesterday, tragically, four civilians were
killed. And in response to those harrowing deaths in
Olenivka, all we have seen is just claim and counterclaim, That is not good enough. All sides have an
obligation to uphold the ceasefire. They all have a duty
to protect civilians, especially the vulnerable. What we
need to see is a real, meaningful commitment to the
ceasefire by all sides. That is the only way to stop the
killings. That is the only way for the Minsk agreements
to succeed. A ceasefire is the bedrock for Minsk.
Without it, all the other measures will falter.
All sides have a role to play, but we should be
under no illusions as to where the vast majority of
responsibility lies. It falls squarely at the door of the
Russian-backed separatists. The Special Monitoring
Mission has repeatedly made that clear. It is the
separatists who are harassing OSCE monitors. It is
separatists who risk escalating the febrile situation. And
it is the separatists who are receiving troops, equipment
and weapons from their Russian allies.
The continued support from the Russian Federation
has sustained the instability in eastern Ukraine. Russia’s
so-called humanitarian convoys cross the border
with no regard for Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity or independence. They do so without any
inspection. We therefore call on Russia to prove that
they have nothing to hide and allow international
access to those convoys. While Russia’s support for the
separatists fuelled this crisis, Russia’s influence can
also bring about a conclusion to the madness. We call
on Russia to use its influence for good, to bring the

S/PV.7683

separatists to heel, so that they respect the ceasefire
and withdraw banned weapons, so that they allow
unhindered access to the Special Monitoring Mission,
and so that international humanitarian agencies can
finally access all areas of separatist-held territory. It
is almost meaningless to discuss any other aspect of
Minsk until that has happened.
What we are discussing today — the death, the
suffering — these are all the bloody consequence of
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea two years ago.
That act of aggression went against every treaty, every
international commitment, that Russia has ever made.
It went against all the rules and norms of international
behaviour in the modern world. Our position on that
act of aggression will never waiver: Russia must return
Crimea to Ukraine. Until it does, it will continue to face
the consequences of its illegal actions.
Over the past two years, the human rights situation
in Crimea has deteriorated. For minorities and
political opponents, life under the de facto authorities
is now characterized by arrests, ill treatment, torture
and intimidation. The Crimean Tartar community
has been particularly affected. The banning of their
representative institution this week is just the latest in a
series of attacks on their community, their organizations
and their way of life.
In the light of the evidence found in United Nations
and OSCE human rights reporting, it is perhaps
unsurprising that Russia has consistently denied access
to international human rights organizations, save for
the solitary Council of Europe mission in January.
One of the recommendations from that mission, which
reported back to the Council of Europe Secretary
General this month, called on Russia to open up Crimea
to international human rights monitoring mechanisms.
We repeat that call today. Russia must grant such access
to enable a proper assessment of the situation.
Let me conclude with this final point. Through
its actions in Crimea and through its support to the
separatists, Russia has brought chaos to Ukraine. In
that chaos, thousands of lives have been lost, including
those four civilians only yesterday. No matter who fired
the shells that killed those poor people, it is clear that,
without Russia’s actions, they would not have been
exposed to the horrific violence that claimed their lives.
I therefore end by once again calling on Russia to fulfil
its commitments under the Minsk agreements and to

16-1200111/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

28/04/2016

allow Ukraine to regain control of its sovereign territory.
That can happen only if there is a stable ceasefire.

OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, from
25 January to 10 April,

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Tayé-Broook Zerihoun, Ambassador Apakan
and the Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine, Mr. Martin Sajdick,
for their informative briefings. I would also like to
thank the Ukrainian delegation for calling this essential
meeting. We recognize, as I think all members of the
Council do, the critically important work that OSCE
teams are carrying out in the field, often at significant
personal risk — as illustrated by the recent attacks
on OSCE monitors. We also note the great work
done by United Nations staff — again at significant
personnel risk, as evinced by the detention of a United
Nations staff member by Russian-backed separatists
since 8 April. That staff member should be released
immediately and unconditionally.

“the [Mission] recorded 11 consecutive weeks in
which the number of recorded ceasefire violations
was higher than in any other single week since
early September 2015.”

The Security Council has not met to discuss
the situation in Ukraine since December 2015 (see
S/PV.7576) — a long stretch by recent standards. It
would not be unreasonable to interpret the absence of
meetings as a sign, perhaps, that the implementation of
the Minsk agreements is advancing. Yet, as we all know,
and as we have heard starkly today, that is, sadly, not
the case. Over the past several months, the conflict has
worsened. Violence has increased, and the challenges
to implementation of the Minsk agreements have only
increased. Before delving into those discouraging
developments, it is important to remind ourselves of the
root cause of this crisis.
What is happening today is the result of Russia’s
violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which began with its occupation of Crimea
more than two years ago. That occupation expanded
with substantial military on the ground and weapons
support for armed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Every negative consequence of the conflict that we see
today — every one — can be traced back to that original
sin. We must not lose sight of that incontrovertible
fact, even as we focus on the issues and the human
consequences in the present.
Let me begin with the situation in eastern Ukraine,
where violence along the line of contact has reached its
highest levels since the 1 September 2015 ceasefire was
declared. According to the most recent report by the
12/28

On 14 April alone — and this is shocking even by
Ukraine standards — the Monitoring Mission recorded
more than 4,000 ceasefire violations, some 500 of them
on a single day, using heavy weapons that are prohibited
under the Minsk agreements.
Just yesterday, as others have noted, we were again
reminded of the dreadful human toll of this violence,
when an explosion killed four civilians and wounded
at least eight more along the line of contact. This cycle
of escalation must stop. As the fighting has increased,
the unarmed international monitors, whose job it is to
document ceasefire violations and to try to de-escalate
the violence, have found themselves denied access,
threatened and, in some instances, even targeted
themselves.
The climate, as has been noted by OSCE
colleagues, is a climate of impunity. On 7 April, a
Monitoring Mission vehicle that was driving deep into
Russian-backed separatist-controlled territory some
60 kilometres from the line of contact came under
small arms fire. The same day, in separatist-controlled
Luhansk, another such vehicle was blocked by Russianbacked separatist forces. When a monitor stepped out of
the vehicle to negotiate their passage, a Russian-backed
separatist cocked his rifle and pointed it directly at the
monitor. Those are not isolated incidents. According
to OSCE reports, separatists have been responsible for
more than 90 per cent of incidents in which access has
been restricted or denied during this month.
That brings us back to a question we have asked
many times before in the Council. When Russia and the
separatists it backs have denied impartial monitors and
investigators access — from the time of the invasion
of Crimea to the inspection of the Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 crash site — the question is: what do they
have to hide? Why are OSCE monitors so scary that
one needs to shoot up their car, cock guns at them and
impede their movement? What is Russia hiding?
Working to ensure that a comprehensive and
sustained ceasefire takes hold along the line of contact,
and that OSCE monitors have the full and unfettered
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

access they need to help monitor that ceasefire, is the
sina qua non for the political steps set out in the Minsk
agreements. Consider the steps of passing an electoral
law and holding free and fair local elections under
Ukrainian law and in accordance with OSCE standards.
That is of critical importance. We all recognize that.
Yet, to hold a democratic election, citizens and election
monitors need basic security and basic freedom of
movement. Candidates must be able to express their
opinions and assemble publicly without fear of violence
or reprisals. Yet the climate created by the separatists
in the parts of eastern Ukraine that they occupy is not a
climate that looks anything like that.
In addition to de-escalating the fighting and
allowing full access for international monitors
throughout eastern Ukraine, Russia must engage
constructively and support serious efforts to propose an
election law for areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast,
as well as support the steps necessary for an adequate
security environment for elections in the Donbas region
that meet OSCE standards. Actions such as those, as
well as the release of all hostages and detained persons,
will help pave the way for further implementation of
the Minsk agreements, which should ultimately lead to
Russia’s withdrawal of all forces and equipment from
Ukrainian territory and the restoration of Ukrainian
control over its side of the international border.
Pulling back forces and abiding by the ceasefire is
also crucial to improving the dire humanitarian situation
faced by civilians, who are disproportionately bearing
the costs of Russia’s aggression in Ukraine. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, an estimated 3.1 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance as a result of the ongoing
conflict. Approximately 1 million of those people live
along the line of contact or in separatist-controlled
territory. Yet they are receiving only a fraction of
the aid they need, in large part because Russianbacked separatists expelled most United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations in July 2015,
and have not allowed them consistent access since.
In a perverse cycle, Russia uses the dire humanitarian
situation that it has helped fuel to send its so-called
humanitarian convoys across the international border
with Ukraine, all the while preventing Ukrainian and
international authorities from inspecting those convoys.
Once again, if your convoys are filled with food and
medicine, why prevent international inspectors from
looking inside of them. To that end, we again urge

S/PV.7683

Moscow to honour its commitments in Minsk to ensure
that separatists allow the immediate resumption of full
humanitarian access.
As the Government of Ukraine seeks to address
this Russian-manufactured crisis, it should facilitate
the safe movement of civilians and commercial cargo
across the contact line. It should keep checkpoints into
separatist-controlled territories open, unless closing
them is essential to ensuring the security of civilians.
And it should find ways consistent with security and
administrative requirements to ensure that social,
economic and educational benefits are provided to
internally displaced persons and other populations,
such as older persons and persons with disabilities.
Let me turn to another part of Ukraine, Crimea. It
has been more than two years since Russia held its sham
referendum, one, we must recall, where the question
posed to voters — those who turned out — was to join
or leave Ukraine. Some choice. It has been two years
since then, as well, that 100 Member States, including
the United States, adopted General Assembly resolution
68/262, which underscores that the referendum has no
validity and affirms our shared commitment, as stated
in paragraph 1, to
“the sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders”.
If you want a picture of the way Russian authorities
govern on sovereign Ukrainian territory, just look at
Crimea today. On Tuesday of this week, the Russiancontrolled Supreme Court in Crimea declared the
Mejlis, the self-governing body of the Crimean Tartars,
an extremist organization. As a result, virtually all
forms of Tartar political expression and organization
have effectively been criminalized. No more speaking
to the press — that is a crime. No more convening
meetings — a crime. No more holding elections — a
crime. Of course, the Mejlis will be allowed to keep its
bank accounts, although now they may be used only to
pay taxes and penalties to occupying authorities. On the
day of the ruling, Crimea’s so-called Chief Prosecutor
declared,
“Today, we build a world in which every Crimean
will be safe and joyful”.
That is unless one is a Crimean Tartar or another
resident who happens to oppose the occupation.

16-1200113/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

Meanwhile, the crackdown on dissent in Crimea
continues to deepen, as the few remaining independent
journalists and other critical voices are methodically
targeted. On 18 April, a high-ranking Russian justice
official argued publicly for passing legislation that
would treat questioning the legitimacy of sham Crimea
referendum as an “extremist activity”, punishable by
law. The following day, the homes of at least seven
journalists in Crimea were raided by authorities. One
of those journalists is now facing up to five years in
prison on charges of allegedly “calling for undermining
Russian territorial integrity via mass media”. In another
words, for reporting that Crimea is part of Ukraine, as
all United Nations maps show that it is, one is locked up.
How is that possible? In Crimea and eastern Ukraine,
as in so much of Russia, telling the truth is now an
extremist activity. Go figure.
Let me conclude. I began my remarks today by
encouraging us all not to lose sight of the root cause of
this crisis: Russia’s occupation of Crimea and ongoing
arming, training and fighting alongside separatists in
eastern Ukraine. Just as the root cause of this crisis has
not changed, neither has the solution. As has always
been the case, the crisis manufactured by Russia can
and must be ended by Russia, by stopping its arming,
training and fighting alongside separatists in eastern
Ukraine and by ending its illegal occupation of Crimea.
The Minks agreements offer the only pathway — one
agreed upon by all sides — to de-escalate this conflict,
to restore peace to Ukraine and to reaffirm the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity that undergird
all of our collective security. But to implement them,
Russia and the separatists whom it supports must
fulfil the very first step of abiding by an immediate
and comprehensive ceasefire and grant full access to
OSCE monitors. Together with the Normandy format
leaders, the United States will continue to press for
their full implementation by all parties, just as we will
keep sanctions in place for as long as Russia continues
to obstruct their implementation. And we will maintain
our Crimea sanctions until Russia ends its occupation
of the peninsula.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
debate. I also thank, the briefers, my good friends
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik. I have had the
pleasure of working with both of them here at the
United Nations, where they both did excellent work.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign
14/28

28/04/2016

Affairs and Chief of Staff of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine for joining us in this debate.
Spain believes that the situation in eastern Ukraine
continues to be extremely concerning. The information
we have just heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun and Ambassador Apakan only confirm that.
Consequently, we want to see the Security Council
continue following up accordingly on the development
of the conflict in its different aspects and use all tools
at its disposal to support the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Normandy format countries, which Spain supports.
Today’s information also serves to confirm that we
are once again going through a troubling time. Not only
is the ceasefire that was called for six months ago not
being respected in a sustained and consistent manner,
but in recent weeks violations have increased and the
number of victims rises daily. Moreover, the other
security aspects covered by the Minsk agreements that
the Council endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015) are not
being applied.
I wish to point out in particular our concern about
the lack of progress in connection with demining
activities, given the disastrous effect that that has
on the civilian population. We are also concerned by
the humanitarian situation and what we have heard
concerning the human rights situation. In that regard,
we have also very carefully read and taken note of
the most recent report of the human rights Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
With regard to the political provisions of the
agreements, Spain also believes that the main obstacle
to moving forward, with respect to them is the lack
of stability and minimal security conditions in the
Donbas region. The status quo is unsustainable, and
maintaining it can lead only to a further worsening
of the situation on the ground and, in particular, more
suffering on the part of the of the civilian population,
which should be a priority in our deliberations when we
consider the conflict.
We all know that freezing conflicts does not bring
us closer but, on the contrary, moves us farther away
from a solution, perpetuating over time their harmful
effects. Consequently, we need to redouble our efforts
in supporting the Minsk process and the work of the
Trilateral Contact Group within the framework of the
OSCE, so that we can soon see concrete progress. The
Minsk agreements are still the only valid framework
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

to seeking a political solution to the conflict, which
has gone on for far too long. But it is not enough to
simply repeat that time and time again, if they are not
accompanied by a real and active commitment with
regard to the obligations that they entail.
Everyone, including members of the Council, must
focus their efforts on their full, immediate and — above
all — good-faith implemention of the agreements. By
everyone I mean not only the parties who are directly
involved, but also especially all of those who have
an ability to influence those parties. In that regard,
I call once again on Russia in particular, in its dual
capacity as member of the Normandy format and as an
actor with a great capacity to influence the separatist
leaders of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk. We condemn the lack of political resolve and
commitment that these leaders continue to demonstrate,
and in particular the difficulties they repeatedly
raise for humanitarian actors, including those of the
United Nations. We also condemn the constraints they
continue to impose on the full mobility and privileges
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission, with occasional
recourse to violence. These actions are unjustifiable
and unacceptable and must end.
I cannot conclude without recalling once again the
content of General Assembly resolution 68/262, which
is binding on us all. Spain is firmly convinced that
any lasting and sustainable solution must necessarily
involve respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and for the human rights
of all its inhabitants, including those of Crimea.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I should like to begin
by thank the three briefers — Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun, Ambassador Apakan and my former
colleague, Ambassador Martin Sajdik — for their
insightful and sobering briefings.
Japan is deeply concerned by the current situation
in Ukraine. The briefings we have just heard confirm
our concern. Ukraine may not make headlines these
days, but the situation is far from calm and stable. The
number of ceasefire violations in Donetsk and Luhansk
has been on an upward trend since January. During
the week of 11-17 April, nearly 1,000 rounds of mortar
fire were recorded — the highest number this year. In
March, 20 Ukrainian soldiers were killed. This was the
highest number of casualties since August 2015.

S/PV.7683

We must challenge this deadlock. The answer lies
in the Minsk agreements. That document has been
agreed to and signed by all the relevant parties. It was
also endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015). Japan once
again urges all parties to fully and promptly implement
the Minsk agreements.
It is a matter of concern that the freedom of
movement of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
is increasingly restricted. The Special Monitoring
Mission has been playing a pivotal role in helping
to de-escalate the crisis. Without such restrictions,
the Mission could do much more. Japan stresses that
the Special Monitoring Mission must be given full
and unfettered access throughout the conflict zone,
including the entire border region.
Japan strongly believes that the conflict in Ukraine
can be solved only by diplomatic means and in full
respect for international law, especially the legal
obligation to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence.
In closing, I wish to confirm that Japan, as Chair of
the Group of Seven Ukraine Support Group and as one
of the largest donors to Ukraine, remains committed to
supporting Ukraine’s efforts for reform.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I should like
to begin by thanking Ukraine for calling for this
debate and to welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs to our meeting. I also want to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassadors Apakan
and Sajdik for their briefings.
In February 2015, the Council endorsed the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which laid out a number of agreed steps
aimed at ending hostilities, alleviating humanitarian
suffering and establishing a path towards resolving the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. Yet more than a year later,
none of these measures has been implemented fully. Even
the first and most basic of the agreed measures — an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire — is routinely
violated. Worryingly, these violations have increased
in intensity in recent weeks. The second agreed
measure — the withdrawal of heavy weapons — has
also not been fully implemented. Recent reports of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) highlight the use of artillery, mortars and
tanks, all of which were supposed to have been pulled
back from the contact line over year ago.

16-1200115/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

28/04/2016

The situation is deeply troubling. Given the
abundance of arms in the separatist-controlled regions,
there is a real risk of further violent escalation. The
persistent violence has caused the deaths of thousands
of people, with tens of thousands more injured. Essential
civilian infrastructure has been damaged and cannot be
repaired amidst flying bullets and falling shells. More
than 1.5 million people are internally displaced.

numbers of Ukrainians face daily challenges accessing
basic necessities, including food and water. All sides
need to intensify their efforts to ensure that support
reaches civilians in affected areas and those that have
been displaced by the violence. Ultimately, however,
the lives of civilians will be best protected through
full implementation of the Minsk Agreements and the
restoration of peace.

Beyond the terrible human costs, the failure
to stabilize the security situation has also made
progressing other aspects of the Minsk agreements much
more difficult. We call on the parties to honour their
commitments and implement all aspects of the Minsk
agreements. This is the best path towards a stable and
lasting peace. As a matter of priority, all parties must
deliver on their commitment to a genuine ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, monitored and
verified by the OSCE. We reiterate our call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that they
implement commitments made in Minsk.

Lastly, let me reiterate New Zealand’s rejection
of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
the Organization.

The OSCE has a critical role to play in verifying
implementation. It is therefore of real concern that
OSCE monitors continue to face significant constraints
on access and movement in areas under separatist
control, including along most of the Ukrainian border
that remains under separatist control. Again, we urge
Russia to use its influence over the separatists to ensure
that OSCE monitors can effectively and safely fulfil
their responsibilities under the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We
condemn recent aggressive acts against OSCE monitors
in separatist-controlled areas, including being fired
upon and threatened at gunpoint. Such actions must be
repudiated by all sides.
On the political aspects of the Minsk agreements,
we need to see faster progress. Reaching agreement
on modalities for elections — which are to be held in
accordance with relevant OSCE standards, monitored
by the OSCE and in a secure, stable environment — is
a priority. Discussions in the Trilateral Contact Group
and Normandy format need to be approached in good
faith and with a determined focus on problem-solving.
We hope that practical steps can be agreed in order to
break the current impasse.
We must not lose sight of the ongoing suffering of
the civilians caught up in this conflict and its aftermath.
The humanitarian challenges flowing from the crisis in
Ukraine continue to affect the lives of millions. Huge
16/28

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join my other colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to the briefers for their
comprehensive assessments of the latest situation in
Ukraine. My delegation acknowledges the presence of
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine at
today’s meeting.
Over one year after the signing of the Minsk II
agreement and its endorsement by the Council via
resolution 2202 (2015), we need to examine how
much progress had been made in its implementation.
Listening to the briefers, it is obvious that much more
need to be done.
Malaysia is deeply concerned by the daily violations
of the ceasefire. The recent escalation in violence in
eastern Ukraine and the missing weapons from the
storage sites detected by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission are alarming signs, and we hope do not indicate
for the direction in which we are heading. While we
welcome the progress made to date in implementing
the Minsk agreements, such as the exchange of
prisoners and on constitutional reform, we wish to see
more efforts towards the holding of local elections in
Donetsk and Luhansk, in accordance with the laws
of Ukraine, the reinstatement of full border control
by Ukraine and the withdrawal of all foreign military
personnel, mercenaries and military equipment from
Ukraine’s territory.
We reiterate our call on the parties to cooperate
fully with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine to enable its personnel to carry out their
mandate, including by providing full and unhindered
access to the OSCE to rebels-held areas in the Donbas
region and the requisite information to enable the OSCE
to verify the withdrawal of heavy weapons. Any threats
to the security and safety of the OSCE personnel and
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

obstructions that prevent them from fulfilling their
mandate are unacceptable. The recent capture of a
United Nations staff member by the separatists is a
cause of great concern, and we urge his immediate and
safe release.
On the humanitarian situation, we remind the
parties to honour their obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law, particularly
on the protection of civilians. Malaysia urges all
parties to allow safe and unrestricted humanitarian
access to those in need. We reiterate our position
that humanitarian assistance must be carried out,
in accordance with international law, international
humanitarian law and respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. We reiterate the need for a peaceful political
solution to the conflict, based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We commend the hard work of the OSCE and the
Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine, and we urge the
relevant parties to intensify cooperation through those
frameworks in good faith.
In conclusion, we urgently need to break the
current deadlock and to halt the downward spiral in
implementing the Minsk agreements. Every effort must
be made to uphold and stabilize the ceasefire and build
trust through confidence-building measures. Malaysia
therefore urges both sides to renew their commitment,
engage in good faith and redouble their efforts to fully
implement the provisions of the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, as
well as Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador Sejdik
for their comprehensive briefings to the Security
Council on the developments in Ukraine and on the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We would
also like to welcome Mr. Vadym Prystaiko, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Egypt has always stressed the need to intensify
international efforts to reach a lasting political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine, a solution that would
bring security and stability in Ukraine, according
to the Minsk agreements. Egypt believes that those
agreements are the best framework for reaching a

S/PV.7683

lasting and sustainable settlement to the conflict raging
in the country.
Security Council resolution 2202 (2015) calls on all
the parties to implement a package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, especially
those related to the commitment to a ceasefire,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the adoption of
necessary constitutional reforms and the holding of
local elections in Donbas. The package also calls
for addressing the humanitarian implications of the
conflict, in coordination with all the relevant parties
without exception.
Egypt expresses its deep concern over the
meagre progress on those fronts. We urge all parties
to comply fully with their commitments under the
Minsk agreements. We call on all parties to engage in
the dialogue process and to work towards a peaceful
solution that meets the aspirations of the people of
the region.
As the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate in Donbas, Egypt stresses the vital need of
ensuring humanitarian access to all affected areas to
improve the life of citizens. Egypt calls on all parties to
exercise self-restraint and to implement fully the Minks
agreements and the ceasefire for the benefit of the
peoples of the region. Egypt will continue to support
all efforts to reach a political settlement to this crisis.
We commend the ongoing efforts at dialogue under the
Normandy format and by other international partners
to that end.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the delegation of Ukraine
for bringing this item to the attention of the Security
Council, and also for the presence of Mr. Vadym
Prystaiko, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine. We would also like to thank Mr. Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
Ambassadors Apakan and Sejdik for their briefings.
Our country has been following with concern the
recent events in eastern Ukraine, as well as the recent
ceasefire violations. We regret that, two years after
the conflict began, hostilities have again intensified
in recent months, and we are concerned by the reports
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
with respect to the presence of heavy weapons, tanks
and artillery systems on both sides of the contact line
in the security zone in eastern Ukraine. In that regard,

16-1200117/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

we believe it is crucial to increase efforts and step up
dialogue in order to ensure the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements. We understand that is the
appropriate way to find a political and peaceful solution
to the conflict. In that spirit, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015). We urge
the parties to comply with their obligations under the
agreements and thereby achieve the objective of the
ceasefire.
Similarly, Uruguay calls upon the parties to
ensure the effective protection of human rights of
the residents of the entire region, in particular the
territories of Donetsk and Luhansk. We believe that
it is crucial for the parties to the conflict to respect
international law and international humanitarian
law in all circumstances. That is essentail in order to
address the situation of internally displaced persons
and persons who require humanitarian assistance, in
particular in terms of protection, continuous supply
of water and food, emergency supplies and other
critical services. It is also crucial to guarantee access
to humanitarian organizations to the affected areas,
and also to guarantee the free and safe circulation of
civilians through the contact line.
Uruguay recognizes the important work done by the
Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE in Ukraine,
and we believe that it is essential that the Mission be
allowed access to all areas of the conflict zone in order
to fulfil its mandate.
Lastly, my country hopes that the challenges in
implementing the Minsk agreements can be overcome
and that existing differences can be settled exclusively
through peaceful means, through dialogue among
the parties and full respect for international law and
democratic values.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome the presence of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has on
many occasions expressed its strict adherence to
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, wherein the peaceful settlement of disputes
and direct dialogue between the parties are an essential
component. That is why we reiterate our conviction
that the full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015),
in support of the decision by the leaders of Ukraine,
18/28

28/04/2016

Russia, France and Germany on 12 February 2015 in
Minsk, is the fundamental basis for the consolidation
of efforts to encourage the parties to work together
towards a political and peaceful solution to the
Ukrainian crisis. In that context, our country considers
the ongoing work of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in support of the
effective implementation of the Minsk agreements to
be a positive step forward and has been following the
recent violent events in the Donbas region with great
attention.
On 5 April 2016, the representatives of the
countries of the Minsk Group of the OSCE condemned
the resurgence of violence and further stated that “there
is no military solution to the conflict”. Also, the joint
statement after the ministerial meeting of the OSCE
Troika on 12 April expressed
“deep concern at reports of increasing numbers of
violations of the ceasefire and the presence of heavy
weapons in the area security in eastern Ukraine”.
Furthermore, they rejected the incidents involving the
monitors of the Special Monitoring Mission.
Venezuela remains convinced that a military
escalation and spread of the conflict should be avoided,
for which the support of the international community
and strict compliance with the Minsk agreements and
resolutions of the Council are required. All parties
should continue working to address the structural
causes of the crisis, in order to achieve a firm and
lasting peace. Any effort to manage the situation will
succeed as long as there is dialogue and support for
direct negotiations, and the parties show political will
using the Minsk agreements as a guide.
Venezuela is convinced and has argued in various
forums of the Organization that the application
of unilateral coercive sanctions are contrary to
international law. In that context, we believe that the
current sanctions are counterproductive to the desire
for peace and stability in the region and are eroding
the climate for dialogue necessary to restoring trust
between the parties.
In any conflict, civilians are the most affected by
violence. We therefore call upon the parties to strictly
abide by the obligations relating to their protection,
including the need to ensure access for humanitarian
assistance to residents, internally displaced persons
and refugees in the affected areas. We reject violence,
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

ethnic and political persecution and acts of terrorism,
regardless of who commits them. Any incident
should be independently investigated, with evidence
being provided to support the conclusions of such
investigations.
Finally, we call on all parties to work with conviction
in efforts to achieve a just and lasting political solution
that is in their own interest and in that of the entire
region.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, the Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Ambassador Ertuğrul
Apakan, and the Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairperson-in-office in Ukraine, Ambassador Martin
Sajdik, for their briefings. We also welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to this meeting.
After a period of calm, with a ceasefire holding
since the last quarter of 2015, violence has returned
to the east of Ukraine, marking the end of a period
of hope for better days in the country. Deaths of
civilians, disappearances, violations of women’s rights,
displacement of people, humanitarian crises and human
misery will again become realities of life in eastern
Ukraine unless a ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
are not reinstated in earnest.

S/PV.7683

We regret constraints on humanitarian access and
urge all parties to the conflict to facilitate the safe, rapid
and unimpeded access by humanitarian organizations
to the areas and people in need. Once again, we call for
the immediate cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal
of all heavy weapons and the full implementation of
the Minsk agreement’s package of measures. We
furthermore call for full access for the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission and for monitoring and verifying
compliance with the Minsk agreements and urge strict
respect for international commitments agreed under
international guarantees so that the people of Ukraine
are allowed to live in peace, freedom and security.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations
and strict respect for the principles of international law
and the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s briefing. I would also like to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to the
Council.

We reiterate our support for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, which were endorsed by
the Security Council through resolution 2202 (2015),
and for a permanent ceasefire, as the prerequisites for
the speedy implementation of the Minsk agreements’
package of measures and ultimately the establishment
of a durable and sustainable peace in Ukraine.

The outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine two years
ago testifies to the seriousness of the issue of conflict
prevention, the Security Council’s responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and how urgent it is that we step
up its efforts in that regard. That was why my delegation
welcomed the meeting the Council held in this Chamber
in February (see S/PV.7635) with Mr. Franz-Walter
Steinmeier, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), one of
whose priorities, rightly, is the crisis in Ukraine, with
the triple goal of renewing dialogue, re-establishing
confidence and restoring security.

We are deeply concerned by the worsening conflict
in eastern Ukraine. Reports of increasing ceasefire
violations, mainly in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
are matters of concern. We regret the restrictions
imposed on the freedom of movement of the Special
Monitoring Mission and express our total disapproval
that heavy weapons previously withdrawn from the
front lines are missing from the permanent storage
sites and are being used by the belligerents. Also of
concern is the situation of internally displaced persons
as a consequence of the reported incidents, while
humanitarian access is increasingly restricted and
serious security incidents are being reported.

That is why my delegation, which continues to
be deeply concerned about the reports of repeated
violations of the ceasefire, would like to recall Senegal’s
commitment to promoting dialogue and international
cooperation as means to help resolve disputes. In that
regard, I would like to reaffirm my country’s support
for the Minsk agreements, signed in September 2014
and finalized in February 2015, which constitute a
solid basis for reaching a sustainable and credible
political solution to the situation in eastern Ukraine. It
is therefore vital that the parties join their efforts, with
the support of the negotiating frameworks already in
place, with the aim of fostering a climate conducive to

16-1200119/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

the diplomatic solution that we all want. In that regard,
we should support the efforts that have already been
made to reduce tensions and promote peace, stability
and security, as well as to facilitate dialogue among
the authorities, civil society and ethnic and religious
groups.
We hope that the various initiatives will contribute
to stabilizing the ceasefire more effectively, ensuring
the withdrawal of heavy weapons and solidifying
a national dialogue, in accordance with the Minsk
agreements and within the framework of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine. In
that context, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the extension by the Permanent Council of the OSCE
of the mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine to 31 March 2017. Given the Monitoring
Mission’s impact on the de-escalation and withdrawal
of weapons, we believe that the OSCE monitors should
continue to benefit from free access to the area in
order to better fulfil their role and ensure the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements, particularly
the ceasefire. Bearing in mind the importance of
establishing credible and legitimate institutions in
the current situation, it seems equally crucial to make
appropriate arrangements for the holding of local
elections in accordance with the provisions of the
Minsk agreements.
I would like to conclude by urging the parties to
renew their commitment to dialogue and by assuring
them of Senegal’s full support in their efforts to reach a
negotiated and sustainable political solution.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to warmly welcome our
former colleagues, Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan and Mr. Martin
Sajdik, who have undertaken a very difficult task and
for whose efforts we are very grateful. And of course I
would like to thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
The extremely grave crisis in Ukraine sparked
by a coup d’état actively supported from outside the
country has now lasted two and a half years. Today,
astonishingly, the Permanent Representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom have attempted
to tie the start of the crisis to the unification of Crimea
with Russia. There is no need to distort the facts. They
will not succeed in covering up their blame for the
crisis. At the moment Crimea is an island of stability by
comparison with Donbas in former Ukraine.
20/28

28/04/2016

For the duration of the crisis in Ukraine, the Security
Council has unfortunately been used as a platform for
propaganda. The single, although very significant,
achievement within the walls of this Chamber was the
adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), which approved the
package of measures agreed to on 12 February 2015.
In adopting that resolution, the Council took on the
political responsibility for ensuring the implementation
of the package. That is what we must focus on. In our
conversations, some of our Western colleagues have
admitted that Kyiv is not implementing it. But they also
say that, while President Poroshenko personally agreed
to the document in Minsk, he does not have sufficient
political clout to implement its provisions. We do
not accept such explanations. Why did the current
Ukrainian leaders seize power through a coup d’état if
they were not capable of governing their country?
We will be keeping a close watch on the behaviour
of the new Ukrainian Government. Mr. Yatsenyuk,
who was well known for his bellicose statements, has
resigned as Prime Minister. It appears that there are
no serious differences between the President and the
new Prime Minister and that the latter does intend to
implement reforms. But it seems clear that there can
be no question of reform succeeding until the bloody
conflict is settled and until Ukrainian society comes
together and rejects its hostile ideology of extreme
nationalism.
In that context, we were interested in the Ukrainian
delegation’s proposal to hold this Security Council
meeting today, particularly since President Poroshenko
announced that this was done on his personal
initiative. We need to know what the new power
structure in Kyiv has to say about its intentions with
regard to implementing the Minsk agreements. That
is particularly the case in view of the fact that before
proposing that initiative, the Kyiv authorities, as usual,
consulted Washington, and an assistant to the Secretary
of State visited Kyiv. In their bilateral contacts, our
American partners have said that they would like to
make a constructive contribution to settling the crisis
in Ukraine and would even like to join the Normandy
format. In practice, however, as we have seen more than
once, their interactions with Kyiv have the opposite
effect, leading to a radicalization of the Ukrainian
authorities’ positions and increasingly aggressive
rhetoric on their part. Now this has happened again.
With policies such as these, based on a hidden agenda,
Washington is undermining trust in its actions, and, as
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

everyone knows, not just in Ukraine but in many other
cases. The statement made today by the United States
representative is yet another example of that policy. And
today’s statement by the representative of Ukraine was
deeply disappointing, with a lot of provocative rhetoric
and twisting of the facts but zero concrete plans for
implementing the Minsk agreements.
The tasks facing Kyiv in implementing the package
of measures are very clear. The political triad is crucial.
First, it involves changing Ukraine’s Constitution and
enacting a permanent law on special status for Donbas.
Secondly, it has to include the enactment of a law
on elections in Donetsk and Luhansk in agreement
with their representatives. Thirdly, it has to settle the
problem of amnesty in connection with the events that
have occurred in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
None of those issues has been resolved. Kyiv continues
to refuse to conduct a direct dialogue with the Donbas
representatives or to agree with them on the steps to be
taken, as provided for in the Minsk agreement. In Kyiv
they love to say that it is Russia that is not implementing
the package of measures. But it is not we who have to
enact all these laws, it is the Verkhovna Rada, and it
is not we who have to put them into effect, it is the
President of Ukraine. It is perfectly clear that they are
simply looking to shift the blame for their problems and
make it somebody else’s headache.
We are always hearing from Kyiv that the main
obstacle to solving the fundamental problems with the
settlement is the instability of the ceasefire. However, if
we consider it logically and carefully compare the facts
of the reports of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), it becomes clear whose interests are served
by constantly stirring up the situation on the contact
line. It is no accident that the Ukrainian authorities are
constantly putting out new ideas either about deploying
peacekeeping forces or sending in police with heavy
weapons. That is, after all, a very convenient way to
proceed: first deliberately fan tensions, and then offer
solutions that are unrelated to reality. The sole objective
is to play for time and to distract attention from the
non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. We are
concerned about reports with regard to the worsening
situation in the conflict zone in Donbas. The situation
began to heat up in December 2015, particularly after
Ukrainian armed forces began to occupy towns in the
neutral strip. On some occasions, they even crossed the

S/PV.7683

contact line as defined by the Minsk agreements. We
view those acts as very dangerous and provocative.
Ukrainian forces must pull out of those towns.
That assessment is supported by the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission. On 17 April, the representatives
of the Ukrainian forces, in discussion with OSCE
observers, did not hide their intention to occupy new
territories in the south-east. The number of violations
of the ceasefire have recently been equal to those in
the heated period of the summer of 2015. On some
days, there have been up to 4,000 such violations.
OSCE statistics indicate that the Ukrainian side is the
side that is most responsible for those violations. From
4 to 21 April, the Special Monitoring Mission noted a
threefold increase in Ukrainian heavy weapons in the
security zone. The most recent report states that only
9 per cent of the declared Ukrainian weapons remain in
their storehouses. A significant portion of the missing
weapons can be found in the forward positions of the
Ukrainian forces. They have continued to use heavy
weapons against Donbas towns. As a result, they are
destroying houses, and civilians are suffering.
Yesterday, the Ukrainian forces, armed with 120mm weapons, shelled the checkpoint and crossing point
of Olenivka. Four civilians were killed, including a
pregnant woman. Our British colleague said that he does
not care who is shooting, but it matters to us. There was
a meeting today of the Permanent Council of the OSCE
to consider specific measures to improve the security
situation. We need to have a permanent presence of
OSCE observers in there, and we must get Kyiv to
remove the serious constraints on their movements.
We must also monitor the weapon storehouses, and, if
necessary, put in surveillance cameras there and in the
most dangerous sectors. We must also have “mirror”
patrols, not only on all of the territory of the Donbas
region, but also in the rear guard of the Ukrainian army.
We must step up our efforts to ensure local ceasefires,
and we need to have a Joint Control Coordination Centre
whose patrols are manned by representatives of the
armed forces involved. We must have direct contacts
between the various sections. All those measures could
seriously reduce the number of incidents.
However, it is remains clear, as has been seen
in many regional crises throughout the world, that
maintaining a ceasefire without resolving the political
problems is impossible. Instead of promoting national
reconciliation by implementing the Minsk agreements,
Ukraine continues its witch hunts and efforts to prepare

16-1200121/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

for war. The latest example of that trend, instead of the
needed reforms, is the decision to set up a ministry to
deal with “anti-terrorist operations” in the “occupied
territories”. Ukraine has persisted in calling the
representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk separatists,
despite the fact that those representatives signed the
Minsk agreements and demonstrated their willingness
to continue to live in a Ukrainian State. An economic
blockade remains in place on Donbas. All dissidents
are being called terrorists and separatists, and they are
being persecuted in all kinds of ways.
The standard operating procedure for those in
power in Kyiv has been torture and abuse of individuals,
arbitrary detention and extrajudicial punishment, much
of which has been cited by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, but
the Western patrons of human rights prefer not to
talk about that. The American and British Permanent
Representatives have tried again today to slander our
humanitarian convoys into Donbas. From the very
beginning, we called upon the Ukrainian Administration
to organize monitoring at the border, but Kyiv refused.
They have also refused permission to international
entities to carry out such inspections. Generating cheap
propaganda is preferable, it would seem, to relieving
the suffering of the people of Ukraine.
Today, it is not possible to forget the tragic date,
2 May 2014, when, two years ago, 48 people were burned
alive in Odessa and more than 200 were injured. No one
has been punished for that crime. The Council of Europe
Office in Ukraine has stated that the investigation
carried out by the Ukrainian authorities does not meet
the requirements of the European Convention on Human
Rights, in particular the requirements of independence,
effectiveness, thoroughness and timeliness. We call
upon members of the Security Council not to forget that
tragic event. It is important to establish the truth and to
bring those responsible to justice.
In that context, we can only feel disgust at the
recent appointment to the speakership of the Ukrainian
Parliament, the Supreme Rada, of the odious person
known as the “Commander of the Maidan”, who,
according to many witnesses, participated in the
provocative shooting by snipers, both in Kyiv during
the coup and in Odessa. It is not surprising that, when he
assumed that post, he proposed in Parliament that they
should remove the paragraph on the special status of
Donbas from the draft bill on changing the Constitution.
The recent meeting between him and a high-level
22/28

28/04/2016

representative from Washington, D.C., again reminds
us of the mechanism behind those bloody events.
In conclusion, I should like to again stress that
what is extremely important today is to implement
the package of measures on the Minsk agreements, as
well as the strict, consistent and full implementation
of the provisions of those agreements. It is the only
way forward for settling the conflict in Donbas and for
resolving all related problems.
That concludes the main part of my statement.
Now, if I may be allowed, I would like to make two
brief comments.
As the Council is aware, we were not here to discuss
the issue of Crimea. That is because that is a domestic
affair of the Russian Federation. But since the issue was
raised, I would like to comment. Indeed, the Mejlis of the
Crimean Tatars was banned by Russia because of their
extremist activities. In some countries, after not enough
attention was paid to dealing with extremists, we can
see what serious consequences that has wrought. We
will not repeat that mistake. The reality is that, during
recent times, there has been a new wave of movement
of members of Crimean Tatars to Russian Crimea. We
have seen more then 1,000 requests from Uzbekistan
alone, for example, which have been accepted.
Kyiv should concern itself not about the Tatars in
Crimea but about Donbas, where heavy weaponry and
tanks have been attacking the civilian population, their
homes, schools and hospitals. The civilian population
is also under an economic blockade and their social
benefits and pensions have been cut off. Kyiv on a
daily basis is jeopardizing the people’s rights to health
and to their very lives. We note that, in recent years
in Ukraine, they banned the Communist Party and
many other parties. They have also suppressed civil
society groups and people’s access to the media. In
addition, they have seized and destroyed Orthodox
churches and monasteries under the Moscow Patriarch.
The Parliament has a draft bill aimed at banning the
activities of that Church in Ukraine, although 12,000
people are members of that Church. Such a campaign
could be compared, say, to efforts in a Catholic country
to ban the Catholic Church, for example, because they
did not like that Church. Therefore, our Ukrainian
colleagues and others who are selective human rights
activists should not preach sermons to us.
Now another minor comment, if I may. Mr. Sajdik
in his statement said something that seemed rather
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

strange to me. He said he requires an answer to the
issue of Kyiv’s control over its borders. But the answer
to that can be found in paragraphs 9 and 11 of the Minsk
agreements’ package of measures, which clearly state
that, after elections are held and the new Constitution
is adopted, Ukraine will then regain control over its
border. There are eight paragraphs that deal with what
exactly should figure in the Constitution about the
special status of eastern Ukraine, Donbas. The answers
are there. We must work in line with the provisions
of the agreements and draw up laws in consultation
with the representatives of the regions concerned. The
Ukrainian authorities do not want to do that, insisting
on restoring what they refer to as their territorial
sovereignty and control, all of which is a cause for
serious concern.
I have a further point. A very important fact has
been communicated to me. When I spoke about the
increased presence of Ukrainian armed forces on the
contact line, this is what I said: the most recent report
of the Special Monitoring Mission noted that Ukrainian
storehouses account for just 9 per cent of the arms stock.
Most of the rest of those weapons can be found in frontline positions, which demonstrates the position of Kyiv
with regard to a peaceful settlement in the Donbas.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, as
well as Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their
respective briefings.
China has been following the situation in eastern
Ukraine closely, and is concerned about the recurring
hostilities. We have taken note that the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group recently held
multiple consultations on the implementation of the
Minsk agreement. We have also noted that the ceasefire
and other issues were discussed at the meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the Normandy format.
Last year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2202 (2015), endorsing the Minsk
agreement and demonstrating the Council’s firm
support for a political solution to the question of
Ukraine. All parties must faithfully enforce the
cessation of hostilities and violence and implement the
Minsk agreement. They must also remain committed
to seeking a comprehensive, lasting, balanced and

S/PV.7683

long-term solution to the question of Ukraine through
dialogue and consultation. Furthermore, that solution
should address the underlying causes of the issue
and should fully accommodate the legitimate rights,
interests and aspirations of all regions and communities
in Ukraine. It also must give equal importance to
addressing all warranted concerns so as to achieve a
balance of all interests. China calls on all the parties
concerned to exercise restraint and to work relentlessly
towards a political settlement and the realization of
peace, stability and development in Ukraine in order to
promote both intercommunal harmony, as well as the
peaceful coexistence of Ukraine and other countries.
The international community should continue
to support all diplomatic efforts towards seeking a
political solution. Council discussions should contribute
to the easing of tensions on the ground and the proper
resolution of the question of Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Apakan to respond
to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Apakan: I wish to thank the Security Council
for giving us this opportunity to address it.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements is
important. From the security prospective, however,
the first, second and the third provisions of the Minsk
agreements are very much related to the ceasefire,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons and addendumproscribed weapons.
We hope to re-instate the ceasefire in the coming
days. We believe that will give us space to pursue
disengagement, de-escalation and confidence-building
measures on the contact line. It will also provide space
to speed up demining efforts in priority areas. I hope
that will also give us an opportunity to engage in more
ceasefire mediation on the contact line. The Council’s
support for the ceasefire and for the security of the
contact line will also pave the way for progress in other
areas, in particular the humanitarian, economic and
political fronts.
Thank you again, Sir, for enabling us to participate
in this meeting.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Sajdik to respond to comments
and questions raised.

16-1200123/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

Mr. Sajdik: Like Ambassador Apakan, I would
like to express my gratitude for having been invited to
brief the Security Council on the situation in eastern
Ukraine.
I understand that there are high expectations, as
well as a certain impatience with the state of affairs.
There are high expectations in terms of scaling up
the work of the Trilateral Contact Group and the four
working groups. I will certainly pass on that message
of the expectations and the feeling of impatience at the
next meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group, which
will take place tomorrow in Minsk.
As Ambassador Apakan said, we very much hope
that at tomorrow’s meeting we will be able to again
establish a ceasefire on the occasion of the Orthodox
Easter holiday, which falls on this weekend. The
ceasefire should not be limited to that holiday, but
endure, restoring the hope of the civilian population in
the areas of eastern Ukraine that they will see a brighter
future. I can only reiterate that I will do everything in
my power to fully implement the 12 February 2015
Minsk agreement, and to ensure that the agreement
works better than it has thus far.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has requested
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, it seems very important to me that
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik take away from this
meeting the impetus to step up the implementation of
the package of measures of the February 2015 Minsk
agreements.
However, I would like to talk about something
slightly different. It is not fully clear to us why the
Ukrainian leadership initiated today’s meeting. Nothing
constructive in terms of internationalmplementing the
package of measures has been heard from the Ukrainian
side. Now, if it was their intention to exacerbate tensions
in order to launch a new military operation, we believe
that such a calculation has not been justified. We have
heard much here in terms of common sense and good
ideas, and we hope that the Ukrainian Government will
listen. They must stop the fighting and the shooting and
deal with the political settlement in a serious manner.
In that regard, we have heard it said that the Minsk
Agreements should be implemented; however, in the
spirit of transparency, that should be put down on paper.
24/28

28/04/2016

Over 24 hours ago, we drafted a press statement for
adoption by the Security Council. Every member of the
Security Council should already have the document,
but I would like it to be circulated here once more, as I
wish to address it.
In the 24 hours since the draft was circulated, only
one delegation — the Ukrainian delegation — has
provided us with feedback. They said that the text was
unacceptable, but did not say why. Now, I would like to
have all members of the Security Council take a look
at the text so that we can adopt it. Although it is very
brief, it does contain two very important dimensions
of the situation. The most important is, of course, the
implementation of the Minsk greements. I will read out
the draft press statement.
“The members of the Security Council recalled
its resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the
‘Package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements’, adopted and signed in Minsk
on 12 February 2015, and called once again for
the full implementation of the package as soon as
possible.”
I would like to recall that paragraph 1 in the package
of measures calls for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire. Much was said about that today, and many
expressed concern about the situation in that regard.
Such an appeal would be very appropriate at this stage.
With regard to the second paragraph, it will soon be
the second anniversary of the tragic events in Odessa.
As we have said, the investigation called for has not
been undertaken, and in Odessa there is much tension
in connection with that issue. There are statements that
various measures will be taken. The so called volunteer
battalions, including Azov battalion and other units
which are known for their atrocities in eastern Ukraine,
are being brought to the city of Odessa, and we would
like the Security Council to take some action, at least,
confirm the need to conduct an investigation, which
would perhaps calm the situation. Accordingly, we have
proposed the following second paragraph in our draft
press statement:
“The members of the Security Council also
recalled the tragic events in Odessa, Ukraine, on
2 May 2014, when dozens of civilians were killed
and hundreds were injured. They underlined the
need to speed up the investigation, while ensuring
its objectivity and impartiality, in order to bring
perpetrators of this reprehensible act to justice.”
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

S/PV.7683

We have drafted the text in such a manner that it
would be impossible to protest the elements contained
therein. I would therefore call on our Ukrainian
colleagues to show some understanding of the current
situation, which is expected of them by many people,
including Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik, with respect to
the realization of the package of measures. How can
they have any objection to the text? We fully do not
understand, and we would therefore propose, in a spirit
of transparency, a vote on this draft text, so that the
President of the Security Council could read it to the
press at the end of our meeting.

city and not that of the Russian representative, I believe
that we have to investigate all of the events there, starting
from the Russians’ actions in Crimea and their support
and incitement that lead to the killing of people, some
of whom were burned alive, in numerous Ukrainian
cities, using knives and other means that were provided
by the Russians. We therefore do not believe that the
draft statement represents an honest attempt on the
part of the Russian representative to bring those tragic
events to our attention, because Russian media have
already reported on the draft statement well before we
were given a chance to read it.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United States of America has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I sincerely thank all
members of the Security Council for giving me a
chance to speak today. It has been a very important
discussion for Ukraine, and I think that all of us agree,
at least, that the Minsk agreements are the only way
forward, in their entirety and complexity, starting
from the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons and
foreign troops, inter alia, to the political resolution, the
changes in our Constitution and the decentralization of
Ukraine. Incidentally, Ukraine has already started the
process of decentralization, and the only part that is not
decentralized is held by pro-Russian proxies.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): Rather than
talk about some hidden agenda of the United States, it
is our view that the Russian Federation delegation, and
all delegations represented on the Security Council,
should work together to re-establish the ceasefire,
arrive at a peaceful de-escalation of the crisis and work
out a peaceful resolution on the ground.

With regard to the Russian representative’s
statement, I am sick and tired, having been in these
negotiations for more than two years, of the accusations
of a bloody revolt in Ukraine. The statement was full
of the usual “Ds”: distract, distort and deny. We have
heard it all before. I have made a very serious effort to
familiarize myself with all of the public statements on
this subject made by the Russian representative up to
now. They add up to 84 pages that are worth reading.
Most of the elements are well-formulated and resemble
the truth, but only if one allows oneself to forget one
principal thing: who came into whose land? Who
appropriated the land? Who started killing people?
Who sent in additional tanks and mercenaries?
With regard to the draft press statement proposed
by the Russian Federation, there is no issue with regard
to the first part, because it represents, as I mentioned
earlier, what all of us here believe and what our leaders
have confirmed, namely, that we have to support the
Normandy format and the Minsk agreements. In
connection with the tragic events in Odessa, my native

We have just received a draft press statement with
the Russian Federation’s suggestion that the Security
Council should consider that draft statement on the
situation in Ukraine. The United States is ready to
engage in a discussion with Council members on a draft
that reflects our consensus view of the situation in its
entirety. Let us recall the situation. I underscore again
that the current crisis in Ukraine is the result of Russia’s
aggression and violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): I wish to respond to
two particular points that the representative of Russia
made in connection with our earlier statement.
First, he made a reference to our comments on
Crimea, which, by the way, according to the United
Nations, is categorically not a part of Russia. He said
that Crimea was a stable peninsula. I would just repeat
the words of my country’s Permanent Representative
in that connection: “grant access to enable a proper
assessment of the situation”. That is all that we are
asking for. Surely, that should be acceptable if Crimea
is a stable peninsula.

16-1200125/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

28/04/2016

Secondly, there was a gross misrepresentation of
my Permanent Representative’s words. Our Russian
colleague said that we do not care who fired the shells.
What my Permanent Representative said was, “no
matter who fired the shells”. As the Russian Permanent
Representative, who speaks excellent English, knows,
the meaning of that is not the same. We are not trying
to express indifference. Far from it, the way we raised
that point was intended to reinforce our view that
responsibility lies on all sides and that they should all
work together to try to deliver a solution.

negotiations — while any action taken separately could
be counter productive.

That is what we expect from Russia. If the Russians
are serious about finding a solution, no matter what
levels of support they are offering to the separatists,
they could do much more in order to help the rest of
us to understand what is really going on in eastern
Ukraine and Crimea. They could do that by agreeing to
consider the Ukrainian request for a policing mission
as well as how to enlarge and adequately equip the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, particularly
along the border.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.

Finally, turning to the draft press statement, I do not
believe that it is a constructive and particularly serious
effort. As the Russian Permanent Representative knows
full well, and as my American colleague has said, the
draft statement does not cover the full picture. Support
to separatists is not mentioned; Nadiya Savchenko is
not mentioned; the investigation into Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is not mentioned; and Crimea is not
mentioned. We will be happy to engage on the draft,
but, as my American colleague said, press statements
are agreed by consensus.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Spain has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
have read the draft press statement from the Russian
Federation, and we agree with the representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom. We are ready to
work on a text. However, it does not seem now as though
there is enough consensus in the Chamber to adopt the
draft press statement as it stands. It appears that there
might be agreement on the first paragraph, but not on the
entire draft press statement. For Spain, at this time, the
Security Council should have a constructive attitude. In
any circumstances, any statement that we issue should
favour a de-escalation, promote goodwill, advance
26/28

The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of France has asked or the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Very
briefly, I just wanat to say that the draft press statement
submitted to us does not seem to cover the entire
subject. Therefore, I believe it would need more work
before being adopted.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): A minor point, but I said accurately in
Russian what my British colleague said, namely, that he
does not care who did the shooting. But we do care. We
continue to believe that those who kill civilians should
not be left unpunished. So we care very much who did
the shooting. But that is not such a substantive detail.
I am more surprised at what our Ukrainian
colleague said about the events that took place on 2 May
2014 in Odessa. The more so as he said that Odessa is
his native town. An event took place in his native town
that shook the whole world. There were many awful
events during the crisis — murders and different forms
of violence — but that event was a milestone. Fortyeight people were burned to death, as could be seen
on television when those who tried to save themselves
jumped out of the windows and were shot. Many
witnesses, including the television coverage itself, said
that the attack was planned, inter alia, by the current
speaker of the Verkhovna Rada.
With regard to what happened in Odessa, the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, who was born in
Odessa, says that that attack does not require special
attention, but, as I have already said, it is possible that
an awful tragedy is in the offing and may take place in
Odessa on 2 May. He is also indifferent. He wants to
see the event in the general context. But our Western
colleagues have also only wished to address the general
context. Their position is quite characteristic. It is
however rather strange for France to do so, as it took
part in the elaboration of the package of measures.
Throughout this chain of events the only useful thing
that we have done, and that we must continue to do in
order to settle the conflict, is to implement the package
16-12001

28/04/2016

Ukraine

of measures. But some say that we cannot confirm the
package of measures. Our Ukrainian colleague said that
he can agree on the first paragraph, but our American
and British colleagues cannot. They say that they want
to play a constructive role, but if we do not refer to the
“aggression”, they will not support the document. There
is nothing about aggression in the package of measures.
We note that the United States likes to use that
term — it has one aggression after another
with
destructive consequences throughout the world. But no
aggression is mentioned in the package of measures.
They are again just trying to draw attention away from
the serious political and diplomatic work. And the
United States says that it wants to be constructive and
help us. How can we understand that claim? It is not
possible to understand that position. It was repeated
again just now. The United States is not even prepared to
agree with the first paragraph, which mentions the need
to ensure the realization of the package of measures
as soon as possible. Why? Because no reference to
Crimea is made in that paragraph? Well, that is because
the package of measures makes no reference to Crimea
either.
It is very clear, as you said, Mr. President, that
there is no consensus here. We see exposed the position
of some members of the Security Council, in particular
our British and the American colleagues. They
ought not to claim that they want to participate in a
constructive manner. France and Germany will perhaps
take part in a constructive way in the implementation
of the package of measures, but the others will still be
engaged in their demagoguery and hide their roles in
all those matters. Here we have come up against one of
the main problems, as a result of which the settlement
of the crisis has been delayed in the Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I will be brief. I will
not add to the attempts to impose more truths, halftruths and lies that members of the Council have been
subjected to for quite a long time. If we are going into
such details, I would like to bring to the Council’s
attention, including that of the Russian representative,
that when we speak of the so-called Minsk package of
measures, we seem to have forgotten about the initial
Minsk agreement, which was signed almost half a
year ago. Why have we forgotten about it? Because the

S/PV.7683

Russian Federation all the time refers only to the Minsk
agreement of 12 February. I must remind the Council
that the original Minsk agreement mentions the special
security area along the Ukrainian corridor monitored
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. If the Russian Federation is so fearful that the
Ukrainian forces will regain control over the territory
of Ukraine, I must remind the representative of the
Russian Federation that the idea, which was supported
by everyone, was that Ukrainian territory should be
returned to Ukraine. But before that, the area around
the Ukrainian-Russian border should be placed under
the monitoring and verification of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, thereby preventing
more weapons and more mercenaries from entering our
territory, a practice that we have repeatedly brought to
the attention of the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to border control, I just spoke
about that when I was talking about Mr. Sadjik’s
comments. Ukraine is delaying everything with regard
to control of the borders. It is very clearly written
in the agreement. The representative of Ukraine
has probably read it. Let me read it. It says that the
restoration of full control of the borders by Ukraine
should begin on the first day after local elections and
be completed with a comprehensive political settlement
with the implementation of article 11, which states
that consultations should take place and an agreement
made with the various representatives of the districts
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Ukraine has not
consulted with representatives of the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions. Ukraine is not implementing article
11, which talks about constitutional reform and about
consultations with the representatives of Donetsk
and Luhansk. This should, furthermore, be done in
accordance with the note in the document, which
contains eight paragraphs on what the special status of
these areas of Ukraine should be.
Once again, I apologize for another comment.
I’d like to see the draft statement adopted, which, as
I understand it, could be acceptable to the Ukrainian
delegation, but then the representative of Ukraine
began talking about who started the killing, pointing
a finger at Russia. Those responsible were those who
sought to overthrow the regime. Around 16 February,

16-1200127/28

S/PV.7683

Ukraine

they started to shoot policemen, and they were the same
persons as those who were throwing Molotov cocktails
for several weeks before. They were the ones who began
the killing. The Kyiv authorities are not investigating
those situations because they want to hide the real truth
behind the coup d’état. Snipers were firing against their
own people and against demonstrators, which created
the conditions for the political coup d’état.
With regard to a final point about the earlier Minsk
agreement, many documents have existed: first, there
was the agreement of 21 February 2014, which would
have enabled us to avoid the entire crisis. Subsequently,
a very good statement was issued with the participation
of the United States of America, a four-party statement,
on 17 April 2014, and it included an inclusive political
dialogue, but all of that was subsequently violated.
The 30 September 2014 agreement was not signed.
Therefore, we came up with a package of measures.
That must be respected. We hope that the appeal that
was made by Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sadjik with regard
to the need to respect the package of measures will be
listened to. Let us not find ourselves having to deal with
some new military adventures, because the situation
along the line of contact gives cause for concern. It can
be seen that some form of military adventurism might
be under way. We must avoid such a situation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representatiave of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I promise, Mr. President,
that this will be my last statement. The Russian
representative was recalling yet another detail of our
long and bloody conflict. The so-called agreements of
21 February — which he just cited — were made possible
with help of the four parties. But the representative of
the Russian Federation has chosen not to remember the
fourth party — Russia was at the table. Although three
members of the international negotiating team helped
Ukraine, the opposition and the President to sign the
agreement, the Russian representative was the only
party who did not sign the document. Obviously, he was
not happy with the agreement between the opposition
and then President, Mr. Yanukovych.

28/28

28/04/2016

In that regard, I have to remind the Council that
the official medal that was produced by the Russian
Federation for the so-called return of Crimea has the
dates on it, starting with 20 February, which is the
day before that agreement was brought to the attention
of the Security Council by the representative of the
Russian Federation. Therefore, the Russian Federation
started — not just planned, but started — the annexation
of Crimea the day before we reached the first agreement
and while President Yanukovych was still in power.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has requested
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Maybe we could continue this discussion in
an another place. The representative of Ukraine helped
me work on that agreement. We believe it is important.
However, President Yanukovych gave up too much as a
result of that agreement, and it seems that its provisions
were weak. That is true, because he was overthrown,
but the signatories of that agreement should have
insisted on respect for the agreement as signed.
Perhaps the representative of Ukraine has his own
interpretation, but the problem is that, if that agreement
had been respected, then in 2014 Ukraine would have
had a new constitution and there would not have been a
conflict. But it started shooting and started to use force,
and now we have seen what has happened.
Throughout this crisis, we have been repeating
one word: “dialogue, dialogue, dialogue”. However,
Ukraine carried out anti-terrorist operations, there
were terrorists, et cetera, and that is what they got.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Russian
Federation has circulated the draft of a press statement.
Considering the situation in the Council, I propose
that after the meeting we continue to discuss the text
among relevant members. If I hear no objection, it is so
decided.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

16-12001
