S/2014/720

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 October 2014
Original: English

Twentieth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Background
1.
The present report is my twentieth semi-annual report on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a review and an assessment
of the process of the implementation of the resolution since my previous report on
the subject was issued on 24 April 2014 (S/2014/296). I note herein the continued
lack of progress on key provisions of the resolution and highlight increasing
concerns about pressure on the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon. While recognizing the efforts of the Prime Minister,
Tammam Salam, and the Government, I highlight the need to elect the new
President and underline the continued impact of the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic on Lebanon and the challenges to efforts to uphold the Lebanese policy of
disassociation from the Syrian crisis.
2.
In response to the political situation in Lebanon, the Security Council, in a
presidential statement adopted on 29 May 2014 (S/PRST/2014/10), expressed
disappointment and concern that the presidential elections had not been conducted
within the time frame set out in the Constitution. The Council appealed to all
Lebanese parties to preserve national unity in the face of attempts to undermine the
country’s stability, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda Declaration, and
stressed the importance for all Lebanese parties to respect the Lebanese policy of
disassociation. On 26 September, the International Support Group for Lebanon
looked to the leaders of Lebanon to show the sense of urgency and flexibility
needed to open the way for the presidential elections to be held without further
delay.
3.
Following a time of relative calm after the formation of the Government,
Lebanon witnessed further challenges to its security situation during the reporting
period, including five terrorist attacks involving improvised explosive devices and
car bombs that left at least three people dead and tens injured. There were also at
least 15 attacks by the Syrian air force on the area around the Lebanese town of
Aarsal, close to the Syrian-Lebanese border. Cross-border shooting, shelling and
rocket attacks from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon regularly took place,
causing death and injury. Until his term as President of Lebanon ended on 25 May,
Michel Sleiman maintained his calls for all Lebanese parties to disassociate

14-62094 (E)

081014

*1462094*

S/2014/720

themselves from the war in the Syrian Arab Republic and to respect their
commitment to the principles of the Baabda Declaration.
4.
The impact of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic on the security and
stability of Lebanon was unmistakeable during the reporting period. In its press
statement of 4 August (SC/11507), the Security Council condemned an attack begun
on 2 August by violent extremist groups on the Lebanese armed forces and internal
security forces in the area of Aarsal, which had caused some 100 fatalities and
numerous injuries by 7 August when it ended. The Lebanese army and security
forces suffered additional casualties in other attacks against them, but remained
robust and resilient in tackling multiple security challenges. There were some
positive developments linked to the implementation of security plans in Tripoli and
the Bekaa.
5.
On 17 June, the Government of Italy hosted a ministerial conference on
international support for the Lebanese armed forces under my auspices in the
context of the International Support Group. The participants acknowledged the
extraordinary pressure on the armed forces and the need to provide additional
international support, in line with the army’s capabilities development plan.
6.
Lebanon, in territory the smallest of the countries neighbouring the Syrian
Arab Republic, continues to host the largest number of refugees per capita in the
world, including 1.2 million registered refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic.
While its support for the refugees remains unabated, Lebanon is facing significant
humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges as a result of the Syrian crisis, with
recent security developments further increasing the pressure. The United Nations
and the Government of Lebanon continue to work closely together to mobilize
greater assistance to help Lebanon to respond to the crisis.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
7.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) on 2 September 2004, several of
its provisions have been implemented, as highlighted in my previous reports.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were conducted freely and fairly in 2008
and 2009. The Syrian Arab Republic withdrew its troops and military assets from
Lebanon in April 2005. Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic established full
diplomatic relations in 2009.
8.
During the reporting period, the Prime Minister continued to affirm the
country’s respect for all United Nations resolutions. The conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic and its corresponding impact on Lebanon, however, continued to limit
progress in the implementation of the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559
(2004) and other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
9.
The delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, which was strongly encouraged
by the Security Council in its resolution 1680 (2006), remains pending. Moreover,
the existence and activities of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias along the border
continue to pose a threat to the stability of the country and the region, highlighting
the need for the Government and the armed forces to step up their efforts to provide
stability and to reach a full monopoly on the possession of weapons and the use of
force throughout Lebanon.

2/11

14-62094

S/2014/720

10. My representatives and I remained in regular contact with all parties in
Lebanon during the reporting period, as well as with relevant regional and
international leaders. I spoke to the President on 25 May to pay tribute to his
leadership during his tenure and to laud his commitment to the unity and stability of
Lebanon, including through the International Support Group and the implementation
of relevant United Nations resolutions. I regret that no sessions of the National
Dialogue have been convened since the most recent session on 5 May, given that I
remain convinced that the disarmament of armed groups in Lebanon, in particular
Hizbullah, can be best achieved through a Lebanese-led, cross-party political
process. I encourage Lebanese leaders to continue their discussion of a national
defence strategy and to achieve tangible progress. I also met the Prime Minister on
26 September and highlighted the importance of continued and united international
support for the security and stability of Lebanon and the critical need for greater
assistance to help the country to meet the exceptional challenges that it faces.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
11. Resolution 1559 (2004) aims at strengthening the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive
authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout the country, in line with the
Taif Agreement of 1989, to which all the political parties in Lebanon committed
themselves. This objective has remained the highest priority of my efforts to
facilitate the implementation of all resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
12. I am concerned by the failure to elect the new President. The mandate of
Michel Sleiman as President ended on 25 May, leaving the position of Head of State
vacant for more than four months and increasing the country’s vulnerability in the
face of mounting security, economic and humanitarian challenges. I commend the
efforts of the Prime Minister and the Government to ensure the continuity of State
institutions and call upon Lebanese politicians to elect the new President without
further delay, in the interest of all communities in Lebanon.
13. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request by the
Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. I continue to call upon
the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to achieve the full delineation of their
common border. Given the continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
however, progress has been even more difficult to achieve in this regard and no
tangible steps were taken by either side in this regard during the reporting period.
14. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They also remain critical to facilitating proper border control. The complex security
situation along the Syrian-Lebanese border in the current circumstances, including
continuing reports of cross-border fighting and movement of arms and people,
further underlines the continued urgency of demarcating the border. While
acknowledging the bilateral nature of border delineation, progress on this matter
remains an obligation of the two countries under Security Council resolution 1680
(2006), derived from resolution 1559 (2004).

14-62094

3/11

S/2014/720

15. On 2 August, in the most serious threat yet to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon from the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, a group of
Syrian fighters, including extremist elements from the Nusra Front and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), attacked Lebanese army positions in Aarsal. The
incident followed the arrest by the Lebanese army of a Syrian commander of one of
the militant groups, Imad Jomaa, earlier in the day. Fighting continued until
7 August, when the armed forces and internal security forces regained control of the
town after a ceasefire had been agreed upon. The precise number of fatalities
remains unclear, although reports suggest some 100 deaths, including 19 soldiers,
various militants and several civilians. During the withdrawal of the militants,
19 soldiers and 16 members of the internal security forces were taken hostage. Since
their withdrawal, the militants have released 10 members of the internal security
forces and four soldiers. I condemn the beheading of two of the hostages, both
soldiers, allegedly by ISIL, and the execution of a third, a soldier, reportedly by the
Nusra Front.
16. During the reporting period, at least 23 cross-border shelling incidents and
rocket attacks causing injuries and material damage were reported in north-east
Lebanon. On 17 June, Syrian refugees and Lebanese residents who had fled violence
across the border were displaced from the Lebanese village of Tufail by shelling
originating from the Syrian side of the border. During the same period, there were
reports of 22 air raids by the Syrian air force on Lebanese territory, causing at least
five deaths and more than 20 injuries. The Lebanese authorities have consistently
highlighted the need to defend Lebanon from such attacks and on 25 July the armed
forces responded by firing back at the Syrian aircraft that had violated Lebanese
sovereignty.
17. The continued occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of the northern part of
the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line stands in violation
of the sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). My
representatives and I continue to engage closely with both parties with a view to
facilitating the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the area in implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
18. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab’a Farms area during
the reporting period. Neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has yet responded
with regard to the provisional definition of the area contained in my report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), issued on 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
19. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israeli armed forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). The Government of Lebanon has repeatedly protested
against the violations. I have deplored them and demanded that they cease
immediately. The Israeli authorities, in turn, claim that the overflights are carried
out for security reasons.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
20. The Government of Lebanon has reiterated to the United Nations its intention
to extend State authority over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif

4/11

14-62094

S/2014/720

Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). The armed forces and internal security
forces have played a crucial role in implementing this commitment under difficult
circumstances. The ability of the Lebanese State to fully exercise its authority over
all its territory continues to be challenged, however. I welcome the Government’s
commitment to building the capabilities of the army and security forces and the
international assistance pledged to date, including $3 billion by Saudi Arabia in
March 2014 in cooperation with France, and reiterate the need for continued
international support to be provided to the authorities and the armed forces.
21. During the reporting period, several incidents challenged national security,
most of which were linked directly or indirectly to the war in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Concern remains at the involvement of Lebanese fighters in the Syrian
Arab Republic, including those of Hizbullah. On 5 May, at the most recent session
of the National Dialogue, the participants reaffirmed their commitment to the
Baabda Declaration and the Lebanese policy of disassociation. Hizbullah and the
Lebanese Forces did not attend, however. Hizbullah continued to publicly
acknowledge its sustained involvement in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic
including, most recently, on 15 August during a speech by its leader, Hassan
Nasrallah. Hizbullah also held funerals for its fighters killed in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
22. At least five terrorist incidents occurred in Lebanon during the reporting
period. On 31 May, an improvised explosive device detonated in Aarsal, injuring at
least two people. A suicide car bomb attack on a checkpoint mounted by the internal
security forces on 20 June in Dahr el Baidar killed a police officer and injured at
least 30 others. On 24 June, a suicide bombing in the Tayouneh area of southern
Beirut killed an officer of the General Security Directorate and injured at least
20 civilians. On 25 June, a militant blew himself up and injured at least 10 people
during a security raid on a hotel in the Ras Beirut area of the capital. On 6 August,
at least 1 person was killed and 10 others wounded in a bombing in Tripoli, amid
reports that the blast had targeted an army patrol. Such violent incidents reflect the
widespread proliferation of weapons held by non-State actors and the significant
threat that such weapons pose to national peace and security.
23. The armed forces and other security agencies faced direct attacks against their
personnel during the reporting period, including the events of 2-7 August in Aarsal.
On 24 April, five soldiers were wounded in an ambush outside Aarsal by armed
militants. On 16 May, three members of the internal security forces were wounded
in a grenade attack in Aarsal. Eight soldiers were wounded in Tripoli on 20 May
when armed men shot at them and attacked them with grenades. An armed forces
bus was shot at in Tripoli on 5 August and, on the following day, an improvised
explosive device targeting an army checkpoint exploded, killing 1 civilian and
injuring 11 others. Most recently, two soldiers were killed and at least three others
wounded in a roadside bomb attack close to Aarsal on 19 September.
24. The security agencies responded robustly and resiliently to some of the
security challenges facing the country. The implementation of security plans for the
northern city of Tripoli and areas of the Bekaa led to the successful detention of
several individuals wanted on various charges, including in connection with
previous outbreaks of violence in Tripoli. The detention of others in relation to
terrorism included the arrests of Sheikh Omar Bakri Fustoq on 25 May and Imad

14-62094

5/11

S/2014/720

Jomaa on 2 August. Furthermore, while the situation remains fragile, there have
been no significant outbreaks of violence in Tripoli since my previous report.
25. Efforts to further increase the capabilities of the armed forces and their ability
to tackle multiple challenges, including internal security, continued. In the press
statement of 4 August, the Security Council expressed its support for the armed
forces and internal security forces in their efforts to combat terrorism and in
preventing attempts to undermine the security of Lebanon, in addition to
highlighting the need to further build the capabilities of the security forces to
counter terrorism and other security challenges. I welcome the commitments by
several Member States to providing further support to the security forces, including
for counter-terrorism and border protection efforts. I particularly welcome a further
donation of $1 billion from Saudi Arabia, announced by the former Prime Minister,
Saad Hariri, two days before his visit to Lebanon on 8 August after a prolonged
absence.
26. The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon remained generally stable, notwithstanding the incidents detailed in my
most recent report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2014/438). In
my next report on that subject, I will provide details on subsequent incidents,
including the launching of rockets and Israeli retaliatory fire.
27. With regard to the border of Lebanon with the Syrian Arab Republic, there
continued to be reports of arms trafficking in both directions. Several Member
States continued to express deep concern over the illegal transfer of weapons across
the land borders. Israeli officials stated that they would act to prevent advanced
weapons systems from being transferred to Hizbullah from the Syrian Arab
Republic. Senior representatives of Hizbullah, for their part, maintained their
position that they had no intention of acquiring chemical weapons. The Lebanese
authorities indicated that the land border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic remained difficult to control, but that the Lebanese armed forces had been
deployed and were seeking to tighten control along the border to the best of their
ability. While the United Nations has no independent means of verifying reports of
cross-border arms smuggling, I have repeatedly expressed my concerns about the
risks to both countries.
28. To tackle continuing cross-border incidents and in the context of reports of
arms smuggling, there remains an urgent need to improve the management and
control of the land borders of Lebanon. This is also necessary to prevent armed
groups and militias in Lebanon from expanding their weapons arsenal, given that
such expansion constitutes a threat to national and regional peace. Donor
coordination with the authorities on integrated border management is under way. I
reiterate my calls upon all Member States to renew efforts to meet their obligations
under Security Council resolutions to take the measures necessary to prevent the
transfer of arms to groups outside the control of the Government of Lebanon.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
29. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disarming and
disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias. This remains a key provision
of the resolution that has not yet been implemented. It reflects and reaffirms a

6/11

14-62094

S/2014/720

decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Agreement, which
led at the time to Lebanese militias, with the exception of Hizbullah, giving up their
weapons. Given the current national context and the growing impact of the Syrian
crisis on Lebanon, it is critical that this agreement be preserved and implemented by
all in order to avoid the spectre of a renewed confrontation among the Lebanese and
to strengthen the institutions of State.
30. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continue to operate
outside the control of the Government, in serious violation of resolution 1559
(2004). While several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess
weapons outside government control, the armed component of Hizbullah is the most
significant and most heavily armed Lebanese militia in the country. The
maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups poses a serious challenge to the
State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In
addition, several Palestinian armed groups continue to operate in the country inside
and outside the refugee camps.
31. Since my previous report, there has been no tangible progress towards the
disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in
the Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that
resolution, no specific steps have been taken to tackle this crucial issue, which lies
at the heart of the sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. Several
Lebanese groups and individuals continue to speak up against the maintenance by
Hizbullah of a military arsenal, which they consider a destabilizing factor in the
country and contradictory to democracy. Many Lebanese see the continued existence
of such arms as an implicit threat for use within Lebanon for political reasons.
32. I have repeatedly expressed my deep concern to Lebanese leaders about the
serious risks that armed groups pose to the stability of the country and the region. I
have urged them to tackle this matter without further delay, given that it is their
obligation under Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). In a democratic State, it
is a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains its own militia.
Nonetheless, Hizbullah has continued to acknowledge openly that it maintains and
expands a substantial military capacity separate from that of the Lebanese State. It
further claims that its arms serve as a deterrent against potential aggression from
Israel. Israeli officials continue to express concern at the alleged maintenance by
Hizbullah of unauthorized weapons and the presence of armed personnel in civilian
areas in the south of Lebanon.
33. The presence of armed extremist militants in Lebanon, as witnessed in the
incident in Aarsal and highlighted by the arrests of individuals wanted on terrorismrelated charges by the Lebanese security forces, is deeply worrying. The violence
and terrorist acts during the reporting period cost many lives and caused great
suffering and fear to many innocent Lebanese, affecting all communities
nationwide. Reports of groups in Lebanese communities carrying arms to protect
themselves for fear of attack by such groups as the Nusra Front and ISIL are also
deeply worrying.
34. I have long supported the National Dialogue as the best way to deal with the
issue of arms and achieve the ultimate goal of no weapons or armed forces in
Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. I am concerned that, with no Head
of State, momentum on building consensus and a unified vision on the issue will be

14-62094

7/11

S/2014/720

lost in the coming period. Since the end of the mandate of Michel Sleiman, no
further sessions of the National Dialogue have been scheduled.
35. During the reporting period, the security situation in the Palestine refugee
camps remained generally stable, with the exception of a few violent incidents.
From 12 to 14 May, intermittent clashes between factions in the Ein el-Hillweh
camp left one person dead. On 19 May, a bomb exploded in an attempt to
assassinate an official from the Fatah movement in the camp, injuring three people.
On 30 June, armed clashes in the Shatila camp left 2 people dead and more than
10 injured. In a positive development, a joint Palestinian security force, comprising
some 150 members of various groups, began its first deployment within the Ein
el-Hillweh camp on 8 July.
36. Humanitarian conditions for Palestine refugees in Lebanon are increasingly
dire, with the influx of an additional 44,000 refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic
since the beginning of the crisis placing tremendous further pressure on the overall
situation in the camps and gatherings, in addition to the efforts of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to assist them. UNRWA has taken measures to reduce tension between
the Palestine refugees who have been residing in Lebanon and those arriving from
the Syrian Arab Republic by, for example, including refugee children in regular
classes in UNRWA schools. The United Nations has continued to urge the Lebanese
authorities to improve the living conditions of the refugees. This should be done
without prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestine refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive peace agreement in the region, and bearing in mind the
detrimental effects of dismal living conditions on the wider security situation.
37. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continues to
challenge the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty over its territory.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 by the National Dialogue and confirmed
in subsequent sessions, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country. All but one of the
bases are located along the Syrian-Lebanese border. Their presence continues to
undermine Lebanese sovereignty and governmental authority and makes delineation
of the border more difficult. It poses a serious challenge to the effective control of
the eastern border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. I have reiterated
my calls upon the Lebanese authorities for the implementation of earlier decisions
of the National Dialogue, specifically those relating to the dismantling of the abovementioned military bases, and upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
cooperate with those efforts in good faith.

III. Observations
38. I continue to be disappointed at the lack of further tangible progress towards
the implementation of the remaining provisions of resolution 1559 (2004). Lebanon
continues to face serious challenges to its stability and security, both internally and
along its borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, including from terrorism and
extremist groups, arms smuggling and further influxes of refugees. I am also
concerned that continued stagnation in the implementation of the resolution could
lead to the erosion of provisions already implemented and contribute to a further

8/11

14-62094

S/2014/720

deterioration in the stability of Lebanon. I reiterate my firm conviction that it is in
the best interest of Lebanon and the Lebanese to make progress towards the full
implementation of the resolution for the long-term stability of the country and the
region.
39. I have repeatedly condemned the continued violation of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, including the many incidents in which civilians have been killed or
injured on the Lebanese side of the border because of the actions of warring parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic. The reporting period witnessed the most serious threat
yet to Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity from the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic, in the context of the attack on the armed forces and security forces
in Aarsal from 2 to 7 August by armed extremist groups involved in the fighting in
the Syrian Arab Republic. Reports of continued activity by the Nusra Front and ISIL
in the mountainous area around Aarsal are deeply worrying. I condemn the
continuation of cross-border shelling and rocket attacks by various groups in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the air raids by the Syrian air force on Lebanese territory,
which are a further violation of Lebanese sovereignty. I continue to call upon all
parties, including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004).
40. Since 24 April, there have been five terrorist attacks in Lebanon, including
those carried out by groups claiming that they are acting in response to the
participation of Hizbullah in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic. I remain
deeply concerned by the failure of various elements to cease involvement in that
fighting and in particular the acknowledged participation by Hizbullah of its role
therein. The participation by Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the fighting
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the actions in Lebanon of extremist armed groups,
including ISIL and the Nusra Front, that are based in the Syrian Arab Republic have
had a significant impact on security and stability in the country. Such developments
highlight that there is a continued need to uphold the principles of the Baabda
Declaration and the policy of disassociation and for Lebanese parties to step back
from their involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic.
41. The fear of the presence in Lebanon of armed militants from the Syrian Arab
Republic is increasing. The deplorable acts of brutality by such groups, including
the beheading of two Lebanese soldiers by ISIL, the execution of a third, reportedly
by the Nusra Front, and sectarian violence elsewhere in the region, have caused fear
among Lebanese communities. Reports of the formation of armed groups to protect
local communities are deeply worrying and would run counter to the spirit of
resolution 1559 (2004). Further unity and moderation between the various
communities in Lebanon will, I hope, contribute to the country’s strength and
resilience.
42. I have repeatedly cautioned that the widespread proliferation of weapons
outside the control of the State, combined with the continued existence of heavily
armed militias, undermines the security of Lebanese citizens. The maintenance by
Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of
the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of grave concern, in particular
because it creates an atmosphere of intimidation and represents a key challenge to
the safety of Lebanese civilians and to the government monopoly on the legitimate
use of force. I reiterate my call upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to

14-62094

9/11

S/2014/720

engage in any militant activity inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the
requirements of the Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004).
43. I continue to urge the Government and armed forces of Lebanon to take all
measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring
weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in
violation of resolution 1559 (2004). I also call upon countries in the region that
maintain close ties with Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of the armed
group into a solely political party and its disarmament, consistent with the
requirements of the Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interest
of Lebanon and regional peace and security.
44. I commend the efforts of the armed forces to robustly confront multiple
security challenges throughout the country and to protect the stability and security
of Lebanon. They have made progress in tackling terrorist threats, despite suffering
losses, and deployed robustly in all conflict-affected areas. The implementation of
security plans in Tripoli and the Bekaa has produced positive results, which need to
be consolidated and built on, including in efforts to combat terrorism. I welcome the
unified support across the political spectrum behind the Prime Minister and the
Government for the army and security forces in the immediate aftermath of the
crisis in Aarsal. I also encourage the continued support of the international
community, including through the International Support Group for Lebanon, and
note the provision of assistance and equipment for the armed forces. I also welcome
the commitment of $1 billion by Saudi Arabia on 6 August to help to build counterterrorism capacity in Lebanon, made in addition to its pledge of $3 billion in March
2014.
45. I am deeply concerned by the situation of Palestine refugees in the camps and
the additional pressure being placed on the limited resources available in the light of
the presence of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic who have fled the
violence there. I reiterate my call upon donors to support UNRWA and its vital work
in providing services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon. I note the formation of a
Palestinian joint security force in the Ein el-Hillweh camp. Strong cooperation
between the Lebanese authorities and the Palestinian security forces in the camps
has been crucial in ensuring that security incidents are brought under control swiftly.
46. I regret the absence of any progress on the delineation and demarcation of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic, which has a significant impact on border
control. I remain of the view that integrated border management will, in the longer
term, contribute significantly to better control of the borders of Lebanon and help to
prevent the illegal transfer of weapons and fighters in both directions. This has
become even more pressing in the context of events in the Syrian Arab Republic. I
call upon donors to continue their support for border management.
47. The continued violations by Israel of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, most conspicuously the overflights of Lebanese territory by Israeli
aircraft, are deplorable. I reiterate my call upon Israel to adhere to its obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its forces from the
northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line, as
well as to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace, which undermine the
credibility of the Lebanese security services and generate anxiety among the civilian
population. Recent incidents along the Blue Line, as detailed in my reports on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), underscore the importance of ensuring

10/11

14-62094

S/2014/720

that the situation there remains calm. I commend the Lebanese and Israeli armed
forces for their efforts to reduce tensions and for the support and coordination of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in this regard.
48. I am disappointed at the failure to elect the new President within the time
frame set out in the Constitution and concerned that the presidency has remained
vacant for more than four months. I commend the leadership of Michel Sleiman in
steering Lebanon through multiple challenges to national unity. Leaving the position
of Head of State vacant increases the country’s vulnerability to mounting security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. While I commend the efforts of the Prime
Minister and the Government to ensure the continuity of State institutions, I call
upon Lebanese politicians to elect the new President without further delay, in the
interest of all communities in Lebanon. Holding a free and fair presidential election,
in the spirit of resolution 1559 (2004), is a key element in preserving democratic
institutions.
49. The security of Lebanon must prevail, as must national peace, without
intimidation by armed groups. The maintenance of weapons by armed groups,
including Hizbullah, outside State control is in contradiction to the Taif Agreement
and incompatible with the democratic process. I note the Cabinet’s approval, on
19 August, of a decree to hold parliamentary elections.
50. With Lebanon hosting the largest number of refugees per capita in the world,
recent security developments, especially in the eastern border region, have put even
greater pressure on the refugees, the host communities that receive them and the
country more broadly, necessitating further support from the international
community. I welcome the activation of the multi-donor trust fund with the help of
the World Bank and strongly encourage Member States to fulfil their burden-sharing
responsibilities by contributing generously through this and other mechanisms.
51. I remain firmly committed to the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) for
the sake of peace and security during a particularly difficult and challenging time
for Lebanon and the region. I therefore count on the continued commitment of the
Government to its international obligations and call upon all parties and actors to
fully abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). I further call
upon Member States to renew efforts to support Lebanon in ensuring respect for its
obligations under those resolutions as the best way to advance the country’s longterm prosperity and stability as a democratic State. I will continue my efforts
towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to
Lebanon.

14-62094

11/11
