General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

26

Hoe Working Group to undertake its deliberations during the thirty-sixth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/169.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 181 (11) of 29
November 1947, 194 (III) of II December 1948, 3236
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and 3376
(XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November
1976. 32/40 A and B of 2 December 1977, 33/28 A to C
of 7 December 1978, 34/65 A to D of 29 November and
12 December 1979 and ES-7 /2 of 29 July 1980,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 38
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people, 39
l. Expresses its grave concern that no just solution to
the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this
problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle
East conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security, and that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 does not
provide for the future and for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, the attainment of which is a
conditio sine qua non for a just solution of the question of
Palestine;
2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be established without the achievement,
inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of Palestine
on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including the right of return and
the right to self-determination, national independence
and sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law;
3. Stresses the basic principle that the future of the
Palestinian people cannot be discussed in their absence
and, therefore, calls once more for the invitation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of
the Palestinian people, to participate, on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22
November 1974, in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are held under the
auspices of the United Nations, on an equal footing with
other parties;
4. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People contained in paragraphs 45 to 48 of its report and draws the attention of the Security Council to
tht: need for urgent action thereon;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the Palestinians
to return to their homes and property in Palestine, from
"Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session. Supp/en1<'nl No. 35 (A/35/35).
"Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session. Plenary Meetings, 75th meeting.
paras. 85-141.

which they have been displaced and uprooted, and calls
for their return;
6. Reaffirms also the inalienable rights in Palestine
of the Palestinian people, including:
(a)
The right to self-determination without external
interference, and to national independence and sovereignty;
(h) The right to establish its own independent
sovereign State;
7. Strongly reaffirms its repeated endorsement of the
recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, as contained in paragraphs 59 to 72 of its report on its thirtyfirst session, and as reproduced in the annex to the present resolution;
8. Demands the complete and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since June 1967, including
Jerusalem, in conformity with the fundamental principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force;
9. Demands that Israel should fully comply with the
provisions, in particular, of Security Council resolution
465 ( 1980) adopted unanimously on I March 1980;
10. Further demands that Israel should fully comply
with all the resolutions of the United Nations relevant to
the historic character of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in
particular Security Council resolutions 476 ( I 980) of 30
June I 980 and 478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, and rejects
the declaration of Israel that Jerusalem is its capital;
I I. Expresses its opposition to all policies and plans
aimed at the resettlement of the Palestinians outside
their homeland;
12. Condemns Israel for its non-compliance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution ES- 7 /2 and
Security Council resolutions 465 (1980) and 478 (1980)
and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
13. Requests the Security Council to convene in order to consider the situation and the adoption of effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of
Palestine".

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
ANNEX
Recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, endorsed by the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session'"

I.

Bi\Sll CONSIDER/\ I IONS AND r;utDHINES

59. The question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East
problem, and. consequently, the Committee stressed its belief that no
solution in the Middle East can be envisaged which does not fully take
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.
60. The legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
return lo their homes and property and to achieve self-determination,
national independence and sovereignly are endorsed by the Committee in the conviction that the full implementation of these rights
will contribute decisively to a comprehensive and final settlement of
the Middle East crisis.
"'The recommendations endorsed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 31 1 20 were originally issued as part two of Official Records
of the General Assernhlv. Thirty-first Session. Supplement No. 35
(;\ /31 /35)

II.

27

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

61. The participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal footing with
other parties, on the basis of General Assembly resolutions 3236
(XXIX) and 3375 (XXX) is indispensable in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East which are held under the auspices
of the United Nations.
62. The Committee recalls the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and stresses the consequent obligation for complete and speedy evacuation of any territory so occupied.
63. The Committee considers that it is the duty and the responsibility of all concerned to enable the Palestinians to exercise their inalienable rights.

Ill.

RIGHTTOSHI DETfRMINAIION.NATIONAL.INllEPEND~NCI'
ANI) SOVERFIGs;TY

70. The Palestinian people has the inherent right to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignly in Palestine.
The Committee considers that the evacuation of the territories occupied by force and in violation of the principles of the Charter and
relevant resolutions of the United Nations is a conditio sine qua non for
the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights in
Palestine. The Committee considers, furthermore, that upon the return of the Palestinians to their homes and property and with the establishment of an independent Palestinian entity, the Palestinian people will be able to exercise its rights to self-determination and to decide
its form of government without external interference.

64. The Committee recommends an expanded and more influential role by the United Nations and its organs in promoting a just solution to the question of Palestine and in the implementation of such a
solution. The Security Council, in particular, should take appropriate
action to facilitate the exercise by the Palestinians of their right to
return to their homes, lands and property. The Committee, furthermore, urges the Security Council to promote action towards a just
solution, taking into account all the powers conferred on it by the
Charter of the United Nations.

71. The Committee also feels that the United Nations has a historical duty and responsibility to render all assistance necessary to
promote the economic development and prosperity of the Palestinian
entity.

65. It is with this perspective in view and on the basis of the
numerous resolutions of the United Nations, after due consideration
of all the facts, proposals and suggestions advanced in the course of its
deliberations, that the Committee submits its recommendations on the
modalities for the implementation of the exercise of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

(b) The Security Council may n~eJ to provide temporary peacekeeping forces in order to facilitate the process of withdrawal;

II.

RIGHT OF RETURN

66. The natural and inalienable right of Palestinians to return to
their homes is recognized by resolution 194 (III), which the General
Assembly has reaffirmed almost every year since its adoption. This
right was also unanimously recognized by the Security Council in its
resolution 237 (1967); the time for the urgent implementation of these
resolutions is long overdue.
67. Without prejudice to the right of all Palestinians to return to
their homes, lands and property, the Committee considers that the
programme of implementation of the exercise of this right may be
carried out in two phases.

Phase one
68. The first phase involves the return to their homes of the Palestinians displaced as a result of the war of June 1967. The Committee
recommends that:
(a) The Security Council should request the immediate implementation of its resolution 237 ( 1967) and that such implementation
should not be related to any other condition;
(b) The resources of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and/or of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, suitably financed and mandated, may be
employed to assist in the solution of any logistical problems involved
in the resettlement of those returning to their homes. These agencies
could also assist, in co-operation with the host countries and the
Palestine Liberation Organization, in the identification of the displaced Palestinians.

72.

To these ends, the Committee recommends that:

(a) A time-table should he established by the Security Council for
the complete withdrawal by Israeli occupation forces from those areas
occupied in I 967; such withdrawal should be campleted no later than
I June 1977;

(c) Israel should be requested by the Security Council to desist
from the establishment of new settlements and to withdraw during this
period from settlements established since 1967 in the occupied territories; Arab property and all essential services in these areas should be
maintained intact:
(d) Israel should also be requested to abide scrupulously by the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949," and to declare,
pending its speedy withdrawal from these territories, its recognition of
the applicability of that Convention:

(e) The evacuated territories, with all property and services intact,
should be taken over by the United Nations, which, with the cooperation of the League of Arab States, will subsequently hand over
these evacuated areas to the Palestine Liberation Organization as the
representative of the Palestinian people:

(f) The United Nations should, if necessary, assist in establishing
communications between Gaza and the West Bank:
(g) As soon as the independent Palestinian entity has been established, the United Nations. in co-operation with the States directly involved and the Palestinian entity. should, taking into account General
Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX), make further arrangements for the
full implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
the resolution of outstanding problems and the establishment of a just
and lasting peace in the region, in accordance with all relevant United
Nations resolutions;

(h) The United Nations should provide the economic and
technical assistance necessary for the consolidation of' the Palestinian
entity.

B

(a) While the first phase is being implemented, the United Nations
in co-operation with the States directly involved, and the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the interim representative of the Palestinian entity, should proceed to make the necessary arrangements to
enable Palestinians displaced between 1948 and 1967 to exercise their
right to return to their homes and property, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly General Assembly resolution 194 (111);

The General Assembly.
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 34/65 A lo D
of 29 November and 12 December 1979,
Taking note of paragraphs 31 and 47 of the report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, • 2
I. Reaffirms its rejection of those provisions of the
accords which ignore, infringe, violate or deny the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right of return, the right of self-determination and the
right to national independence and sovereignty in
Palestine, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law, and

(b) Palestinians not choosing to return to their homes should be
paid just and equitable compensation as provided for in resolution 194
(III).

"United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/35/35).

Phase two
69. The second phase deals with the return to their homes of the
Palestinians displaced between 1948 and 1967. The Committee recommends that:

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

28

which envisage and condone continued Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel
since 1967;
2. Expresses its strong opposition to all partial agreements and separate treaties which constitute a flagrant
violation of the rights of the Palestinian people, the principles of the Charter and the resolutions adopted in the
various international forums on the Palestinian issue, as
well as the principles of international law, and declares
that all agreements and separate treaties have no validity
in so far as they purport to determine the future of the
Palestinian people and of the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
3. Declares that no State has the right to undertake
any actions, measures or negotiations that could affect
the future of the Palestinian people, its inalienable rights
and the occupied Palestinian territories without the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization on
an equal footing, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, and rejects all such actions,
measures and negotiations.

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
C

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3376 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976, 32/40 A and B of
2 December 1977, 33/28 A to C of 7 December 1978,
34/65 A to D of 29 November and 12 December 1979
and ES-7 /3 of 29 July 1980,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 42
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to
it by the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Committee to keep the situation
relating to the question of Palestine under review and to
report and make suggestions to the General Assembly
or the Security Council, as appropriate:
3. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert all
efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or representatives to international conferences where such representation would
be considered by it to be appropriate, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session and thereafter;
4. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General
Assembly resolution 194 ( III) of 11 December 1948, as
well as other United Nations bodies associated with the
question of Palestine, to co-operate fully with the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and to make available to the Committee, at its request, the relevant information and
documentation which they have at their disposal;
5. Decides to circulate the report of the Committee
to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and
urges them to take the necessary action, as appropriate,
in accordance with the Committee's programme of implementation:

6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Committee with all the necessary facilities
for the performance of its tasks.

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
D

The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 42
Noting, in particular, the information contained m
paragraphs 20 to 29 and 38 to 44 of that report,
Recallinf its resolutions 32/40 B of 2 December 1977,
33/28 Co 7 December 1978 and 34/65 D of 12 December 1979,
I. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the
Secretary-General in compliance with General Assembly resolution 34/65 D;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Special Unit on Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat, in
consultation with the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and under
its guidance, continues to discharge the tasks detailed in
paragraph I of General Assembly resolution 32/40 B
and paragraph 2 (b) of resolution 34/65 D;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep under
constant review the question of the strengthening of the
Special Unit on Palestinian Rights and to provide it with
the resources necessary to discharge the responsibilities
assigned to it by the General Assembly as well as the
redesignation of the Special Unit as requested in
paragraph I of resolution 34/65 D;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the continued co-operation of the Department of Public
Information and other units of the Secretariat in enabling the Special Unit on Palestinian Rights to perform its tasks:
5. Invites all Governments and organizations to lend
their co-operation to the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the
Special Unit on Palestinian Rights in the performance of
their tasks;
6. Notes with appreciation the action taken by Member States to observe annually on 29 November the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People and the issuance by them of special postage stamps
for the occasion.
95th plenary meeting
15 December ! 980
E

The General Assembly.
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 2253 (ES-V)
of 4 July 1967 and 2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967,
Recalling the resolutions of the Security Council relevant to the character and status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, in particular resolutions 252 ( I 968) of 21
May 1968, 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969, 271 (1969) of 15
September 1969, 298 ( 1971) of 25 September 1971, 465
(1980)ofl March 1980,476(1980)of30June 1980and478
(1980) of 20 August 1980,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible,

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind the specific status of Jerusalem and, in
particular, the· need for protection and preservation of
the unique spiritual and religious dimension of the Holy
Places in the city,
Expressing its satisfaction at the decision taken by the
States which have responded to Security Council resolution 478 ( 1980) and withdrawn their diplomatic representatives from the Holy City of Jerusalem,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,4 1
Deploring the persistence of Israel in changing the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and the status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem,
Deeply concerned over the enactment of a "basic law"
in the Israeli Knesset proclaiming a change in the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, with
its implications for peace and security,
1. Censures in the strongest terms the enactment by
Israel of the "Basic Law" on Jerusalem;
2. Affirms that the enactment of the "Basic Law" by
Israel constitutes a violation of international law and
does not affect the continued application of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since June
1967, including Jerusalem;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have altered or purport to alter the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and,
in particular, the recent "Basic Law" on Jerusalem and
the proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, are
null and void and must be rescinded forthwith;
4. Affirms also that this action constitutes a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;
5. Decides not to recognize that "Basic Law'' and
such other actions by Israel that, as a result of this law,
seek to alter the character and status of Jerusalem and
calls upon all States, specialized agencies and other international organizations to comply with the present
resolution and other relevant resolutions and urges them
not to conduct any business which is not in conformity
with the provisions of the present resolution and the
other relevant resolutions.
95th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/206.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 44
A

SITUATION IN Soun1 AFRICA
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community towards the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation
movement, as proclaimed, in particular, in General
Assembly resolution 3411 C (XXX) of 28 November
1975,

''United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 7\ No. 97.1. p. 287.
"See also sect. I, foot-note 8, and sect X. R.2. decision 35/415

29

Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid,''
Recalling Securit) Council resolution 473 ( 1980) of 13
June 1980,
Taking note of the great advance in the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement,
Gravely concerned at the further aggravation of the
situation in South Africa, resulting from the policies and
actions of the apartheid regime,
Considering that the policy of "bantustanization"
aggravates the situation in the region,
Reaffirming that the policies and actions of the
apartheid regime, the strengthening of its military forces
and the escalating acts of aggression and subversion of
that regime against independent African States constitute a grave threat to international peace and security,
Considering that the acquisition of nuclear capability
by the apartheid regime constitutes a grave menace to
Africa and the world,
Condemning all military, nuclear and other collaboration by certain States with South Africa,
Condemning also the collaboration by transnational
corporations and financial institutions with South
Africa,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity,
Recognizing that the so-called constitutional and
other reforms by the racist minority regime are no
more than mere adjustments within the framework of
apartheid.
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a democratic society in accordance with
their inalienable human and political rights, as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,'"
Recalling and reaffirming the Declaration on South
Africa contained in resolution 34/93 0 of 12 December
1979.
I. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement by all available means, including armed
struggle, for the seizure of power by the people, the
elimination of the apartheid regime and the exercise of
the right of self-determination by the people of South
Africa as a whole:
2. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime for
its brutal repression and indiscriminate torture and killings of workers, schoolchildren and other opponents of
apartheid:
3. Vehemently condemns the Pretoria regime's
persistent attempts at destabilization of neighbouring
States and its repeated acts of aggression and subversion:
4. Further condemns that regime for its defiance of
Security Council resolution 473 ( 1980):
5. Urges the Security Council to determine that the
situation in South Africa, and in southern Africa as a
whole, resulting from the policies and actions of the
''Offi~ial Records of rhe General Assembly. Thirry-fi.fih Session.
Supplemenr No. 22 (A'~~. 22) and Supplement No 22 A (Af-'5122
Ad<l.1-J)
''·Resolution 217 A (Ill)
