RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON mE REPORTS OF mE THIRD COMMITIEE

CONTENTS
Page

832 (IX). International assistance to refugees within the mandate of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (21 October 1954) {item 27) . . .
833 (IX). Draft international covenants on human rights ( 4 December 1954)
(item 58) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
834 (IX). United Nations Narcotics Laboratory (14 December 1954) (item 12)
835 (IX). United Nations Children's Fund (14 December 1954) (item 12) . . . .
836 (IX). Universal Children's Day (14 December 1954) (item 12) . . . . . . . . .
837 (IX). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of
peoples and nations to self-determination ( 14 December 1954) (item 12) . .
838 (IX). Draft International Code of Ethics for the use of information personnel
(17 December 1954) (item 29) . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . .. .. . .. . . .. .. . .. . .. .
839 (IX). Technical assistance in freedom of information (17 December 1954)
(item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
840 (IX). Draft Convention on Freedom of Information (17 December 1954)
(item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
841 (IX). International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the
Cause of Peace (Geneva, 1936) (17 December 1954) (item 28) . . . . . . . . .
842 (IX). Forced labour (17 December 1954) (item 30) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
843 (IX). Status of women in private law: customs, ancient laws and practices
affecting the human dignity of women ( 17 December 1954) ( item 59) . . .

19
20
20
21
21
21
22
22
22
22
23
23

Having considered the problems of refugees within
the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in the light of his report 1 to the General
Assembly at its ninth session,
Having noted with satisfaction the work accomplished for refugees,
Noting that, in spite of the efforts made, there is
little hope that-at the present rate of repatriation,
resettlement, or integration-a satisfactory solution to
these problems will be reached within a reasonable
period of time,
Considering that, while the ultimate responsibility
for the refugees within the mandate of the High Commissioner falls in fact upon the countries of residence,
certain of these countries have to face particularly
heavy burdens as a result of their geographical situation, and some complementary aid has been shown to be
necessary to accelerate the implementation of a programme for permanent solutions.
Recalling resolution 728 (VIII) of the General Assembly and resolution 549 (XVIII) of the Economic
and Social Council,

Considering that the programme outlined in the
report of the High Commissioner contains a number of
constructive elements for an effective attempt at achieving a permanent solution to the problems of certain
groups of the refugees who are the concern of the
High Commissioner, having special regard to family
groups,
1. Authorizes the High Commissioner, in accordance
with his Statute, to undertake a programme designed
to achieve permanent solutions within the period of
his current mandate for the refugees included within
the proposals 2 in his report to the General Assembly
at its ninth session;
2. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds, in co-operation with the High Commissioner, to negotiate with the Governments of Member and non-member States for voluntary contributions
towards a fund based on the proposals of the High
Commissioner ( the amount to be determined by the
High Commissioner's Advisory Committee at its next
session), to be devoted principally to the promotion of
permanent solutions, and also to permit emergency
assistance to the most needy cases, such fund to incorporate the fund authorized by the General Assembly
in resolution 538 B (VI) ;
3. Authorizes the High Commissioner to make appeals for funds for the purposes set forth in paragraph
2 above;

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplements Nos. 13 and 13 B.

2 Ibid., Supplement No. 13, chapter IV, section 4, and Supplement No. 13 B, paras. 1 to 11 inclusive.

832 (IX) . International assistance to refugees
within the mandate of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,

19

zo

General Aaaembly

4. Requests the Economic :ind Soci~l Coun~il, not
later than its nineteenth session and m _the hght ?f
proposals to be subm_itted to i_t by t~e High Co~m1ssioner upon the advice of his Adv1s?ry Comm1t!ee,
either to establish an Executive Committee responsible
for giving directives to the High Commis~i?ner in
carrying out his programme and for exerc1smg the
necessary controls in the use of funds al~otted to the
Office of the High Commissioner or to revise the terms
of reference and composition of the Advisory C<;>mmittee in order to enable it to carry out the same duties ;
5. Requests the High Commissioner to prepar~, for
presentation to the inter-go~ernmental body mentl?ned
in paragraph 4 above, detailed propos~ls for_ proie.cts
designed to achieve permanent solut1o?s, .mcludmg
plans for adequate financial or other. contributions from
sources within the countries of residence;
6. Requests the Governments c?ncerned, ~n !he negotiation of agreements with the H1~h Comm1ss101:er for
the projects for permanent solut10ns ui:ider this programme, to give assurances that they will assume full
financial responsibility should any of. the r~fugees
within the scope of the programme still require assistance at the end of the stipulated period;
7. Urges Member and non-member States to cooperate with the High Commissioner to the fullest
extent in this programme ;
8 Requests the High Commissioner to include in his
ann~al report a statement on the measures which he
has taken under the terms of the present resolution.
495th plenary meeting,
21 October 1954.
833 (IX). Draft international covenants on
human right•

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the draft intenatio_na! covenants on
human rights 8 prepared by the Comm1ss1<?n on Hum~n
Rights and transmitted• by the Economic and ~0~1al
Council and expressing its gratitude to that Comm1ss10n
for the work accomplished,
Having considered these draft international covenants on human rights at its ninth session,
Reaffirming that it is important that . these. draft
international covenants should be adopted m their final
form as soon as possible,
Considering that it is desirable to give Governments
of States Members and non-members of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies time to make a
full study of these draft international covenant~ _and
to submit, if they so desire, amendments or additions
thereto, or further observations thereon,
Considering that it is desirable for each Government
to be informed in good time of the views of other
Governments and of the specialized agencies concerning
the provisions to be included in the draft international
covenants on human rights so that it may take due
account ·of these views in determining its own attitude,
Considering that it is desirable that public opinion
should continue to express itself freely on the draft
international covenants on human rights,
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7, an?exes I, I~ and III.
• See Economic and Social Council, resolut10n 545 B

(XVIII).

Ninth Session

1. Invites:
(a) Governments of States Members an_d non-members of the United Nations to communicate to the
Secretary-General, within six months after the end of
the present sessio!1. of the Gener~! Asse';llbly, any
amendments or additions to the draft mternabonal covenants on human rights or any observations thereon;
( b) The specialized agencies to communicate to the
Secretary-General, within six moI?ths after the ~nd
of the present session, any obser_vat10ns .they may wish
to make with regard to the draft mternattonal covenants
on human rights ;
( c) The non-governmental or~anizat.ions ~oncerned
with the promotion of human nghts, mclu~mg_ those
in the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Tern tones, to
stimulate public interest in the draft. internation~l cov~nants on human rights by all possible means m their
respective cquntries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare and distribute to Governments, as
early as possible, a concise annotation of the te~t of
the draft international covenants on human nghts,
taking account of the observations made before and
during the ninth session of the ~eneral ~ssembly,
including those made in the Economic an? Social Council and in the Commission on Human Rights;
(b) To distribute to Governments, as soon as they
are received, the communications which may be made
by Governments and by the specialized agencies during
the next six months ;
(c) To prepare as a working paper a compilation
of all the amendments and proposed new articles which
may be submitted by Governments during that period;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give the ~raft
international covenants on human rights the widest
possible publicity through all the media of information
available to him, and within the limits of his budget;
4. Recommends that, during the tenth session of the
General Assembly, the Third Committee give priority
and devote itself ma'inly to the discussion, article by
article, in an agreed order, of the draft international
covenants on human rights with a view to their adoption
at the earliest possible date. The discussion shall also
cover any new articles which may be proposed.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

834 (IX). United Nations Narcotics Laboratory

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 548 D
(XVIII) of 12 July 1954 on the subject of the establishment of a United Nations Narcotics Laboratory,
Having considered the Secretary-General's note 5 of
15 October 1954 which sets out the comparative cost
of setting up such a laboratory at Headquarters and
at Geneva,
Noting the statement by the Secretary-General in the
above note that he "would regard it as important that
the laboratory should be situated in the same place,
and preferably in the same building, as the Division of
Narcotic Drugs as a whole",
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document A/C.3/573.
