II.

Resolution~ adopted without reference to a Main Committ_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

2. Invites Member States, as well as organs and subsidiary bodies of the United Nations, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, educational, scientific,
cultural and research institutions and the communication
media to commemorate the International Year of Peace in
the most appropriate form, highlighting, inter alia, the role
of the United Nations in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security;
3. Decides to convene a second pledging conference
during the first quarter of 1986 so that Member States
which have not yet announced their contributions may
have an opportunity to do so;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
Voluntary Fund for the Programme of the International
Year of Peace, to assist in the commemoration of the Year
and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about the Year and its objectives;
5. Emphasizes the importance of continuing the coordination and co-operation established among United
Nations programmes and activities related to the promotion of the International Year of Peace;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the programme of the International Year of Peace;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "International Year of
Peace".
70th plenary meeting
I I November 1985

40/11. Right of peoples to peace
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the year 1986 was proclaimed the
International Year of Peace,
Reca//ing that the principal aim of establishing the
United Nations forty years ago, as enshrined in the Charter, was to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war,

Reaffirming the strong resolve of peoples to maintain
and strengthen international peace and security,
Reca//ing its Declaration on the Right of Peoples to
Peace, approved on 12 November 1984, 21
Reca//ing further that, pursuant to the Declaration, all
States and international organizations are urged to do their
utmost to contribute to the implementation of the right of
peoples to peace,
Bearing in mind that peace is an inalienable right of
every human being and that, in the Proclamation of the
International Year of Peace approved on 24 October
1985, 18 the General Assembly, having reaffirmed that
peace constitutes a universal ideal, called upon all peoples
to join with the United Nations in resolute efforts to safeguard peace and the future of humanity,
Taking note of the programme for the International
Year of Peace, 22
I. Calls upon all States and international organizations
to do their utmost to implement the provisions of the Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting
his report on the implementation of the programme for the
International Year of Peace, to report on the measures
taken by Member States and international organizations in
21 Resolution 39/ 11, annex.
22 A/40/669 and Add. I, annex I.

21

the implementation of the Declaration on the Right of
Peoples to Peace.
70th plenary meeting
I l November 1985

40/12.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assemb{v.
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980, 35/
37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981,
37/37 of29 November 1982, 38/29 of23 November 1983
and 39/ 13 of 15 November 1984,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territo1ial integrity
and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention, subversion. coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Gravelv concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention ·in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,23 and
the status of the diplomatic process initiated by him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political
solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
I. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem:
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of the necessary Cllnditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour:
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and
international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating the hardBA- 4ll 709-S' 17527. For ihe printed text. see Otfi,:ia/ Record., oj tire
Se, umr ( ·ouncil. Fortieth l'rnr. Supp/emenr r,,, Oc1ober. NcJl'embcr and
f)er("t,0! 1 : "

!'18'. documC'nl S

..,'i~.,.

22

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

ship of the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation and support for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General,
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him, in the
search for a solution to the problem;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those
efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in
accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
and the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for
the non-use of force, or threat of force, against the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict non-interference in each other's internal
affairs and with full regard for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".
74th plenary meeting
13 November 1985

40/13. International relief to Colombia
The General Assembly,
Deeply distressed by the loss of lives, the number of
afflicted persons and the enormous destruction wrought by
the volcanic activity ofNevado de! Ruiz, affecting areas of
the departments of Caldas, Tolima and Valle de! Cauca in
Colombia,
Noting the efforts of the Government and people of
Colombia to save lives and alleviate the sufferings of the
victims of this natural disaster,
Considering the enormous effort that will be required to
alleviate the grave situation caused by this natural disaster,
Recognizing that the magnitude of the catastrophe and
its effects will require, as a complement to the effort being
made by the people and Government of Colombia, a demonstration of international solidarity to ensure the necessary multilateral co-operation in order to meet the immediate emergency in the affected areas, as well as to
undertake the task of reconstruction,
1. Expresses its solidarity and support to the Government and people of Colombia in this tragedy;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States, international and regional agencies, non-governmental organizations and individuals providing emergency relief to
Colombia;
3. Calls upon the Governments of the Member States
to contribute generously to the relief and reconstruction
efforts in the affected areas and, to the extent possible, to
channel their assistance through the United Nations system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
resources in order to assist in the relief and reconstruction
task of the Government of Colombia;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to co-ordinate
the multilateral assistance and, in consultation with the
24 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session. vol. I, Reso/utwns, p.
135.

Government of Colombia, to determine the emergency
and reconstruction needs of the affected areas.
79th plenary meeting
15 November 1985

40/19.

Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19
November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of
29 November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980, 36/64 of 27 November 1981 and 38/34 of 25
November 1983,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 24 adopted on 14
November 1970 by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 25
Noting with satisfaction that following its appeal other
Member States have become parties to the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they
may constitute collections representative of their cultural
heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that some countries have taken
positive steps towards the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and objets d'art to their countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of inventories as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples,
Supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June 1978 by
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it,
I. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished,
in particular through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the
preparation of inventories of movable cultural property,
the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural property and the
dissemination of information to the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures contributes to the strengthening of international
co-operation and to the preservation and flowering of uni2.I A/40/344.
