S/PV.8674

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8674th meeting

Friday, 22 November 2019, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbegono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Jeffrey

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-38166 (E)
*1938166*

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, and Ms. Sabah Al Hallak, Board Member of the
Syrian Women’s League.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: On 30 October, 150 Syrian men and
women gathered in Geneva to launch a Syrian-led and
-owned, credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional
Committee, facilitated by the United Nations. There
were 50 members nominated by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, 50 members nominated by the
opposition Syrian Negotiations Commission and 50
civil society activists, experts and other independents
from inside and outside of Syria — a so-called middle
third. This was a potentially historic moment. It brought
Syrians together in one room in the context of the formal
political process mandated by the Security Council for
the first face-to-face talks in five years — for the first
time ever, following a political agreement between the
Government and the opposition and, for the first time
ever, with civil society present.
This launch was a sign of hope for the Syrian
people and a chance for the Syrian parties to begin a
direct dialogue that they lead and own on the future of
a broken country. It opened a door to a political effort to
overcome nearly nine years of conflict and chart a path
to a new day for Syria, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), which has all the necessary elements for a
political settlement.
Over the next two days in Geneva, members
of the large body offered visions for Syria’s future
constitutional arrangements. They adopted, by
2/20

22/11/2019

consensus, a code of conduct and a set of initial
procedural practices, and agreement was reached on
the 45 members to work in the small drafting body.
Thereafter, the small body — 15 from each group of
50 — convened and reviewed ideas and proposals in
the speeches delivered by the members in the large
body and offered other ideas, too, in order to identify
potential constitutional principles. There were extensive
exchanges and ideas put forward, and they agreed to
return to Geneva on Monday, 25 November.
I commend Committee members for their courage
and patriotism in participating in those initial
proceedings and for the way that they did so. It was not
easy. There was mistrust, suspicion and strong feelings
among the members. There were deep feelings of anger
and loss, personal and national. Narratives, positions
and proposals diverged sharply. At times, proceedings
were painful, and emotions ran high. And yet everyone
stayed engaged. The members of the Committee
agreed on an initial agenda and listened to each other’s
discourse. Efforts were made through language, tone,
gesture and positioning to signal openness to dialogue.
With each passing day, those efforts gradually increased.
I appreciated the business-like approach of the two
equal co-Chairs — Mr. Ahmad Kuzbari, nominated by
the Government and Mr. Hadi Al-Bahra, nominated by
the opposition. They respected their responsibilities and
alternated the chairmanship of meetings. They enabled
Committee members to speak openly and frankly. They
dealt in good faith with me and my team. Let me also
note that, while we focus on what the parties say in
the room, it is important that public statements show
commitment to the Committee’s work, based on the
political agreement that both parties reached to launch
it. There is work to be done in that regard.
It is too early to say that there is agreement on
constitutional principles. Nor is there yet agreement
on which issues should be addressed in a future
constitutional text and which should be addressed in
other ways. But there was a solid initial discussion and
there are commonalities on which to build. I have urged
the members to reflect, during the recess, on what
was discussed and return ready to build on it. The 15
small body representatives of the Government and the
opposition have been meeting with the remaining 35
of their respective groups to that end. I have discussed
with the co-Chairs that we need them to propose a
forward-looking agenda for the coming work, and they
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

have agreed with me that that is indeed important. My
good offices are at their disposal.
Let me say a few words on the middle third,
whose members include civil society, independents,
experts and other Syrians of standing. They have no
formal political affiliations, and none of them speaks
for any other. Like Syrian society in general, there
are differences in their opinions, experiences, fears,
objectives and connections. Despite that, they sat
together, worked together and began their own long task
of building trust and confidence with one another. As
this effort proceeds, it will be important to enable the
15 in the small body to consult the remaining 35 in their
group. I look forward to furthering initial discussions
with them and the co-Chairs in that regard.
Let me also point out that around 30 per cent of
members are women. They made their voices heard
on all issues. Gender equality and women’s rights
issues — raised by both men and women — were
prominent in discussions and are areas where I sensed
some potential for initial common ground.
I should add that the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board was convened in Geneva as the Constitutional
Committee proceedings began, and its members
showed, once again, an example of how a cross-section
of Syrians can build trust and work together. I look
forward to them convening again in Geneva in the nottoo-distant future.
I also look forward to continuing the process of
consultations by the United Nations with a wide crosssection of Syrian civil society from both inside and
outside Syria through the work of our Civil Society
Support Room, and we expect further engagement in
that framework fairly soon as well.
Let me thank the Security Council for uniting to
support the Constitutional Committee. I was also glad
to meet with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran,
Russia and Turkey, and earlier with representatives
of the small group in Geneva before the launch of
the Committee.
This brings me to the bigger picture. Undoubtedly,
the work of the Committee can build trust and
confidence. But if confidence is to develop among the
Syrian people in the political process, dynamics on the
ground need to begin to change, and that must start
with fully respecting international humanitarian and
human rights law and the protection of civilians.

S/PV. 8674

I am extremely concerned about the renewed
violence in Idlib. As the Council is aware, there are
3 million civilians in Idlib, many of whom have fled
from fighting elsewhere in Syria and who have suffered
and continue to suffer. There has been an escalation
these past weeks in aerial bombardment, as well as
ground-based attacks from both sides. Just two days
ago, at least a dozen civilians were killed and 50 injured,
including children, when a missile reportedly launched
from Syrian Government territory struck a camp for
internally displaced persons near a maternity hospital.
Meanwhile,
there
have
been
significant
developments in the north-east: a Turkish military
intervention into Syria together with Syrian armed
opposition forces; the Syrian Government deploying
troops in the north-east following an understanding
with the Syrian Democratic Forces; a United StatesTurkish ceasefire understanding; a Turkish-Russian
understanding, leading to joint patrols along the Turkish
border; and, of course, the redeployment of United
States forces from large parts of the north-east to Deir
ez-Zor and Hasakah, including close to oilfields. While
these understandings have reduced violence in the area,
reports of clashes and shelling continue. More than
90 civilians have been killed, and, while many have
returned home, more than 75,000 remain displaced.
Meanwhile, Israeli air strikes near Damascus, which
Israel said was in response to rockets launched towards
Israel, reportedly killed two civilians.
All these dynamics are extremely worrying. We
must step away from any trend that could lead towards
a deeper international conflagration over Syria and
the continued infringement of Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
Resolution 2254 (2015) also calls for nationwide
ceasefire and a common approach to combating
terrorism. The unsolved challenge of Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham, the danger of the resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, and the continuing
threat of foreign terrorist fighters only underlines the
need for a cooperative approach — one that ensures
stability, protects civilians, fully upholds international
humanitarian law, promotes real calm and prioritizes a
political solution.
As the violence and suffering continue, Syrians
on all sides are demanding concrete actions from this
process to improve their lives. I continue to consider
unilateral releases of detainees/abductees and steps

19-381663/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

for clarifying the fate of missing persons by all parties
and at a meaningful scale as crucial entry points in
that regard.
But I also remain convinced that a broader set of
concrete actions would likely have to follow a steps-forsteps model, with some element of reciprocity, building
trust and confidence between Syrians and with the
international community.
I continue to pursue a discussion with the Syrian
parties on the wider dimensions of the process and
to offer my good offices to the key regional and
international players on these issues. Russian and
American officials continue to meet to discuss steps
that could be taken. I had a valuable discussion on this
with German Chancellor Merkel and senior officials in
Berlin last week. Within the Astana group, the dialogue
among countries supporting different players in Syria
continues, and I continue to support the convening of
an international format that could bring the key players
together in a common effort.
Ultimately, I believe that all these efforts should lead
towards the establishment of a safe, calm and neutral
environment. That would allow any constitutional
reform to be matched by emerging positive conditions
on the ground, as well as an environment that would
allow for inclusive, free and fair elections administered
under the supervision of the United Nations, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). Clearly, the steps necessary to
create such an environment would also contribute to
refugees having the confidence to return in a voluntary,
safe and dignified manner.
It is my firm hope that with the Constitutional
Committee as a door opener, the Government and the
opposition will be able in time to establish a relationship;
violence will abate and conditions on the ground will
change; and a comprehensive and decisive solution will
finally emerge for the benefit of all Syrians. The Syrian
parties, who are leading and owning this process, must
seize the opportunity that the launch of the Committee
offers. And they, and all of us, must build around it a
mutually reinforcing dynamic for the sake of the Syrian
people. I appreciate the support of all members as I
continue to work in this direction, in implementation
of my mandate as contained in resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Al Hallak,
who is briefing in her capacity as a board member of
the Syrian Women’s League and founding member of
the Syrian League for Citizenship.
4/20

22/11/2019

Ms. Al Hallak (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Madam President, for having invited me to brief the
Council today. As the President noted, I am a member
of the Syrian Constitutional Committee and a member
of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board. For more than
half my life, I have worked for the empowerment of
Syrian women and the advancement of their rights in
all fields and continue to fight to achieve that. Today,
I am briefing the Council in my capacity as a Syrian
civil-society feminist.
The fate of millions of Syrians is still in the hands
of the Council because of the continued military
operations in Damascus, Idlib, Aleppo, the north-east
and other governorates.
My statement will focus on three key issues: first,
the gender impact of military conflict on millions of
women and ensuring accountability and punishment;
secondly, securing the effective participation of Syrian
women in the political process as well as in all aspects
of peace and security; and, thirdly, the release of
detainees and forced disappearances by all parties.
The Syrian conflict, which has been ongoing for
more than eight years, has had tragic impacts on all
Syrians, particularly women, girls and children. As the
Special Envoy noted, just this week 16 people, including
women, children and medical staff, were killed as a
result of a missile attack near a maternity hospital in a
displaced persons’ camp in Idlib. This is the sixty-fifth
attack on health facilities in north-west Syria since last
April, according to reports by the Syrian American
Medical Society. Furthermore, tens of thousands of
people, the majority of whom are women and children,
have been displaced in north-east and north-west Syria
as a result of the recent military operations, which have
been causing catastrophic humanitarian emergencies.
The
current
deteriorating
political
and
humanitarian crisis in Syria has led to an exacerbation
of discrimination against women, and in turn to an
increase in gender-based violence, early and forced
marriage and trafficking of women. Syrian women have
faced numerous threats to their rights from all sides,
not only by existing Syrian discriminating laws but
also by practices of other groups, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and the Al-Nusra Front and
others, which have been terrorizing and committing
violence against women and girls, as well as depriving
them from their basic rights. Syrian women make up
the majority of those forcibly displaced. Ensuring
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

conditions conducive to their safe, voluntary and
dignified return to their places of origin is therefore
essential, as stipulated under the international law.
All parties to armed conflict in Syria today continue
to operate as if they can act with impunity. The Security
Council must therefore pressure all parties to abide
by their obligations in accordance international law
and ensure that all those who have committed serious
violations against millions of Syrian women and men
are held accountable legally and punished. Any efforts
by the Council to ensure legal accountability and
punishment, as well as transitional justice mechanisms,
must have the gender perspective and the impacts of
armed conflict on women and girls at their core. That
cannot wait until a political process is concluded.
Despite the fact that space for Syrian civil society
to influence the political process remains limited,
feminists and human rights movements persevere in
their pursuit to chart the future of Syria, especially
on issues related to justice, citizenship and human
rights. Let me be clear. There can be no democracy
in Syria without gender equality or women’s effective
participation in the political decision-making process.
I stress those demands because they continue to be
overlooked in forums and decision-making platforms to
this day. Since 2014, despite the efforts of the Special
Envoy and the demands of Syrian feminists, there
have been only two women in the Government and the
opposition delegations to the negotiations process.
Many civil society activists support the ongoing
constitutional process and consider it a path to the
political process. The Constitutional Committee, which
met for the first time this month, is a good step forward in
increasing women’s participation, which, as the Special
Envoy mentioned, has reached approximately 30 per
cent. That has been possible thanks to the efforts by
the Special Envoy and very strong advocacy by Syrian
feminists. We very much hope that this percentage will
increase in the negotiations process. That percentage
must be enshrined in our new constitution in order
to ensure that women’s rights are guaranteed in
Syria’s future.
The matter of detainees and missing and kidnapped
persons is a thorny issue. Regrettably, no progress
has been made since the previous Security Council
briefing (See S/PV.8593) on the matter, held in August.
Despite the Council’s expressed sympathy, over
100,000 Syrians remain kidnapped or detained, as
my colleagues from Families for Freedom reported.

S/PV. 8674

They are still subject to torture and other ill-treatment.
Parties to conflict detain many women and children,
using them as hostages to blackmail and exert pressure
on their fathers or husbands who are politically or
militarily active. The majority of detained or forcibly
disappeared persons over the past decade have been
human rights defenders, often under the pretext of the
so-called counter-terrorism efforts. Women activists,
including relief workers, have faced various forms of
violence that is not limited to arrest. Women and girls
who are detained face gender-specific consequences for
being women, particularly in our societies. That causes
them acute stigmatization upon release and can result
in honour killings, divorce or even suicide.
All warring parties in Syria must release all persons
who have been arbitrarily detained or kidnapped, in
keeping with international human rights law and the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Addressing this
issue is a precondition to building confidence between
the parties to the conflict and the Syrian people; and
between the United Nations and the people of Syria, as
mentioned by the Special Envoy. If the United Nations
exerts pressure to prioritize this issue, the legitimacy
of its role in the process will increase in the eyes of
millions ordinary Syrians, who have felt for long that
they have been let down by the international community
efforts to put an end to their suffering.
In conclusion, I call on the all members of the
Council to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), which was adopted by consensus as a road
map for the future of Syria. I also call on the Council to
prioritize the following actions.
First, the Council should call for an immediate
ceasefire to end the current conflict and ensure that all
civilians are protected from repeated attacks.
Secondly, the Council should ensure women’s equal
and meaningful participation in all ongoing and future
political decision-making processes. A minimum of
30 per cent representation of women, on the way to
reach the goal of 50/50 gender balance at all levels of
decision-making, must be guaranteed.
Thirdly, the Council should ensure that the new
constitution includes provisions that reflect principles
of international human rights law, including with
regard to gender equality and non-discrimination.
The constitution must also include provisions that
criminalize all forms of gender-based violence and
any kind of discrimination on the basis of gender, race,

19-381665/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

ability, color or other status. In addition, it must include
provisions on the primacy of international conventions
over national law.
I return to our most important priority, namely,
giving the release of all arbitrarily detained persons a
humanitarian priority and, accordingly, to the granting
of unconditional access to all places of detention. The
Security Council should also support the ongoing
efforts of the Special Envoy to address the situation
of detainees as part of his tasks and ensure that the
gender-specific consequences for many detained and
kidnapped women after their release are addressed.
The failure of the Security Council to date to stop
the bloodshed in my country and end impunity in
Syria undermines its credibility in terms of carrying
out its core mandate of maintaining international
peace and security. Members heard — just this year
here, in the Chamber — briefings about the serious
impacts the war has had on civilians, including women,
children, persons with disabilities, the families of the
disappeared and medical workers. As Syrians, all of
us wish desperately for the day when all are free from
violence and war. We dream of a democratic country
and an inclusive future in which human rights are
respected, including women’s human rights. But our
future, indeed our present, depends upon decisive
action by the Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Al Hallak for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Jeffrey (United States of America): Ms. Al Hallak’s
presentation was a very commendable and moving
depiction of the problems that this terrible conflict
has wrought on Syrian civilians, particularly women.
We thank her very much once again. We thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his remarks and even more so
for the pivotal role he played in last month’s launching
of the Constitutional Committee. We congratulate him
personally, as well as the Secretary-General and the
United Nations generally, on that signal achievement.
But while we must not mistake one individual step,
however important, for the peace that we are pursuing,
we must still consider the significance of what has
happened in Geneva. Pursuant to a decision by the
Security Council, we now have two platforms that are
officially recognized by the international community
6/20

22/11/2019

for dealing with Syria and the problems related to
the Syrian conflict — the regime in Damascus and a
congress of members of all political views in Geneva.
We have no doubt that that balance, particularly the
part of it based on the work that can be done in Geneva,
can open the door to a much better future if the Council
supports it fully. That is therefore our first prescription
for finding a solution to this terrible crisis. The second,
also pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), is a ceasefire.
We should think about what we have seen since the
Council last met to talk about Syria (see S/PV.8645).
We have seen major new outbreaks of fighting with
the Turkish incursion into the north-east. Four of the
five outside armies concerned, as well as the Syrian
army and several major non-State actors, are all
manoeuvring, sometimes shooting at each other in
a very confined and dangerous area. Meanwhile, in
Idlib in the north-west we have seen a new increase in
violence. As Ms. Al Hallak reminded us, yesterday we
saw a terrible incident of a long-range strategic missile
fired — deliberately, in our view — into an area for
internally displaced persons next to a maternity
hospital, killing and wounding scores of people.
Finally, there was an increase in violence last week
involving three of the other major State military forces
in the air over Syria. Blame should be placed in that
regard on the Iranian Government for continuing to
move long-range weapon systems into Syria in order to
continue its dangerous actions through its proxies. In
the past year three of our partners have been struck by
those weapon systems. In particular we support Israel’s
right to defend itself and to act in self-defence when it
needs to.
Our second priority is the achievement of a
nationwide ceasefire. Our third is maintaining
unrelenting diplomatic and economic pressure on
Damascus by the international community to push
forward on our other goals, because we believe that
we will not get them without that pressure. In that
regard, the United States maintains its position that no
reconstruction assistance can be provided to Damascus
in the areas that it controls until a credible and
irreversible political process is in place, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and until we are sure that it is
well under way. We believe that position is consistent
with that of many of our European and Middle Eastern
partners, and we will work closely with them to ensure
that this pressure is sustained. Any efforts to provide
reconstruction assistance at this moment is premature,
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and here we appreciate the importance of the United
Nations assistance in adhering to its principles and
parameters in support of a political solution. That is our
third area of emphasis.
However, our fourth priority in support of a
viable political solution is based on trying to find
compromises and alternatives to a military solution,
something that the regime, at any rate, still believes to
be possible. My Government in particular has worked
with many of those around this table. I especially want
to emphasize our work with the Russian Federation,
including Secretary of State Pompeo’s trip to Sochi
to meet with President Putin in May. We believe that
there is a way forward, as long as we maintain a policy
focused on the political process, putting pressure on
the regime and on those who support it, and ultimately
the achievement of a national ceasefire with a view to
reaching a compromise solution that will finally put an
end to this terrible war, which from the use of chemical
weapons to the millions of refugees destabilizing entire
areas, and from the rise of various terrorist groups to
the mass slaughter of civilians, has been such a disgrace
for the world.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing, as
well as his dedicated efforts to establish an intra-Syrian
dialogue. We also listened with interest to Ms. Sabah
Al Hallak.
As Mr. Pedersen has just informed us, the first round
of intra-Syrian negotiations within the framework of
the Constitutional Committee took place on 30 October
in Geneva. Its establishment and the start of its work,
with the decisive assistance of the Astana format, was
unquestionably an achievement for the Syrian people.
I recall the Council that the idea of establishing a
Constitutional Committee was adopted in 2018 in Sochi
by representatives from every stratum of Syrian society
participating in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress.
We are pleased by the initial outcomes of this process,
which is aimed at shaping Syria’s future. We hope that
the next stage of negotiations, which begins next week,
will be held in a constructive atmosphere, and we wish
the Syrians and Mr. Pedersen every success.
We agree with the Special Envoy that this is
only the beginning of a long and difficult journey.
We therefore believe it is essential to approach the
intra-Syrian dialogue cautiously. Any attempts to

S/PV. 8674

interfere with its work and impose decisions on the
Syrians that are incompatible with their national
interests are unacceptable, as is the imposition of
artificial time frames or demands for concessions that
apply to only one of the parties involved. We believe
it is also important to remember the key principle of
the work in the Constitutional Committee, enshrined in
resolution 2254 (2015), which stipulates that it should
promote the advancement of the political process, led
and implemented by the Syrians themselves. We urge
all our colleagues to adhere to that principle.
As the guarantor nations of the Astana process,
Russia, Turkey and Iran are ready to continue to assist
the Syrian parties and the Special Envoy in the quest for
a political solution to the Syrian conflict. At the same
time, all of the Astana countries’ actions will be based
on strict respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Today’s positive turn for the better in the work
of reaching a political settlement creates the conditions
necessary for concrete steps to be taken towards the
provision of comprehensive humanitarian assistance in
Syria’s post-conflict reconstruction. It is a pity that as
we just heard, our colleagues from the United States
are still unwilling to abandon their stereotypes and join
that process.
The most worrisome humanitarian and military
situation is still in areas that the Syrian Government
does not control east of the Euphrates River, in the
Idlib de-escalation zone and in the area occupied by
the United States around Al-Tanf. Thanks to Russia
and Turkey’s signing on 22 October in Sochi of a
memorandum of understanding, the situation in northeastern Syria has been brought under control. The
efforts undertaken have enabled the prevention of a
large-scale armed confrontation and civilian casualties.
We have long emphasized that resolving the issue of
the aspirations of the Kurds, who are an integral part of
Syria’s multi-ethnic society, will be impossible as long
as the Syrian Government cannot regain control of its
entire national territory and borders. We are ready to
continue to assist the Syrian authorities and the Kurds
in establishing a broad dialogue on their most pressing
issues. At the same time, we are trying to correct the
harm done throughout Syrian society by those who at
one time or another have attempted to take advantage
of the Arab-Kurdish disputes beyond the Euphrates.
Unfortunately, those attempts are still continuing.
Except that now they are accompanied by open

19-381667/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

22/11/2019

declarations about the existence of their real motive,
which is the desire to cash in on the illegal extraction
and smuggling of Syrian oil.

such information as the truth. Otherwise they will
essentially become participants in an information war
fighting on the side of the terrorists.

We would like to point out that the participants
in the work of the Constitutional Committee include
representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, civil society and the Syrian opposition,
including those that control armed groups. In this
way everyone with a genuine interest in the process of
determining Syria’s political future has come together
in this peace process. And yet outright bandits and
terrorists continue to threaten Syrian society. Most of
Idlib is therefore controlled by militants from Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, a group that the Security Council
has designated as a terrorist organization. Militants
are terrorizing the local population, using civilian
infrastructure for military purposes and sheltering
behind civilians, preventing them from leaving Idlib.
Terrorists from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham regularly fire
on neighbouring settlements using modern weapons.
About 600 such attacks were recorded in October, and
there have been more than 28 such incidents in just
the past 24 hours. There are reports of executions,
detentions and violent dispersals of demonstrations by
ordinary people against the terrorist authorities in Idlib.
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock spoke about
the situation in the besieged town of Kafr Takharim at a
recent Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8664). I will
say it once again. While the opposition is conducting
negotiations in Geneva, terrorists are fighting in
Syria. We therefore warn against attempts to pass off
these jihadists as the so-called moderate opposition or
local administration.

With the assistance of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic, together with the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the United Nations, efforts continue
to resettle Rukban camp. We hope that the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons there will
be resolved soon. And we will not cease pointing to
the dire situation in the Al-Hol camp. We urge all
who care about Syria’s humanitarian welfare to join
the efforts in that regard and to provide all Syrians
with humanitarian assistance without discrimination,
politicization or preconditions. That includes not only
post-conflict reconstruction projects but also lifting
unilateral sanctions in the interests of normalizing the
life of the Syrian people.

I want to point out that some of our colleagues
are still relying on unverified or extremely dubious
information sources in analyzing reports claiming
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
join others in urging for compliance with international
humanitarian law. We and our Syrian partners are doing
all we can to protect the civilian population, whom the
terrorists are using as human shields. However, we have
often felt certain that a great many reports of these sorts
of strikes are in fact fake. Unfortunately, the sources
for the latest of these reports are regularly manipulating
the information in them, and we therefore have no
confidence in them, especially since there have been no
active military hostilities or large-scale operations in
Idlib recently, and there are none right now. We urge all
of our colleagues to be very cautious before presenting
8/20

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen for
his briefing but especially for his tireless determination,
which has succeeded in getting Syria’s Government,
opposition and civil society to sit face to face around
the same table in the framework of the Constitutional
Committee. We welcome Ms. Sabah Al Hallak and
thank her for sharing the insights of her extensive
experience working for the good of Syrian civil society.
We also thank the presidency for inviting her to our
meeting today so that through her we could learn about
the views and aspirations of civil society, and of women
in particular, as they seek to build a new future for
the country.
Following the first round of negotiations,
Ambassador Pedersen described the constitutional talks
in Geneva as successful, intense, substantive and very
professional. He also stressed that in many ways they
were painful, and that is a good thing. We are hopeful
that, through the facilitation of the United Nations and
on the basis of mutual respect, dedication, commitment
and trust, it will be possible to build bridges and make
progress even in the most difficult areas. We therefore
urge all the members of the Committee, based on their
shared beliefs and common interests, to continue their
deliberations with enthusiasm. Women in particular
have a decisive role to play in these talks, which is
why their participation rate of at least 30 per cent is
so crucial.
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Against the current backdrop, my delegation would
like to highlight the following points. It is essential to
build trust through a broad-based political process, for
which the Constitutional Committee is undoubtedly
key. If it does its work effectively, it will strengthen
the Syrian belief that their legitimate aspirations are
attainable. But the work of the Committee will not be
enough and will not succeed in contributing to that
broad-based process if the conditions for building a
unified national vision are not put in place, starting
with meaningful and robust support to its constituent
sectors. Progress on mutual confidence-building
measures is crucial to that process. We fully agree that
releasing women, children, the elderly and the disabled
and people who have been arbitrarily detained who have
become ill would contribute significantly to that and
would also provide families with credible information
about the whereabouts of missing loved ones.
However, perhaps it is up to the Syrians themselves,
whether under the auspices of the Committee or
another platform, to define what other measures the
Government and the opposition can undertake so that
the civilian population can see tangible change in their
lives. That is to say, hope must be rebuilt. We believe it
is more important than ever to reach a lasting national
ceasefire that provides relief and calm to the civilian
population. It is worth stressing the importance of
providing specific assurances that all counter-terrorist
activities will be carried out in strict adherence to
international humanitarian law, which establishes
limits even on hostilities. Those limits are clear — they
apply to civilian populations and infrastructure. In that
regard, we regret and condemn the reports of missiles
being launched from areas controlled by the Syrian
Government that have claimed the lives of 12 people
and injured 56 others, including children. Many will
say that no political process can bear fruit while a
humanitarian tragedy continues, and that this would
be too much to ask for. That is true, but we advocate
treating this tragedy as the force driving every sector of
the population in Syria, wherever they may be, together
with all of us who want peace, to make real progress in
achieving the Syria that its people aspire to and deserve.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Sabah
Al Hallak for her input.
Let me start by welcoming the beginning of the
work of the Constitutional Committee on 30 October.

S/PV. 8674

Poland has underlined many times that any sustainable
solution to the conflict requires a genuine political
transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. That process has
finally begun. We agree with the Special Envoy that the
future Constitution belongs to the Syrian people alone.
The proceedings of the Constitutional Committee
should allow for a truly meaningful discussion on
Syria’s future.
All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that context, let
me stress the importance of safeguarding the humane
treatment of detainees, including abductees and
missing persons in Syria, by placing an emphasis on
their inherent rights derived from international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
The Syrian war has brought unspeakable suffering
to the once peaceful country. Thousands of people
remain in arbitrary detention, where many are subject
to various forms of ill-treatment, including torture and
rape. At the same time, thousands remain missing, with
their relatives deprived of any information regarding
their fate. We call for their release, particularly the
release of children, women and the elderly. Some
progress in that area would help to raise the level of
confidence between the parties and greatly contribute
to the efforts aimed at reaching a lasting peace in Syria.
That is one of the most important confidence-building
measures, if not the most important, between the parties
to the conflict.
Unfortunately, apart from the political track, we
must also note the escalation of the conflict in Idlib.
Yesterday we learned that missiles fired on Wednesday
night into settlements for people fleeing conflict in
the country’s northwest killed at least 12 people and
wounded dozens more, including children. The most
vulnerable groups, including the elderly, women and
children sheltering in the internally displaced persons
camps, must be under special protection.
We particularly condemn the attacks against
medical facilities and their personnel conducted
across the whole of Syria this year. We reiterate the
essential need to ensure safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid, as well as the free and unhindered
movement of civilians fleeing from violence.
International humanitarian law is crystal clear.
It requires all parties to the conflict to strictly
distinguish between civilians and combatants and to

19-381669/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

take constant care to spare civilians in the conduct of
military operations.
In conclusion, I want to recall that we fully support
the safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled their
homes. We believe that a lasting solution for Syria
should ensure the security of the sustainable, dignified
and voluntary return of Syrians to their country of
origin, in accordance with international law and the
principle of non-refoulement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I also want to start by
thanking Mr. Geir Pedersen for his relentless work,
and I congratulate him on what he has achieved. In his
statement, the United States representative said that the
process could open the door for a peaceful process, but
it is just the first step. There are worrying statements
by President Al-Assad, who is trying to disassociate
himself from the Constitutional Committee. Of course,
that must not happen, and we must have a guarantee
that the independence of the Constitutional Committee
will be respected and that its members will be safe and
secure and will not be blackmailed.
We have opened the door for a political process.
I would also like to remind colleagues that, from
Germany’s perspective, there must be a genuine
political process that is comprehensive and inclusive
and a transition under way before we can start to think
about assistance to reconstruction.
In talking about an inclusive process, I would like
to pay tribute to what Ms. Al Hallak said with regard to
women. We greatly welcome the fact that Mr. Pedersen
mentioned in his briefing that he had met with the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board. But there needs to be
the full participation of women in the political process
and in all political bodies. I fully subscribe to what he
said about the future Constitution, namely, that the goal
of the political process is that women’s rights must be
enshrined in the Constitution. What Mr. Pedersen said
about gender-based violence, discrimination, forced
disappearances and the fact that still today women are
being taken hostage is horrifying.
We need a political process. We need a ceasefire,
as colleagues have said, and, as we discussed earlier
this week in this body (see S/PV.8668), we need
reconciliation in the country. As a first step, what is
absolutely necessary for that is that the Syrian regime
put an end to arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence,
forced disappearances and the extrajudicial killings
of detainees. It must inform the families of tens of
10/20

22/11/2019

thousands of missing persons about the fate of their loved
ones, provide the United Nations or the International
Committee of the Red Cross unconditional access to
all detention facilities under its control, allow persons
in custody access to medical treatment and release all
political prisoners and arbitrarily detained persons.
With regard to reconciliation, there is one
more key point that I have repeatedly stated, that is,
accountability. Without accountability, there cannot be
reconciliation. I therefore again appeal, including to our
Russian colleagues, to fully support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, which actually creates the conditions for
reconciliation and a better future for Syria.
This morning, when we discussed the situation in
Yemen, our Russian colleague said that there needs
to be unconditional compliance with international
humanitarian law (see S/PV.8672). This afternoon, I
listened to his statement and he did not mention that.
When I hear and read about what is happening and
what the Russian and Syrian forces are undertaking
in Syria, I understand why he did not mention it. We
heard the news about the sixty-fifth attack on a medical
installation, in Qah, where 10 people — civilians and
medical personnel — were killed. There is no excuse
for indiscriminate attacks against innocent civilians
and civilian infrastructure. As has been said earlier,
we also support that the board of inquiry should look
into such attacks and that its subsequent report should
be published.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Madam President, to thank Special Envoy Mr. Pedersen
for his valuable briefing on the political process in
Syria. We also thank Ms. Al Hallak for her briefing.
We meet today following a major achievement in
the Syrian political process, namely, the holding of the
first round of the Constitutional Committee meetings.
It would be remiss of me not to once again commend
the efforts of Mr. Pedersen this year, which contributed
to reaching this agreement.
We have been following the work of the Committee,
which met as the large body comprising 150 people and
the small group comprising 45 people in Geneva during
the first half of this month. We must commend the Syrian
parties for taking that vital step and for participating in
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the work of the Constitutional Committee. The launch
of the Committee’s work is a glimmer of hope not only
for Syrians, but also for the international community,
after the years of suffering as a result of the conflict
in this brotherly Arab country. Given the fact that we
are just days away from resuming the Constitutional
Committee meetings in Geneva, we hope that
dialogue will prevail and that the parties will engage
in constructive discussions leading to understandings
with regard to the Syrian Constitution.
We know that those discussions are not going to be
easy and that there are competing views. However, we
call on the Syrian parties to focus at all times on the
interests of the brotherly Syrian people and to allow
them to fulfil their legitimate aspirations through a
political settlement agreed upon by all components of
Syrian people — a settlement that would uphold the
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We stress that this political process must be
coupled with confidence-building measures. Most
importantly, genuine and tangible progress needs to be
made on the issues of detainees and missing persons, as
Mr. Pedersen mentioned in his briefing. International
organizations must be allowed to visit detention centres
and prisons. On the issue of refugees, we once again
express our position that the return of refugees must be
voluntary, safe and dignified. We stress that attaining
comprehensive and sustainable peace will not be
possible without ensuring justice, ending impunity and
ensuring accountability for all the crimes that have been
committed in Syria since the beginning of the conflict
in 2011. Once again, we support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as the board of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General, which has recently started its work.
We would like to refer to the press release
issued yesterday by UNICEF and its horrific figures
on the number of children who were killed last
year — more than 1,100 children were killed. It also
contains information on civilian facilities that were
targeted. In that context, we express once again our
concern about the latest developments in the north-west
of Syria, specifically in Idlib, which has recently seen
a military escalation that has led to civilian casualties.

S/PV. 8674

The latest attack was on an internally displaced persons
camp in Idlib, which also led to civilian casualties.
We stress once again that we condemn the targeting
of innocent civilians, by any party. We also condemn
all attacks carried out on civilian-populated areas by
terrorist groups that are designated by Security Council
as terrorist organizations. At the same time, we recall
that counter-terrorism operations do not absolve
any party of its obligations under international law,
which include abiding by the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and protecting civilians
and civilian facilities.
We recall that the United Nations has warned that
any large-scale military operation in Idlib could lead
to the worst humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first
century. We fear that such a military operation may
adversely affect the political process and the meeting
of the Constitutional Committee, and we reiterate our
call for a ceasefire throughout Syria, as provided for
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2401 (2018). We condemn Israel’s repeated
attacks on Syria’s sovereignty and its territories, which
violate the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 350 (1974), concerning the
disengagement between Israeli and Syrian forces.
In conclusion, we stress once again that there
is no military solution to the conflict in Syria. The
solution must be sought through a political settlement,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), which set
out a road map for a transitional political process that
includes a number of stages, including the drafting of a
constitution and the holding of free and fair elections in
accordance with that constitution, under the supervision
of the United Nations. That process must engage all
Syrians, including those who are abroad.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation too would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his excellent briefing on the latest developments in the
political process in Syria. We also thank Ms. Sabah Al
Hallak, representative of civil society in Syria, for her
detailed briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the mediation and good
offices efforts of the Special Envoy, which enabled the
work of the Constitutional Committee to be launched
in Geneva on 30 October in a constructive spirit. We
also applaud the willingness of the two co-chairs of the

19-3816611/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

Constitutional Committee to meet again in Geneva on
25 November.
Despite these positive developments, my delegation
believes that the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee is but one step in the political process
towards the resolution of a conflict that has been going
on for more than eight years. That is why Côte d’Ivoire
calls on the international community and, first and
foremost the Council, to strongly support all actors in
their continued peace negotiations under the auspices
of the United Nations.
My country also reiterates the need for a complete
cessation of hostilities in order to create an environment
conducive to the successful conduct of talks. In that
regard, we welcome the agreements signed between
Turkey and the United States and Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 17 and 22 October, respectively, with
regard to the cessation of the offensive against Kurdish
forces in north-eastern Syria. Those agreements,
in addition to the unilateral ceasefire declared on
31 August by the Russian Federation and Government
forces in Idlib province, seek to build the climate of
trust required for successful negotiations among the
Syrian parties.
In that context, my delegation remains concerned
about the persistence of sources of tension in northeastern Syria. We are also concerned about the military
escalation between Tel Aviv and Damascus, which could
exacerbate regional tensions and the already worrisome
security and humanitarian situations in Syria. My
country therefore urges both States to give priority to
dialogue in the pursuit of solutions to their differences.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire hopes that the work of
the Constitutional Committee will lead to the expected
outcomes of peace and lasting stability in Syria. In that
regard, we call on the Council to support the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to achieve a
political settlement of the Syrian conflict, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing on
the situation in Syria. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Special Envoy and the teams
supporting him in carrying out his responsibilities with
dedication and fortitude. We commend the efforts of
the Special Envoy towards creating an environment that
is conducive towards a Syrian-led and United Nationsfacilitated process to establish credible, inclusive
12/20

22/11/2019

and non-sectarian governance and set a process for
drafting a new constitution and conducting free and
fair elections. I also thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for her
very informative briefing.
I will focus my remarks on the following three issues:
the security situation, the political and constitutional
processes, and the humanitarian situation.
Regarding the first issue, South Africa expresses
it grave concern at the recent reports of shelling and
missile strikes in Idlib that have resulted in the injury
and deaths of civilians, including children. We urge all
parties to adhere to their obligations under international
law, especially with regard to the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure. However, we also hope that
as the Syrian Government forces move to gain further
control of their territory, the threat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other armed groups will be
fully destroyed. We must also note that while counterterrorism activities are vital to achieving that goal,
those activities must be undertaken in full compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
On the second issue of the political and
constitutional processes, South Africa welcomes the
launch and convening of the first meeting of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee at the end of October. Reports
show that tangible progress has been made in the work
of the larger committee and that of the small group. We
urge all members of the Constitutional Committee to
faithfully carry out their duties in line with the code
of conduct that was adopted during their discussions.
We look forward to receiving regular updates on the
progress of their work.
While the work of the Constitutional Committee
progresses in earnest, the other aspects of the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) must also
continue, including the active engagement of all parties
in the continuing political process facilitated by the
Special Envoy. As a complement to the Constitutional
Committee, parties should consider bolstering that
progress with confidence-building measures, including
the release of civilian detainees, particularly women,
children, the elderly and the sick.
My delegation reiterates that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that
reflects the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed
protection for all groups of Syrian society. In that
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

regard, we welcome the representation of women as
well as the various religious groups in the peace talks,
and we reiterate that resolution 2254 (2015) remains the
road map for the political process in Syria.
On the third issue — the humanitarian situation and
the upcoming renewal of the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mandate — I would like to reiterate that
South Africa will continue to work with all interested
parties to find consensus on the matter. South Africa
remains committed to supporting the protection of
the fundamental interests of the Syrian people, the
maintenance of peace and security in the Middle East
region and upholding the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms
governing international relations, including respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Syria. We call on all parties in Syria, including the
political and civil society sectors and all of the Syrian
people, to unite in order to stitch together a peaceful,
stable and prosperous future.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I
also listened carefully to Ms. Al Hallak’s remarks.
The consensus of the international community
is that a political solution is the only way to reach a
settlement of the Syrian issue. The Syrian political
process has seen major developments in the past month,
including the successful holding of the first meeting of
the large body of the Constitutional Committee and
a 45-member small group. The small group will hold
its second and third round of discussions in Geneva
very soon. China welcomes such developments and
commends Special Envoy Pedersen’s good offices and
hard work, as well as the constructive participation of
all Syrian parties.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is a good starting point for the Syrian political process.
We support the work of Mr. Pedersen, on the basis
of existing gains made, to continue promoting the
political process according to the principle of a Syrianled, Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254 (2015),
In that regard, there is a need to listen carefully to the
legitimate appeals of the Syrian Government, maintain
the independence of the work of the Constitutional
Committee and fully respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country. Syria should not be divided or torn apart. We
hope that the Syrian parties will use the discussions

S/PV. 8674

in the Constitutional Committee to increase mutual
understanding and gradually build mutual trust. The
members of the Constitutional Committee should
prioritize the interests of the country and its people and
reach consensus as soon as possible. The international
community, including the Security Council, should
provide support in that regard and do more to help
the Syrian parties set their differences aside and
create consensus.
Rampant terrorism represents a major potential
threat to a political solution to the Syrian issue, as it
will have a significant negative impact on the political
process and the future of the country. This scourge
deserves the attention of all parties and should be
resolved. The situation in north-eastern Syria remains
fragile. The parties involved should avoid any action
that might undermine the achievements made thus far
in the area of counter-terrorism. The current priority is
to jointly deal with the risk posed by the movement of
terrorists and guard against the return of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. The Secretariat should
keep a close eye on the counter-terrorism situation in
Syria, as well as terrorists on the move, and carefully
consider the issue of bringing those terrorists to justice
by proposing recommendations to that end. Idlib has
become a breeding ground for terrorism, posing a threat
to millions of civilians. This is a common challenge for
the peace and security of Syria, the Middle East and the
world at large. The international community, in line with
the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
should continue to align standards to fight terrorism in
all its forms and undertake joint efforts to deal with the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters.
While promoting the political process in Syria,
we should also make efforts to improve the country’s
economic and humanitarian situation. The international
community, including the United Nations, should adopt a
comprehensive, objective and balanced perspective when
considering and addressing the Syrian humanitarian
crisis. Syria is currently faced with economic sanctions,
oil shortages, damaged infrastructure and a lack of
reconstruction funds, as well as other difficulties
that exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and have an
acute impact on providing food, clothing, housing and
transport for its people. The large number of refugees
has put economic and social pressure on neighbouring
countries and constitutes a destabilizing factor in the
region. The provision of humanitarian materials to
Syria should not come with any political preconditions.

19-3816613/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

All humanitarian relief actors on the ground in Syria
should increase their communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government.
China would like to reiterate its support for
the political process in Syria and is ready to play a
constructive role in the early resumption of peace,
stability and development in Syria.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We wish to thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. We also thank
Ms. Al Hallak, from the Syrian Women’s League,
for sharing her experience and information with the
Security Council.
Indonesia welcomes the launching of the
Constitutional Committee and the subsequent
discussions among Committee members in Geneva
few weeks ago. We share the view of others that the
Constitutional Committee is not in itself a solution to
the conflict. However, we also believe that the current
discussions in Geneva are crucial as a point of entry
to a broader Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations and based on
resolution 2254 (2015).
My delegation is extremely concerned by the
escalating violence in the north-west, including the
recent attack that affected an internally displaced
persons (IDP) camp in Idlib, as previously reported by
Special Envoy Pedersen. The people in the IDP camp,
including women and children, are seeking safety;
however, even their shelters are now destroyed. They
have lost their homes and their shelters. We would
therefore like to reiterate our appeal for a complete end
to the violence in Syria.
With regard to the overall political process in Syria,
my delegation would like to highlight three points.
First, it is crucial to create a conducive environment
for the ongoing process of the Constitutional Committee.
All parties need to support the Committee in focusing
on its work, without unnecessary, additional pressure
from external actors. The international community
should allow the members of the Committee concentrate
on the substance and let the Syrians decide their own
future. We hope that the members can further discuss
their visions constructively during the next round of
Committee discussions starting next Monday.
Secondly, my delegation commends the role of the
Special Envoy in bringing the parties together, which is
not easy. We strongly support Special Envoy Pedersen’s
14/20

22/11/2019

robust efforts to build trust and confidence between the
relevant parties. Trust has to be nurtured carefully in
order for it to lead to a genuine dialogue. We believe
it is essential that the Council reaffirm its continued
support for this process and strongly signal our full
backing of the Special Envoy’s work to all parties.
Thirdly, in order to achieve a lasting political
settlement of the crisis, it is absolutely essential that
all sides support the initial pathway to peace in Syria,
including by fully respecting the ceasefire agreements.
Both the political process and a ceasefire should move
ahead expeditiously, and de-escalation must be a top
priority in the interest of the well-being of millions of
people in Syria.
Before concluding, as was clearly stated by Special
Envoy Pedersen, the Constitutional Committee meeting
was potentially a historic moment. It is our collective
moral obligation to continue assisting all parties to
transform that potential into something real, namely,
the beginning of a better future for all Syrian people.
My delegation wishes to stress the importance for
all parties to avoid any provocative activities and/or
statements that could potentially disrupt the ongoing
process in Geneva.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): It is always a pleasure for Equatorial
Guinea to listen to the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and above all
a source of great satisfaction to hear of the important
advances being made in the political process in Syria.
We reiterate our thanks for his admirable commitment
and thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for her briefing.
Having welcomed the formation of the
Constitutional Committee at our previous briefing
(see S/PV.8645), the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea now welcomes the convening of the
Committee’s first meeting in Geneva on 30 October
and the approval of the composition of the drafting
group for the future Syrian constitution. This is a truly
important and hopeful moment as the outcome of the
first agreement between the Syrian parties since the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015). We believe that it is
now essential for the Committee to participate in serious
and substantial discussions to achieve positive and
tangible results that serve the interests and aspirations
of the entire Syrian people.
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the high level of representation in
the Committee of a broad segment of civil society, of
various ethnic and religious groups and of different
political movements, and we recall that their work
must be undertaken in respect for the Charter of the
United Nations, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and such indisputable principles as respect for
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria.
Furthermore, we share the opinion that the
Constitutional Committee must be governed in its
work by the search for consensus and constructive
interaction, without external interference and without
outside deadlines, in order to reach a general agreement
among its members that would allow for the broadest
possible support among the Syrian people for its
work. However, we must be aware that this is only a
first step towards the political and peaceful settlement
of the crisis, because after this first step we will still
have 1,000 miles to go, since the Committee is not
the crowning goal of all efforts to achieve a durable
conflict resolution.
We also believe that attempts to present the
resolution of the conflict as depending only on the work
of the Constitutional Committee represent the wrong
approach. The war will end when we have put a halt to
hostilities across the country and to terrorism. The fight
against terrorism in Syria is an indispensable condition
for advancing the process of a political solution. Syrians
have the same right as everyone else to live free from
terrorists in their own country. Equatorial Guinea does
not believe that it is possible to make progress in the
political process if the guns continue to roar, hundreds
of innocent lives are annihilated time and again, and
mass population displacements occur.
I reiterate that there is no military solution to the
war or an alternative to a political solution and that the
improvement of relations between the Syrian parties
regarding the release of prisoners and humanitarian aid
is in the interest of the political process. Any process of
any kind in Syria must respect the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the country and involve the Syrians
themselves as the main actors and protagonists, since it
is the future of their own country that is at stake. There
must be no imposed solutions.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen for being with us today on the eve of

S/PV. 8674

the second meeting of the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva, as well as Ms. Al Hallak for her intervention.
There is an urgent need to silence the guns
everywhere in Syria in order to create the conditions
conducive to a political settlement. We must prevent at
all costs a resumption of hostilities in the north-east
that would be disastrous on the humanitarian level
and would only benefit Da’esh, to the detriment of our
collective security. Our priority is therefore to remain
united in the fight against Da’esh and to preserve the
hard-won progress made by the Coalition. Da’esh
continues to pose a major threat. It retains significant
action capabilities, as evidenced by the resurgence of
asymmetric attacks on the ground. France is pleased
that the members of the International Coalition
against Da’esh have reaffirmed their determination to
pursuing their engagement in Syria and Iraq, including
by maintaining a military presence in the north-east.
France will continue to assume all its responsibilities
against Da’esh.
The sharp deterioration of the situation in the
north-west since late October is another source of
concern. France condemns the ongoing indiscriminate
strikes by the regime and its allies in Idlib, in violation
of international humanitarian law. In particular, I
condemn the strike of 20 November against a camp for
internally displaced persons near the Turkish border, as
well as those against medical facilities, some of which
are supported by the European Union and France.
The fight against terrorism is a priority for my
country, but it cannot be waged at the expense of respect
for international humanitarian law. The protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, and civilian infrastructure is an obligation
on all. We also condemn the repression of peaceful
civilian demonstrations by the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
group. In this context, it is necessary to reaffirm the
full and complete restoration of the ceasefire on Idlib
in order to join forces against the terrorist groups listed
by the United Nations.
I wish to reaffirm France’s full support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy to reach a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
I congratulate him on the holding of the first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee, which is a positive
step. We hope that the second meeting of the drafting
committee, to be held on Monday in Geneva, will bring
progress towards giving Syria a new constitution. In

19-3816615/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

order to move in that direction, it is important that all
members of the Committee, particularly the delegation
of the regime, engage in good faith in the discussions
and resort to disingenuous procrastination. We will
remain vigilant with regard to any manoeuvre aimed at
hindering the discussions and ask the Special Envoy to
report to the Council in a transparent manner.
The Constitutional Committee is not an end in
itself and represents only a first step. It is necessary
to make parallel progress on the implementation of all
the elements of resolution 2254 (2015), as the Ministers
of the small group reaffirmed on 14 November
in Washington, D.C. This involves working on
confidence-building measures, especially with respect
to detainees. It also requires creating a safe and neutral
environment for the holding of credible elections under
the supervision of the United Nations, in which all
Syrians, including refugees and internally displaced
persons, must participate.
Without progress in that direction, the positions
of France and the European Union on reconstruction
and sanctions will remain unchanged. That should in
no way prevent those who believe that the conditions
for reconstruction have already been met, and who
are eager to begin forthwith and on a large scale, from
financing that reconstruction and from rebuilding that
which they, to a large extent, helped to destroy. It is
also an illusion to imagine that the dignified, safe
and voluntary return of refugees is possible without a
comprehensive agreement, including real political and
security guarantees and ensuring full and unhindered
United Nations access to observe and support that
return on the ground.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my call to
all who have influence on the regime to bring pressure
to bear so that it genuinely engages in the political
process. We must all do our part in order to make
progress towards peace.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing and also for his work on and
commitment to reaching a political solution in Syria.
I would also like to thank Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for
her testimony.
First, with regard to the Constitutional Committee,
we share the Special Envoy’s positive assessment
of its first meeting. Its work can and must be a first
step in the political process and towards realizing the
16/20

22/11/2019

legitimate aspirations of all Syrians, both at home and
in the diaspora. In order to do that, the representatives
of the Committee must be able to carry out their work in
a propitious environment. We call on all the parties to
honour their commitments by allowing representatives
to do their job and seize the historic opportunity that
the Constitutional Committee represents. Belgium
continues to support an inclusive political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Secondly, with regard to the situation on the
ground, the unfortunate reality is that the violence
continues in north-eastern and north-western Syria.
We are particularly concerned about the latest
reports of attacks, including on a camp for internally
displaced persons in Qah on 20 November, as others
have mentioned. Such violence is unacceptable and
must cease immediately. We call on all the parties
to establish a nationwide ceasefire, as called for in
resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian Government has a
particular obligation to ensure a safe, stable and calm
environment throughout the country as a backdrop to
the peace talks in Geneva. That also includes protecting
rights and preventing reprisals, repression and forced
recruitment into the armed forces.
Thirdly, the Special Envoy reminds us every
month about the importance of implementing
confidence-building measures. Thousands of Syrians
continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained. We
call on Syria to take on board the crucial importance of
combating that issue as a sign of good faith towards its
own population.
Finally, I would like to remind members that
the Council will soon be considering the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014), on cross-border humanitarian
aid. The importance of that resolution is indisputable,
and its renewal highlights the collective responsibility
of the Council in meeting the most basic needs of
4 million people.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and to Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and very
valuable briefing. We acknowledge the intensive work
that he has done with a view to bringing the parties
closer together, and we reaffirm our commitment to
ensuring the success of his mandate. We also thank
Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for the information she provided
this afternoon.
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Peru has been closely monitoring the work of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva and welcomes
the constructive spirit and willingness to compromise
demonstrated by all parties. We hope that will help to
find the common ground necessary to move towards
a process of national reconciliation. We encourage the
participants to ensure that the meetings of the Committee
and the various topics discussed there continue to take
place within a framework of transparency, which will
enable the international community, and the Council in
particular, to monitor and support the implementation
of the agreements reached and foster greater trust
among all the parties to the peace process.
We believe that we are at a critical point, at which
it is essential to act quickly on the political front and
make concrete commitments in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). The grave humanitarian situation and the latent
threat of terrorism in Syria require it. We stress how
important it is that in addition to those efforts all the
parties continue to work on measures that foster an
atmosphere of understanding, including by releasing
detainees, identifying missing persons and handing
over mortal remains. We underscore that progress in
that area is not only a gesture of great humanity that can
heal open wounds and ease tensions, but also represents
an ideal way of advancing Syria’s process of political
dialogue, accountability and reconciliation.
As the Organization has pointed out, it is crucial
that the Syrian Government and the opposition focus
on achieving more extensive solutions that go beyond
the current level of individual and reciprocal exchanges
of prisoners towards the simultaneous release of
unequally sized groups. Another major challenge
that must be addressed is the serious situation facing
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons,
which requires not only making the necessary financial
resources available but especially demonstrating the
political will needed to guarantee their safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters. In
order to achieve that, we highlight the importance of
avoiding an escalation of the conflict, which would
undermine the prospects for a political solution. An
effective ceasefire in Idlib and its surrounding areas is
vital in the current circumstances.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Syria and that
my delegation will continue to work to put an end to

S/PV. 8674

the suffering of the Syrian people and build sustainable
peace in the country.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have asked for the floor to respond to the
remarks made by our German colleague. It seems
that he did not listen very carefully to my statement,
because I did mention international humanitarian law,
for example. Besides that, his attention to the topic
of the statement was also lacking, because the fact is
that we are discussing the political settlement of the
situation in Syria, not the humanitarian situation there,
which is a separate subject. If it had been, I would of
course have paid greater attention to the humanitarian
situation, which was what he wanted to talk about, as
I understand it. I would nevertheless recommend that
he familiarize himself with the bulletins that Russia’s
Ministry of Defence puts out regularly, from which
he would see how we deliver and ensure access to
humanitarian aid for those in need. And I can assure
him that we do a great deal of that.
On top of that, I conclude that despite my warning
about the need for a cautious attitude to information
sources on what is going on in Syria, our colleague
the representative of Germany has apparently signed
on as a volunteer in the army of people spreading
unverified information about the actions of Russia and
the legitimate Government of Syria, while forgetting
to find out if that information has been refuted. And,
apparently, he is not planning to resign his commission.
That is of course his choice, and apparently a conscious
one, but I ask him to keep in mind that every reckless
statement like this merely prolongs the suffering of
the residents of Idlib and other areas. It represents yet
another missed opportunity for ensuring a fair trial
for the people who do not want peace in Syria, and it
makes ordinary Syrians’ lives a living hell. His rhetoric
helps to legitimize them and protect them from the
punishment they deserve, the necessity for which he
theoretically — I repeat, theoretically — never ceases
to insist on.
The President: The representative of Germany has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish very briefly to
say, first, that I believe that international humanitarian
law and humanitarian assistance are very political and

19-3816617/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

belong in a discussion about the political situation,
because these cannot be separated. Secondly, I leave
it up to others around the table and to the public as to
who is prolonging the suffering of the people — is it
Germany, or is it Russia?
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I was going to lead off with exactly what the
German Ambassador has said, but I will come back to
that later, if I may, because I think that there may have
been an important confusion as to what international
humanitarian law really means.
I wanted to start by thanking the Special Envoy and
Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for their briefings. As others have
said, what they have achieved with the Constitutional
Committee is extremely welcome. It is a very positive
tone and could be a very important first step towards
stability in Syria. Of course, we all know the amount
of effort now required, but we would use today’s debate
to urge all the parties to seize this opportunity and
make full use of the help that he and his team are ready
to provide.
We are also incredibly grateful to Ms. Al Hallak
for joining us today and her reminder that the political
process goes a long way beyond the Constitution. It is
critical that all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) make
progress in tandem. Others have referred to the release
of detainees, refugee returns and preparations for free
and transparent elections open to all Syrians, including
the diaspora.
I want to take this opportunity to add the British
voice to that of the United States, France and Germany
that there will be no reconstruction assistance for Syria
without such a credible political process, and it goes
beyond at the Constitution.
We welcomed hearing Ms. Al Hallak’s views on
the situation of women. It is not just about percentages
or about how many women are formally involved; it is
about how genuinely their voices and the voices of civil
society are included in the political process. But we
recognize her tireless efforts and those of other women
to overcome the barriers to being heard. I was in Geneva
in 2012 and saw the efforts made there by the women of
Syria to obtain a seat at the table, so it is incredibly good
news that the Special Envoy and she and her colleagues
have been able to achieve that. If there are reports of
any intimidation of the Constitutional Committee, we
18/20

22/11/2019

hope that the United Nations will deal with those as an
urgent priority.
Turning to the situation on the ground, as I said, the
German Ambassador made many of the points I wanted
to make. But I did not really like the confusion between
international humanitarian law and humanitarian
issues. International humanitarian law is not solely
about humanitarian assistance. It is about such things
as attacking civilians, bombing hospitals and using
weapons of mass destruction against civilians, and it
is about being able to protect civilians on the ground.
I think that looked at in that light, it is not the track
record of the West that is lacking. It is the track record
of the Syrian Arab Republic and its ally, the Russian
Federation. I want to say again in this Chamber that
attacks on the West and attempts to portray us as
harbouring terrorists or somehow on the side of
terrorists really need to cease. We are trying hard to
assist the United Nations in bringing peace to Syria. We
are giving money on the humanitarian side to that end.
We do not deserve — nor are the attacks in the Chamber
warranted — to have it said that “we are fighting on the
side of terrorists”. If that were to be repeated outside
the Chamber in an individual capacity, legal action
would taken on that statement. I hope that we will hear
no more about it. It is a calumny and it is untrue, like
so many of the other things that have been said about
the situation in Syria by the two countries represented
to my right.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First and foremost, I would like to thank
Mr. Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing.
Two weeks ago, the Constitutional Committee met
in its two formats, the large body and the small body.
The Syrian State has shown flexibility and a positive
attitude in the initial phase leading to the meeting of
the Committee. That is what the United Nations and the
Special Envoy confirmed. He explained in his briefing
today that the first round of the Committee’s meetings
has witnessed positive discussions involving a number
of questions linked to its work, and the Committee has
adopted its rules of procedure.
19-38166

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The Government of my country reiterates the
importance of fully conforming with the mandate,
principal core terms of reference and rules of procedure
of the Committee, in particular respect by all Members
of the United Nations, especially those that are
members of the Security Council, for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. It reiterates also the importance
of Syrian oversight and ownership of the political
process and of the impartial facilitating role played by
the Special Envoy, without imposing any preconditions,
prejudgment or artificial deadlines regarding the work
of the Committee or its conclusions, because drafting a
Constitution for the Syrian Arab Republic and charting
the course of the country’s future is an exclusive right of
the Syrian people that cannot be prejudiced or given up.
We are satisfied with the confirmation by the
United Nations and the Special Envoy in this context.
We hope that this will materialize during the upcoming
meetings of the Committee next week at which it will
discuss the Constitution. We are also pleased to see
that the delegation representing the Syrian State has
actively participated in the first round of discussions.
We affirm that that delegation will discuss its tasks
on its own on the basis of its national convictions and
that the dialogue is among Syrians, Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led.
The greatest risk facing the Constitutional
Committee is the attempts by some parties to interfere
in its work and hamper its efforts in order to achieve
schemes that run counter to the basic interests of the
Syrians, so this must be avoided.
All Syrians expect that all necessary and proper
conditions will be created to enable the Committee to
work in a positive atmosphere so as to ensure that the
efforts made are successful.
Nonetheless, we were surprised to see that the
support given by some regional and international parties
to the Constitutional Committee to ensure its success
took the form of the conquering and occupation of Syrian
territories by the Turkish regime, as well as the killing
of many Syrians and the forcible displacement of more
than 180,000 Syrian citizens in order to assemble proErdoğan terrorists and help them gain ground on Syrian
territory under the pretext of the so-called safe area.
That safe area is rejected by the Syrian Arab Republic.
We consider it occupied territory and we will treat it

S/PV. 8674

based on relevant provisions of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
The United States Administration expressed its
support for the Constitutional Committee in its own
way by occupying Syria’s oil fields and stealing the
resources belonging to the Syrian people. That was met
with silence from the Security Council penholders on
humanitarian, political and chemical weapon issues and
from those supporting them. That is how the American
occupation of parts of my country resonates with the
Turkish one in looting our resources and natural wealth.
Indeed, whenever two States agree to act against Syria,
usually another party joins them and, in this case, it
is Israel. One loots the territory, another steals oil and
the third seeks to continue its occupation of the Syrian
Golan, seizing the land of Syrians and committing
successive aggressions against my country in flagrant
violation of international law and resolution 350 (1974)
on the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces.
The most recent Israeli evil aggression took place
on 20 November, resulting in a number of civilian
deaths and the destruction of many homes, while certain
Council members, including permanent members,
continue to protect Israel and render the Council
powerless. What is more heinous is that our United
States colleague has justified the Israeli aggression as
an expression of Iranphobia. It is a shared sentiment on
the part of the Americans and the Israelis.
My country’s Government stresses that the terrorist
war against Syria did not start due to national differences
over the Constitution but because of international
terrorism, which targeted Syria for political objectives
related to trying to change the geopolitical map of the
region. That means the war against Syria will end once
the terrorism supported by foreign Powers also comes
to an end. We say all that despite the fact that we are
ready to encourage the delegation supported by the
Syrian State to make efforts so that the Committee
can accomplish its task. The Constitutional Committee
must submit the outcome of its work to the Syrian
people, which is the only authorized party to examine
its conclusions and judge them.
The Syrian people categorically condemn the
occupation and terrorism practised by various terrorist
groups, irrespective of their name and affiliation.
They include Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front, the Muslim
Brotherhood and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, all of which,

19-3816619/20

S/PV.8674

The situation in the Middle East

22/11/2019

as the Council knows, are organizations that have their
elements graduate from major Western universities
that teach international humanitarian law in the United
States of America, France, Belgium or Germany. All
those terrorists studied in major Western universities.
They behead people, eat livers and burn individuals.
That is part of the international humanitarian law that
they studied.

coercive measures imposed on them, which amount to
economic terrorism. It goes without saying that those
national constants must be at the core of the work of
members of the Committee discussing the Constitution.
That is the situation all in the Chamber need to grasp.

The Syrian people also reject any separatist scheme
or semi-secessionist plan regardless of its form and the
propaganda campaigns that are used to promote it. Our
people call for the immediate lifting of the unilateral

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

20/20

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

19-38166
