United Nations

S/PV.6494

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6494th meeting
Thursday, 10 March 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Bellingham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace and security in Somalia
Letter dated 3 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/114)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-25831 (E)

*1125831*

S/PV.6494

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Comprehensive strategy for the realization of
peace and security in Somalia
Letter dated 3 March 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/114)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Denmark,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Norway, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, and request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, to participate in this
meeting. On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Mr. Mahiga, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Mogadishu.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union for Somalia, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.

2

I recognize the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and the Minister for Africa of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, His Excellency
Mr. Henry Bellingham MP.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/114, which contains a letter dated
3 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, containing a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
The question of Somalia involves the peace and
security of the Horn of Africa, the African continent
and the whole world. In recent years, thanks to the
joint efforts of Somalia and the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
progress has been made towards the settlement of the
question of Somalia. But formidable challenges remain.
This open debate of the Security Council is aimed at
urging the international community to give greater and
more sustained attention to the question of Somalia and
to formulate and implement a comprehensive strategy
for the realization of peace, security and development
in Somalia.
I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

His

The Secretary-General: I thank Ambassador
Li Baodong of China for convening this meeting and
for rallying the international community to the cause of
Somalia during this critical period. I wish him all the
best as President of the Security Council. I appreciate
his leadership.
I would also like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of Somalia for
his participation in today’s meeting. I would also like
to recognize the participation of His Excellency
Minister Henry Bellingham of the United Kingdom, as
well as that of Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative for Somalia of the Commission of the
African Union, whom I thank for all his contributions.
I am pleased that we are able to have this meeting
with the participation of my Special Representative,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, who is joining us by videolink
from Somalia. I am grateful for his contributions and
those of the staff of the United Nations Political Office

11-25831

S/PV.6494

for Somalia directed at keeping the political process
moving. I also thank our staff at the United Nations
Office in Nairobi and the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for working so tirelessly and for assisting
in the medical evacuation of troops, especially in the
past few weeks.
The situation in Somalia requires urgent attention.
The military gains of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and AMISOM are fragile. The
humanitarian situation is dire, and violence continues
to rage. And given the calls for good governance and a
decent life in North Africa and the Middle East, public
expectations are likely to grow in Somalia, too. If we
act now, we can consolidate recent gains and set
Somalia on a more promising course.
In recent heavy fighting, dozens of brave
peacekeepers of AMISOM from Burundi and Uganda
made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace. There
are also rising numbers of civilian casualties. I have
spoken with Presidents Nkurunziza and Museveni to
express my gratitude for their continued commitment
to Somalia. I also offered my condolences to the
families of the victims.
The TFG and AMISOM have succeeded in
expanding the line of control in Mogadishu. The TFG
and its ally, Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a, have opened
new fronts in southern Somalia and taken control of
major towns previously held by insurgent groups. We
must help them to sustain these gains in order to
restore security and deliver basic services,
humanitarian aid and support for recovery and
reconstruction. Such improvements for the people of
Somalia and the thousands of internally displaced
persons in zones controlled by the TFG are critical to
sustaining the hard-won military gains.
AMISOM and the TFG forces are delivering on
the military front. AMISOM would be even more
effective if it had more resources, including helicopters,
and support for intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance. The international community must
keep its end of the bargain. There are critical gaps in
the United Nations support package to AMISOM and
significant shortfalls of military assets and equipment.
I appeal to Member States to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM and to reimburse contingent-owned
equipment and troop-contributing countries.

11-25831

We must also enable AMISOM to reach its full
authorized strength. Building a viable force is as much
about troop numbers as it is about the assets that
support them. This would enable the TFG to establish
greater space under its control, foster direct links
between the Government and its citizens, and promote
political dialogue and reconciliation. It would also
make it possible for the United Nations to expand its
presence in Somalia.
At the same time, Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) have to rise to the challenge on the
political and governance fronts, and in achieving
stability. Clear political objectives must frame the
military objectives. The TFIs collectively have an
opportunity to consolidate their authority in the areas
under their control, but this opportunity may not last.
The TFIs must find unity of purpose. That spirit should
be the driving force behind the talks on the end of the
current transitional period and the next chapter for
Somalia. Disagreements on the transition could have a
negative impact on the security situation and
stabilization efforts, including the fate of newly trained
members of the Somalia forces.
Moreover, any extension of the transition period
must be earned. The focus should be on fulfilling
outstanding tasks for the transition, including the
constitutional
process.
Constitution-building
is
paramount because it provides a platform for national
reconciliation. The process would finally allow
Somalis to choose their own fate, their own framework
for governance, and their own leaders. This exercise
should be open and inclusive. My Special
Representative, Mr. Mahiga, has been working to
facilitate consensus on these issues. He has also been
working closely with the various clan and religious
leaders to expand the reconciliation process, as
stipulated in the Djibouti Agreements.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a grave
and growing menace. The international community has
mobilized to stamp out piracy and bring the
perpetrators to justice. I welcome improved
information-sharing and coordination, as well as the
deployment of significant military and other assets. But
attacks are increasing in number, and the pirates are
expanding their geographic reach. The recent report
(S/2011/30, annex) of my Special Adviser on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang, highlights the need for urgent action.

3

S/PV.6494

We must forge an integrated response based on three
pillars: deterrence, development, and security.
The United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Maritime Organization,
recently revitalized the Kampala process, a mechanism
for dialogue that brings together the TFG, Somaliland,
Puntland and other regional Somali authorities. I hope
this important forum will continue to meet throughout
the year.
I am also concerned about the drought unfolding
in Somalia. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reports that
drought has displaced some 50,000 people during the
past two months. Many are moving to urban areas in
search of help. In the Hiraan region of Central Somalia,
70 per cent of the population is in crisis. Food has not
been distributed there since the World Food
Programme was forced to suspend its operations there
in January 2010.
In addition to drought, hostilities are forcing
people to flee their homes and villages. According to
UNHCR, every week for the past few weeks some
2,500 Somalis have been registered in the overcrowded
Dadaab camps in Kenya. Before the fighting and
drought, that number was less than 400. Mogadishu
reached a terrible milestone last year when 7,600
people were reported to have weapons-related
injuries — the highest toll in more than a decade. That
disturbing trend has continued this year, with more
than 1,000 weapons-related injuries reported in the
city’s hospitals since January.
This year’s humanitarian appeal for Somalia
seeks $529 million for urgent needs. As of last month,
only one-quarter of that amount had been funded. The
United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator has
allocated $15 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund. An additional $50 million has been
allocated from pooled funding to respond to the
drought. But if the traditional long rains fail in April,
the situation will deteriorate even further. Inadequate
funding is not the only obstacle; we also lack access to
areas of conflict and insecurity where needs are
greatest.
Somalia urgently needs our help. It faces levels of
violence, damaging weather conditions and insecurity
that would shake even strong countries. AMISOM and
the TFG have made some progress, but they need more

4

support. If we reinforce the military gains, provide
humanitarian relief and achieve political progress, we
can set Somalia on course to greater stability and peace.
If we fail, we risk a growing humanitarian crisis, a
deteriorating security situation, and a worsening threat
to regional peace and stability.
I welcome the Security Council’s decision to
authorize more troops for Somalia, as well as the
Council’s focus on the situation today. But AMISOM
and the TFG need more than authorized troop levels.
They need actual troops, equipment and enhanced
capacity. And the Somali people need to see real,
tangible improvement. They need humanitarian
assistance, political stability and a constitutional
process that offers hope.
Let us do all we can to make that possible. By
working together and thinking ahead, we can establish
the conditions in which Somalis can steer their country
out of violence and into a future free from want and
free from fear.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): It gives me a great
pleasure to appear before this body today to report
about the success that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFI), including my Government, have
achieved during their first 100 days in office, as well as
the challenges ahead as we bring to a close the seventh
year of the transitional federal system of governance in
our nation. I come before the Council today to give an
update on the progress we have made, the challenges
we face and the strategies that we hope to employ to
mitigate those challenges.
As I mentioned in January (see S/PV.6467) and as
stipulated in the road map, my Government’s five main
priorities are to improve security, enhance
reconciliation, complete the transitional tasks —
including the completion of our constitutional
process — address humanitarian crises and promote
good governance.
Let me begin by expressing my heartfelt gratitude
and sincere appreciation for the ongoing support to
Somalia from the United Nations, the African Union
(AU) and the international community. That

11-25831

S/PV.6494

unwavering support is critical to our efforts to rid
Somalia of its sworn enemy, the Al-Shabaab, which is
part of a vast global terrorist network. In particular, we
are especially grateful to the young men and women
who make up the AU troops. Hailing from Uganda and
Burundi, they are sacrificing their lives for Somalia.
We salute and mourn those who paid the ultimate price.
We are eternally grateful for their priceless sacrifice.
Let me state in no uncertain terms that my
Government is the Council’s committed and credible
partner in defeating our two common enemies, namely,
Al-Shabaab and lawlessness — that is, piracy. Our
troops and the forces of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are currently making tangible
progress in reclaiming large portions of territory from
the enemy throughout the country, including the
nation’s capital, Mogadishu, and its surroundings, as
shown in the map I have provided. As we mobilize the
Somali people behind these security successes and
forge ahead on our explicit road map in the next few
months, we are confident that we will meet our
objectives in bringing most of southern Somalia under
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). It is our
view that by meeting that objective we will be that
much closer to attaining the transitional tasks set out in
our Federal Charter.
We are in the first line of defence against two
evils, namely, the scourge of piracy and the plague of
terrorism. We need to defeat them at the source, which
requires cooperation and collaboration between us and
the international community. Fighting these twin evils
requires moral fortitude and a strong political will from
us, the Somalis, and strong commitment and support
from the international community. We have to
understand that lawlessness is both the root cause and
the breeding ground for both terrorism and piracy,
coupled with poverty and unemployment and
permeated by fanaticism and religious indoctrination.

September 2001. Why bother with a small plane when
you can capture a tanker?
During the past 100 days, my new Government,
comprised of 18 ministers who are able technocrats
from within and outside the country, is changing the
political landscape and earning the respect of our
citizens and our partners in the international
community. We are fully and forcefully engaged in
implementing good governance to improve our
capacity and to realize our national road map, which
includes the following.
With regard to accountability and transparency in
financial management, we have, for the first time,
established measures that will enhance the collection of
public revenues from both the seaport and the airport
of Mogadishu, the two main revenue-generating
Government services in the public sector, as well as the
distribution of public funds. Since then public-revenue
collections have improved significantly, in line with
the annual State budget for 2011 approved by the
Parliament and the audited accounts of 2010, which
have been submitted to our international partners.
With regard to the anti-corruption taskforce,
following more than 20 years of statelessness,
corruption in Somalia has became endemic, with the
pilfering of public funds being an activity undertaken
shamelessly. Against that backdrop, the anti-corruption
taskforce is an essential and necessary deterrent
measure to end the abuse and misuse of public funds,
goods and property. Members of my Cabinet and I are
were the first signatories of these anti-corruption rules
and procedures, so as to send the message that this
Government has a zero-tolerance policy on corruption
and the appalling practices of the past.

With regard to enhancing the delivery of services,
it is essential to empower and rebuild the capacity of
Government institutions so as to reach our citizens.
Some of the successes achieved in that regard involve
We recently saw the human face of piracy when
public safety and security, new or improved public
four innocent Americans were killed by ruthless pirates.
health services, the opening of new schools, the
Our heart goes out to their loved ones. The scourge of
installation of new street lights and cleaning and waste
piracy cannot be defeated on the high seas. Its solution
collection services.
lies in bringing back the rule of law to Somalia and
helping coastal communities to develop alternative
With regard to the security sector, with improved
livelihoods. Moreover, not only are these two ills street lighting and police patrols day and night, the
working in tandem, but they are learning from each Government-controlled areas of Mogadishu are a lot
other. It will not surprise us if Al-Qaida agents in safer, as indicated by the growing nightlife in the
Somalia start hijacking tankers in the high seas and streets. Another critical component of our security
using them as deadly weapons, as they did in strategy involves the ongoing reform of the services.

11-25831

5

S/PV.6494

These reform efforts are focused on providing the
necessary logistics, tools and equipment, as well as
paying salaries on time.
Let me emphasize the urgent need of deploying
the additional 4,000 AU troops approved by the
Security Council to reinforce the efforts to bring about
peace and stability.
An equally important priority for my Government
is the establishment of a credible and effective
disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation
programme. After 20 years of continuous conflict,
many of our youth have not experienced peaceful
coexistence in their entire lives. Restoring their faith in
society and Government and reintegrating them into
their communities is a long-term task that we must
initiate immediately. We have devised the means to
welcome and assist a rising number of youth defectors
from the ranks of Al-Shabaab. To that end, we are also
searching for effective means to counter the souldestroying radicalization efforts of the insurgent
groups, not just in Somalia but also in diaspora
communities around the world. That is absolutely
critical if we are to win the hearts and minds of our
youth and to secure their future.
Regarding the constitutional development process,
in our quest to reform the TFG model, we have
undertaken, with our international partners, a process
that has produced a draft constitution. To expedite that
further, we now have in place an independent
constitutional
commission,
a
parliamentary
constitutional committee and a cabinet-level ministry
that are hard at work coordinating and finalizing the
draft constitution and achieving the necessary
consensus within the Transitional Federal Institutions
and the Somali public.
With regard to reconciliation and outreach, we all
agree that reconciliation and conflict resolution at the
local, regional and national levels are the cornerstone
of peace and security in our nation. In that spirit, my
Government continues to engage in and to facilitate the
resolution of conflict through dialogue and peaceful
means.
That is evidenced by the achievements of the two
Cabinet-led missions to the central regions in the past
100 days. The first resolved the hot war between two
clans in Galmudug and Puntland, and the second
between clans in Galmudug and Himan and Heeb. Our
agreement with Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a is holding

6

firm and is being implemented; and it will continue to
be part and parcel of the current Government. Let me
highlight again that the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a and
TFG forces are jointly conducting security operations
in many parts of the country with a successful outcome.
Regarding humanitarian assistance, with the
expanding security operations and a debilitating
drought across the country, there has been a major
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In Mogadishu alone, up to 80,000 IDPs have
moved into Government-controlled areas. We appeal to
the international community for urgent medical and
food assistance to help the IDPs. For our part, in
addition to the port and airport facilities in Mogadishu,
we are opening up new corridors along our borders,
particularly in the central and southern parts of the
country.
As is clear from this summary of our road map,
my Cabinet and I have the will and the commitment to
rebuild State institutions so as to meet the basic
requirements of our citizens. We are winning the hearts
and minds of the Somali population. A recent study
conducted by Mogadishu Media House, an independent
local media organization, released this month shows
that 75 per cent of the people surveyed in Mogadishu
indicated strong displeasure with Al-Shabaab and its
extremist ideology. Of the participants, 70 per cent
recognized that the TFG is making a great effort to
reach out to the regions and the opposition groups.
Finally, 75 per cent rated AMISOM and the African
Union forces as friends of the Somali people. That is
clearly a far cry from the general public view only a
few months earlier.
On transitional issues, the transitional period will
end on 20 August. Although the seven-year term of the
current TFG has had its ups and downs, some progress
has been achieved. Nonetheless, I am here today to
underpin our ongoing consultations as partners with a
common interest in reaching a consensus on the posttransitional framework.
First and foremost, as confirmed by the Cabinet
meeting in Mogadishu on 7 March, the executive
branch has approved and adopted the following: first,
the formal end of the TFG term on 20 August 2011, in
accordance with the Charter; secondly, the election of
the Speaker and the deputies to be held in July 2011;
thirdly, the election of the President to be held in
August 2011; fourthly, the new Government should be

11-25831

S/PV.6494

given ample time to fulfil the remaining transitional
tasks, including the ratification of the constitution and
the establishment of the election commission; fifthly,
parliamentary reform to commence immediately in line
with the ongoing reform of the executive branch and
the security sector; and sixthly, a caretaker
Government to be appointed by the new leadership to
move the country to permanent statehood.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our commitment to
our people and to the international community. I state
before the Council that we will regain our land, our
identity and our dignity from the extremists. We will
not compromise the interests of our nation or the future
of our children. We will do whatever it takes to regain
our status as a State that protects its borders from
enemies, foreign and domestic, ends all forms of
international piracy, protects its citizens, and produces
a nation at peace with itself and its neighbours.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Prime
Minister Mohamed for his statement.
I now give the
Mr. Boubacar Diarra.

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Diarra: On behalf of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Jean
Ping, I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to
brief the Council on the situation in Somalia and, in
particular, to contribute to the debate on a
comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace and
security in Somalia. I also want to offer Mr. Jean
Ping’s regrets and apologies for his inability to
personally join in today’s debate. Chairperson Ping
asked me to convey to you, Mr. President, his best
wishes for success during your presidency of the
Council.
Allow me to begin by reiterating the appreciation
of the African Union to the President of the Council,
the Secretary-General and all States members of the
Security Council for the interest and commitment to
addressing the situation in Somalia. The number and
frequency of debates held on Somalia is a clear
testament to that. Another eloquent testimony is the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security, and in
addressing the situation in Somalia in particular. That
partnership is yielding positive and tangible results. We
appreciate and value the partnership.

11-25831

Despite the Council’s support and some positive
results, the situation in Somalia remains challenging. I
will begin with the political situation. With the current
transitional arrangement coming to an end on
20 August and key transitional tasks, such as the
adoption of a draft constitution, still outstanding, the
political situation in Somalia is at a critical juncture.
In order to address the need for a post-transitional
arrangement, the Assembly of the African Union, at its
sixteenth ordinary session, endorsed the decision taken
by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) at its extraordinary session on
Somalia to extend the term of the Transitional Federal
Parliament so as to allow for the remaining political
dispensation to be handled by the people of Somalia. In
line with that decision, on 3 February the Parliament
passed a resolution extending its term for a further
three years.
Together with IGAD and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), we are
channelling all efforts to implement the decision of the
African Union Summit, in particular through, first, the
conduct of elections for the Speaker of Parliament and
the President; secondly, parliamentary reforms to
enhance the legitimacy and inclusiveness of the
Transitional Federal Parliament; and, thirdly, the
establishment of a new political dispensation. Together
with IGAD and UNPOS, we remain engaged in
accompanying the process of adopting a new
constitution for Somalia within the shortest possible
time.
On the military front, over the past couple of
weeks, Transitional Federal Government (TFG) forces,
supported by troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) — which now has a strength of
well over 8,000 soldiers — have changed the picture
on the ground in Mogadishu. The TFG forces,
supported by AMISOM troops, have taken control of
key positions in north-west Mogadishu, including the
former Ministry of Defence building, which had served
as the main logistical and operational base of
Al-Shabaab. Those gains are the latest in a series of
steady advances our forces have been making since the
summer of last year.
I would like once again to express our
condolences to the families of our brave soldiers who
have paid the ultimate price during those recent
operations and, in the same breath, reiterate our

7

S/PV.6494

appreciation to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment and increased
deployment of troops to Somalia under AMISOM.
Following those gains, I am pleased to inform the
Security Council that the TFG now effectively controls
about 60 per cent of Mogadishu. The Government now
fully controls seven districts of Mogadishu.
Importantly, about 80 per cent of the city’s population
of roughly 2 million lives in the areas that have come
under the control of the TFG and its Somali forces.
The humanitarian situation remains dire. It has
been further exacerbated by the famine occasioned by
the drought. Also, Al-Shabaab continues to act in
flagrant violation of all norms of all civilized societies.
They are not only targeting the TFG and AMISOM
with mortars, improvised explosive devices and suicide
attacks, but are also using innocent civilians as human
shields, in horrific violation of humanitarian law. They
are hampering the flow of humanitarian aid to the
needy population and are perpetuating a siege on the
population, which is now hostage to their ideology.
In spite of the gains we have recorded in Somalia,
I must emphasize that the armed opposition group,
Al-Shabaab, is still fighting to remove the TFG and
AMISOM from Somalia so that it can continue to rain
terror on the Somali people and even far beyond, as it
did last year in Kampala, Uganda. The situation in
Somalia poses a clear threat to international peace and
security. A robust response from the international
community is therefore needed.
Allow me at this juncture, therefore, to express
some thoughts for the Council’s consideration as it
discusses a comprehensive strategy for peace and
security in Somalia. These recommendations are based
on the African Union’s strategy, which encompasses
political and security pillars.
The political pillar of the African Union strategy
hinges on the need to support the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs). At this juncture in the transition,
the African Union believes that the TFIs require the
continued support of AMISOM. That will assist them
in their efforts to meet the aspirations of the population
and will also facilitate the end of the current
transitional arrangements and allow for a new
dispensation come August.
The security pillar of the African Union strategy
is a means of achieving the political goal that I have

8

just outlined. It includes provisions for the
enhancement of AMISOM troop levels and the revised
concept of operations that informed the decision of the
African Union Peace and Security Council at the end
of its meeting on 15 October 2010. It requires the
deployment of 20,000 troops across Somalia and
12,000 troops in Mogadishu in particular.
This is to enable the African Union to achieve
three broad political and military objectives. The first
objective is to improve the security environment in and
around Mogadishu. The second is to create an
environment conducive to increased political
engagement between the TFG and Somali groups
outside the peace process, including the armed
opposition
groups
and
regional
and
local
administrations across the country, and to finalize the
new constitution. The third is to create an environment
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and public services to the needy population in
Mogadishu.
The political and security objectives that I have
mentioned are achievable with the support of the
international community and, in particular, through the
Council’s continued support to AMISOM. We certainly
welcome the support of the Council, as detailed in its
resolution 1964 (2010) of 22 December 2010. However,
the African Union urgently requires the support of the
Council in more ways. In specific reference to a
comprehensive approach, the African Union would like
to reiterate the requests made to the Council by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union Commission, Ambassador Lamamra, in
December last year.
First, the African Union requests the Council to
continue to support Somalia’s Transitional Federal
Institutions and its security forces, including through
the provision of specialist training and equipment and
initiatives to meet welfare needs.
Secondly, it requests the Council to enhance the
support package for AMISOM, funded through United
Nations-assessed contributions, on the basis of the
newly authorized strength, and arranging for
reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment,
including minor and major equipment, and the payment
of troop allowances at United Nations rates so as to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission.

11-25831

S/PV.6494

Thirdly, the African Union asks that the Council
authorize the naval operations off the coast of Somalia
to provide more direct and tangible support to
AMISOM. That support could take the form of
maritime deterrence and air surveillance operations to
prevent the entry of foreign elements into Somalia and
of flights and shipments delivering weapons and
ammunition to armed groups inside the country that are
carrying out attacks on the TFG, AMISOM and the
Somali population.
Fourthly, the Council is requested to ensure the
effective implementation of sanctions against all those
impeding the peace and reconciliation process in
Somalia, in particular through financial, material and
logistical support to groups waging attacks on the TFG,
the Somali people and AMISOM.
Fifthly, the African Union asks the Council to
approach the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in
a holistic manner, with the view to effectively
addressing its underlying causes and other equally
serious threats affecting the livelihood and well-being
of the Somali people, in particular illegal fishing and
the dumping of toxic substances and waste off the
coast of Somalia.
Finally, the African Union requests the Council to
enhance humanitarian aid assistance to Somalia and
particularly to alleviate the current suffering of the
population due to famine.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating on behalf of
the African Union our appreciation to the Security
Council for its untiring, resilient and courageous
efforts in resolving the situation in Somalia. The
African Union recognizes and appreciates fully the
support of the international community to Somalia. We
are now only a few months away from the end of the
transition. During the coming months, more support is
required. What we do and when and how we do it in
addressing the situation in Somalia will be critical.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Diarra for his statement.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

11-25831

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Bellingham (United Kingdom): I am grateful
for the opportunity to discuss Somalia at such an
important time. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Special Representative of the
African Union (AU) Diarra and Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi-Farmaajo for their excellent
contributions to this debate.
The United Kingdom Government regards
Somalia as a key priority. That is why I am here today.
I convey great thanks to you, Mr. President, for
facilitating this debate. Listening to the debate so far, I
am struck by our common desire to end 20 years of
instability, which have brought conflict and
humanitarian disaster to the people of Somalia and
threatened the people of the region and beyond with
piracy and terrorism. I am glad the Secretary-General
mentioned piracy and the need for urgent action; I do
believe the Jack Lang report is very welcome
(S/2011/30, annex).
In recent weeks, we have seen just how
challenging the situation in Somalia is. I would like to
commend the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for what it is doing on our behalf and in
particular on behalf of the Somali people. I join others
in paying tribute to the brave soldiers of AMISOM and
the professionalism and dedication they have shown in
their successful actions against the corrupt and brutal
tyranny of Al-Shabaab. In particular, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi for the commitment they have shown and
also pass on my sincere condolences to the families of
those who have lost their lives in the recent fighting.
The bravery of AMISOM troops in making their
territorial gains reminds us that AMISOM needs our
support and guidance.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, the gains
are indeed fragile. This is not solely about defeating
insurgent attacks, but also about protecting civilians as
best as possible, in line with international humanitarian
law. The force headquarters have recently taken steps
to improve AMISOM’s capacity to protect civilians.
We welcome this, but more is needed to ensure that
AMISOM is sufficiently resourced and continues to
make gains. Incidentally, I also welcome the gains that
have been made in the south of the country.

9

S/PV.6494

I am pleased to announce that the United
Kingdom will shortly make a $3-million uncaveated
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM. I call on other donor countries to make
similar uncaveated contributions.

action to ensure a more stable future for the Somali
people. I commend the United Nations Humanitarian
Relief Coordinator’s work and encourage greater
support for United Nations and bilateral humanitarian
efforts in Somalia.

It is clear that there is no simple solution to
Somalia’s instability. Military efforts alone are not
going to bring about lasting peace. We need a political
process that is legitimate and inclusive, allowing all
those Somalis who oppose violence to play a positive
role in their country’s future. We encourage the United
Nations and the AU to continue to work together to
develop a coordinated political and military strategy
that delivers real benefit to the Somali people.

The year 2011 marks 20 years since the collapse
of the Somali State. For many Somalis, the situation
remains desperate, and many have been forced to flee
their homes and families. A generation of Somali
children has grown up without knowing peace, without
going to school, without the simplest opportunities that
many of us just take for granted.

In under six months’ time, in August 2011, the
transitional period is due to come to an end. We cannot
allow a political vacuum to develop, but nor can we
simply continue with business as usual. Recent efforts
to extend the transitional period unilaterally without
meaningful reform or consultation have not brought
consensus. Indeed, they have served only to damage
the legitimacy and credibility of the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs). It is troubling to me to hear
about yet another reshuffle of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), as this suggests that political infighting is a higher priority of the TFG than
reconciliation and the delivery of services to the
Somali people.
The United Kingdom believes there should be no
extension of the Transitional Federal Institutions
without reforms to make them more representative,
legitimate and accountable to the Somali people. There
needs to be broad consultation within Somalia and with
the international community on what should follow the
current arrangements. I was encouraged when His
Excellency Prime Minister Abdullahi-Farmaajo
outlined various service improvements, but these need
to be built on. I therefore encourage all of us, under
Special Representative Mahiga’s leadership, to work
more effectively, both with the TFIs and with regional
and local administrations to bring about a new and
more inclusive political arrangement.
The United Kingdom fully supports Augustine
Mahiga in his efforts to negotiate a way forward. I am
delighted that he is going to participate in and is
listening to this debate.
The dire humanitarian situation in Somalia,
worsened by drought, underlines the need for concerted

10

But there are encouraging signs. At the local level,
Somalis are working together to establish areas of
stability and to reject acts of extremism, terrorism and
piracy. We have an opportunity to help Somalis build
on these initiatives. I believe that Somalia is literally at
a crossroads. If recent military and political progress is
maintained and the counter-piracy initiatives
succeed — and I believe they can — then the future is
bright. The alternative scenario is incredible depressing
and grim. We must prevent it. That will require us to
work together. I believe that we all have a
responsibility to act and the United Kingdom will play
its part.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, my delegation would like to welcome your
initiative to hold a debate on the implementation of a
comprehensive strategy for peace and security in
Somalia. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Boubacar Diarra for their briefings. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abulllahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of Somalia, and of
Mr. Henry Bellingham.
On 20 August, we will see the end of the
transition period in Somalia. Despite the efforts of the
international community to restore peace in that
country, many challenges remain. Given the picture of
the situation that has been painted for us today, my
delegation believes that a comprehensive strategy in
Somalia that incorporates the political, security, socioeconomic and humanitarian aspects would be the most
effective way to settle the crisis in the country
definitively.
We share the concerns raised with regard to the
political situation in Somalia. The Transitional Federal
Government needs to further expand its political base,
and we take note of the efforts highlighted by the

11-25831

S/PV.6494

Prime Minister. The reconciliation process needs to
take deeper root. The new constitution remains a
priority. The slow progress in these areas fuels the
prevailing uncertainty, which requires the authorities to
show greater political will and commitment.
Gabon shares the wish to see more effective
action on the ground on the part of the Government. Its
primary goal should be to finalize the constitutional
process, which is key for the completion of the
political process. It is equally urgent to complete the
other tasks of the transition, particularly providing
basic services to the people of Somalia, who continue
to bear the brunt of the crisis. I believe that it is also a
priority for the Transitional Federal Government to
strengthen cohesion within the institutions under its
authority. We believe that the unilateral decision
recently taken by the Parliament to extend its mandate
for three years may be a departure from this notion.
It is from the standpoint that my delegation calls
on all parties to conclude as soon as possible the posttransition arrangements in accordance with the
Djibouti Agreement, to which Gabon remains
committed. To that end, my country supports a
compromise solution that would guarantee the
legitimacy of the political arrangements in place and
control over the Somali forces that are being trained.
Moving the peace process forward in Somalia
requires strengthening both the political and the
military strategy in order to first improve the security
situation on the ground. In that respect, my delegation
pays a well-deserved tribute to the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
their tireless efforts to ensure security, as seen in the
meaningful improvements in the situation in
Mogadishu. In this regard, my delegation expresses its
solidarity to Uganda and Burundi for the sacrifices
they continue to make to restore peace and stability in
Somalia.
AMISOM is still facing many challenges on the
ground. Rebel movements, including Al-Shabaab,
continue to pose a real threat. That is why it is urgent
for the international community to put an end to the
illicit financing of these groups and of the supplies of
men and weapons that they receive at the borders. We
therefore need to strengthen the current sanctions
mechanisms of the Council by focusing on targeted
measures.

11-25831

Similarly, it is increasingly necessary to increase
the operational capacities of AMISOM. For this, the
Security Council needs to do its utmost to follow up
the recommendations contained in resolution 1964
(2010), particularly with respect to the dispatch of
4,000 additional troops. It also needs to ensure the
effectiveness of both their deployment and their
financing. This measure will be key with respect to the
precarious situation on the ground. We also need to
recall that the lack of predictable financing for
AMISOM and the failure to reimburse the sums due for
its equipment restrict its ability to fulfil its mandate.
In this respect, my delegation highlights the need
to take into account the recommendations made here in
October 2010 by the African Union, aimed at making
AMISOM more effective on the ground. It would also
be appropriate for donor countries to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund set up
to support the operations of AMISOM.
The humanitarian situation is deteriorating in
Somalia. Without robust action by the international
community, drought and fighting will continue to cause
further loss of human life. My delegation therefore
urges greater mobilization by Somalia’s partners to
provide the necessary assistance to the people who
need it. In this process, the Council must be able to
ensure compliance by the parties with international
humanitarian law, specifically the obligation to protect
civilians, the non-use of minors in fighting and the free
movement of humanitarian assistance.
One cannot address the situation in Somalia
without taking up the serious threat of piracy. We share
the evaluations and conclusions of the Jack Lang report
(S/2011/30, annex) on this issue. I recall that my
delegation has always underscored the need to address
piracy in tandem with the security threats on land in
the country. This is why we support the initiative for a
comprehensive strategy.
From this same standpoint, we commend the
adoption by the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia, together with AMISOM, of a regional joint
strategy. The interdependent nature of the challenges to
be met in terms of political, security and humanitarian
issues justify this comprehensive strategy, which we all
support.
My delegation supports the presidential statement
to be adopted by the Security Council at the conclusion
of this debate.

11

S/PV.6494

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today’s meeting. Germany is
also very grateful for the clear and informed remarks of
the Secretary-General. I am particularly gratified by
the presence of Prime Minister Abdullahi Mohamed
and the Special Representative for Somalia of the
African Union Commission, Ambassador Diarra, as
well as, via videolink, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, our friend Augustine Mahiga, from
Mogadishu. I would like to extend a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bellingham, Minister
for Africa of the United Kingdom.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union
later on.
The Security Council has a unique responsibility
in addressing the momentous challenges in Somalia.
Germany strongly advocates for continued and focused
work by the Council on Somalia, in close cooperation
with regional actors and especially our partners in the
African Union.
The conflict in Somalia has lasted far too long. It
has attracted international terrorist activities and
provided the breeding ground for piracy. It threatens
international peace and security. But above all, its
human cost is unacceptable. This human cost reminds
us of our humanitarian responsibilities, especially with
respect to vulnerable groups such as refugees, women
and children. They continue to bear the brunt of the
violence. We are concerned by the severely limited
humanitarian space. We call upon all parties in the
country to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian
aid as well as the safety of all humanitarian staff. We
also call for the immediate implementation of all the
conclusions of the Security Council’s Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict in Somalia.
Five months before the end of the transitional
period, it is urgent to promote a clear political strategy
for mastering the remaining transitional tasks. All of
us — the Security Council, the actors in Somalia,
neighbouring countries and all other stakeholders —
must continue to join efforts to achieve tangible
progress.
Germany reiterates her full support to the
Djibouti process. The Somali Government now needs
to focus on the completion of the constitution-making
process, outreach to armed opposition groups through
dialogue wherever possible and sensible, and the

12

provision of security and basic services to the Somali
people. The Transitional Federal Institutions must stop
their political infighting. They are responsible to their
people. They must refrain from unilateral actions, such
as the recent extension of its term by the Transitional
Federal Parliament.
The international community has to pursue its
support to the Somali people and Somali institutions, in
particular the security institutions, in order to work
towards the stabilization of Somalia. Wherever
possible, we should explore ways to extend our support
to those regions of Somalia enjoying relative stability
and security, including Somaliland and Puntland. We
should also urge better cooperation between such
regions and the Transitional Federal Government in
Mogadishu. We also see the need to engage with local
administrations, communities and civil society as a
whole. We feel that their traditions and experiences can
add significantly to the political process on the ground.
In the longer perspective, extended cooperation
between all actors could enhance opportunities for
economic and social development beyond those regions,
for the betterment of all Somalia.
Piracy originating from Somalia needs to be
tackled in a comprehensive way. The United Nations
and all other international actors have to pursue their
common efforts in this regard. Germany will continue
to actively take part in this endeavour.
Let me turn to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We reiterate our full support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and its troop
contributors, and are looking forward to its full
deployment in the near future, in accordance with
resolution 1964 (2010). Germany and the European
Union are extensively assisting AMISOM and troopcontributing countries. Germany recently delivered
substantial equipment aid to Burundian AMISOM
contingents worth well over $5 million. We invite other
donors to join our common effort and support
AMISOM.
Germany is impressed by the professional and
successful work carried out by AMISOM and its troop
contributors in fulfilling its daunting task. We thank
them for their dedication and are encouraged by the
recent progress made on the ground, in Mogadishu and
beyond. We are very saddened by the recent casualties
among AMISOM soldiers.

11-25831

S/PV.6494

My last point concerns the future of a United
Nations presence in Somalia. Germany encourages the
United Nations to strive to strengthen its presence in
Somalia and especially in Mogadishu, as outlined by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report. We
welcome the recent efforts of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and the United Nations
country team in this respect. An enhanced United
Nations presence on the ground can contribute to a
more direct engagement with the various communities
and thus to a political solution in Somalia.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank China for having convened this debate on
Somalia, which will launch a process of reflection on
ways of stabilizing the country and achieving peace as
the expiration of the mandate of the transitional federal
institutions approaches. I should like also to thank
Mr. Mahiga and Mr. Diarra as well as the Prime
Minister of Somalia for their respective contributions. I
also align myself with the statement to be made later
by the European Union.
The Transitional Government, allied factions and
militias and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) have launched an offensive against the
Al-Shabaab rebels. We welcome the efforts deployed
and the sacrifices made by the contingents involved
and the success achieved on the ground in Mogadishu
and in southern Somalia. The Ugandan and Burundian
forces are bravely carrying out their mission within
AMISOM and have paid a heavy price in recent weeks.
France, for its part, has taken on the transportation and
care of a number of wounded AMISOM soldiers.
That offensive will contribute to weakening the
extremists and ensuring security in a large part of
Somali territory and of the capital. However, this
military approach cannot be a solution in and of itself;
it must be part of a broader political strategy. From this
perspective, we cannot but acknowledge that the
progress made has been insufficient.
The transitional federal institutions have fuelled
counter-productive institutional rivalries. They have
not been able to increase their representativeness, nor
have they managed to provide the people with the
minimum level of services they require. We must,
however, welcome the first initiatives of the new
Government. A budget has been submitted to the
Parliament, security for civilians has been set as a
priority objective, the fight against corruption has been

11-25831

strengthened, and civil servants are now being paid.
This represents important progress that must be
acknowledged and strengthened.
We need a new political strategy for Somalia.
What must its priorities be? First, a renewal of the
institutional framework, as the State cannot continue to
have transitional status. In order to prevent the absence
of an institutional framework in August, the Somali
authorities must undertake the finalization and
adoption of a constitution. The transitional federal
institutions, in particular the Parliament, must be
reformed in order for all stakeholders of Somali society
to be represented, in keeping with the Djibouti
Agreement and on the basis of the most inclusive
dialogue possible with all parties, including the
provincial administrations, representatives of civil
society and those militias that are willing to renounce
violence.
Along those lines, we deplore the unilateral
decision taken by the transitional Parliament to extend
its own mandate. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
for the work undertaken in the area of consultations
and encourage him to revitalize the mechanisms for
agreement set out in the Djibouti Agreement. A
dialogue with the regions — Puntland in particular —
and with allied groups, including Ahlu Sunnah Wal
Jama’a, must be relaunched.
The second priority must be security and the
provision of basic services for the Somali population.
The Somali authorities must assign priority importance
to working to benefit the people. Support for the
transitional institutions must translate into tangible
achievements on the part of the Somali people.
How can these objectives be attained? First, the
role of the United Nations will be key. A strengthened,
permanent and coherent presence of the United Nations
will be required in Mogadishu. We call upon the United
Nations agencies and programmes to deploy urgently
their resources in the service of the people and the
accessible territories. The work of the United Nations
must take the form of concrete achievements that will
benefit the Somali people; much remains to be done in
this respect.
We are also aware of the lack of resources of the
Somali Government. The financial support of the
international community, as called for by the Prime
Minister, reflects a practical need in a political context

13

S/PV.6494

and must be forthcoming. Finally, to seal the
partnership between the Somali institutions and the
international community, a new, joint road map focused
on the respective objectives of the Somali institutions
and the United Nations, including a timetable, could be
created. Such a tool would allow for the creation of a
coherent, agreed-upon strategic framework for the
post-transitional period. Regular follow-up would be
essential. Support by the international community for
Somali institutions must be commensurate with the
concrete results obtained.

Strengthening the military contingent of
AMISOM and the security sector of the Transitional
Federal Government is aimed above all at protecting
civilians and dismantling the military capacity of
Al-Shabaab as the primary factor of destruction in
Somalia. We must therefore close the external channels
providing support for the armed Somali faction. The
Security Council must continue to focus on the task of
ensuring effective sanctions regimes that include
targeted sanctions and that should be imposed on the
basis of objective, vetted information.

I should like to conclude by addressing the issue
of piracy. The report submitted by Mr. Lang (S/2011/30,
annex) has recalled the urgency of finding solutions
with respect to the judicial and penal treatment of
pirates. Given what is at stake for the international
community and for the region, we welcome the
intention of the Russian Federation to submit, in the
near future, a draft resolution to the Security Council
aimed at the implementation of the proposals made in
the report seeking to place Somalia at the centre of a
mechanism aimed at combating impunity.

The achievement of a peace settlement in
Somalia will depend largely on the Somali people
themselves. The Transitional Federal Government and
the Parliament must strengthen their social bases,
including by ensuring that the population has social
and economic services, and also by restoring contacts
with the constructive opposition and broad public
participation in discussing the nation’s future
constitution and the parameters for the country’s
development after the transition period.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Security Council of the Prime Minister
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
and we listened carefully to his assessment. The
complex military and political situation and the
humanitarian situation in Somalia give greater urgency
to the task of crafting a coordinated international
strategy for a settlement. The lead role in this process
is to be played by the Somali transitional federal
institutions.
The priority task now is to ensure security in
Somalia. A radical military and political breakthrough
must be achieved. In particular, there is a need for the
further consolidation and enhancement of the country’s
defence and security structures. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) continues to be a key
stabilizing factor in Somalia. We express our gratitude
to the Governments of Burundi and of Uganda, as their
units form the backbone of the Mission.
Predictable and timely support for African Union
peacekeepers must be provided by both donors and the
United Nations. We advocate quickly increasing the
size of the Mission to the level planned for in
resolution 1964 (2010).

14

We support the process of phased expansion of
the United Nations presence in Somalia and measures
to improve coordination of its activities. We commend
the efforts of Special Representative Mahiga, and in
this context it is important to continue to take into
account the security conditions under which United
Nations staff members work.
The ongoing difficult humanitarian situation in
Somalia and the meagre financing of assistance
programmes are also matters of concern. We welcome
the efforts of humanitarian organizations working
under very difficult military and political conditions.
The problem of piracy continues to worsen.
People perish at the hands of pirates, and the current
counter-piracy measures do not keep up with
developments. The Security Council needs to take
urgent and decisive steps to stem further deterioration
of the situation. The Russian delegation intends shortly
to submit the draft of a new resolution on piracy, aimed
at a comprehensive solution to this problem, including
the very important issue of fighting impunity. We
anticipate the support of the Council members for our
initiative.
With the leadership of Somalia and international
and regional partners, Russia will continue to work
towards achieving a stable peace in the country based

11-25831

S/PV.6494

on the Djibouti Agreement and in the interest of
strengthening stability and security in the region.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
open debate and for seeking to bring a comprehensive
perspective to the situation in Somalia. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing. I would also like to thank Prime Minister
Mohamed of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) for his remarks and Special Representatives
Mahiga and Diarra for their participation today.
On behalf of the United States, let me express my
deepest condolences for those killed and wounded in
the recent fighting in Somalia against Al-Shabaab and
its allies. In the current offensive, peacekeepers from
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali national security forces have shown
professionalism, dedication and courage. We owe them
our gratitude. I commend the resolve and commitment
of the troop-contributing Governments of Burundi and
Uganda. The international community needs to do
more to support the troop, equipment and resource
needs of AMISOM.
The situation in Somalia, as we have heard this
morning, remains alarming. The Somali population
face a dire humanitarian situation. We are gravely
concerned about the approximately 2.4 million Somalis
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance, most of
them living in areas held by Al-Shabaab — areas where
humanitarian space is shrinking. More than a year ago
the World Food Programme (WFP) was forced to
suspend its programmes in Shabaab-held territory due
to threats and demands against its staff. Al-Shabaab has
expelled several non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies.
The inability to deliver humanitarian assistance
under deteriorating conditions has meant that
significantly more Somalis are seeking refuge and aid
in neighbouring countries. My Government commends
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the WFP, UNICEF, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others as
they continue to provide services under difficult
conditions to the internally displaced and to Somali
refugees in Kenya, Djibouti, Yemen and Ethiopia,
whose Governments we thank for their hospitality.

11-25831

We are deeply concerned by the continued threats
to peace and security posed by radical extremists,
criminals and other spoilers in Somalia. Instability and
lack of economic opportunity continue to fuel piracy
off the coast of Somalia, which threatens not only the
Somali people and seafarers but the stability of the
region as a whole. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is
seriously hindering the delivery of vital humanitarian
aid to the region, international trade through the Indian
Ocean and the welfare of seafarers passing through the
waters off the coast. Last month, as has been noted,
four Americans tragically lost their lives while being
held hostage by Somali pirates.
The level of violence being used by pirates is
escalating and their range of operations is broadening.
Those are troubling trends, and the international
community, including this Council, must do more to
address this flatly unacceptable situation not only by
stepping up prevention efforts and enhancing judicial
accountability, but also by going after those who
finance, plan and organize piracy activities. In this
regard, the United States recently hosted an ad hoc
meeting of interested members of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia to further explore
what the international community can do to go after
those who unlawfully profit from those despicable
activities. We strongly urge the international
community to support those efforts.
The United States commends the efforts of the
twenty countries, including many members of this
Council, that have built a multinational naval patrol to
conduct counter-piracy operations and safeguard
vessels. Additionally, while we consider options to
ensure that pirates face judicial consequences, we hope
that the international community will continue to
support and enhance prosecution-related programmes
already under way. We welcome the contributions
made by the United Nations and the Contact Group.
We hope that the international community, including
the Security Council, will work to ensure that the
various initiatives that are being proposed complement
each other.
As we move forward, incarceration capacity
should be a key focus of both this Council and the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. As
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues, Jack Lang, made clear in his comprehensive
report to the Council (S/2011/30, annex), this will still

15

S/PV.6494

be an issue no matter which prosecution mechanism we
pursue.
The obstacles to a stable Somalia cannot be
underestimated. Under the dual-track approach, the
United States continues to support the Djibouti peace
process and the Transitional Federal Government even
as we support other local and regional entities in
Somalia that seek peace, reject terrorism and are
willing to work with the TFG. We are increasingly
concerned about the incessant political infighting and
the lack of progress on governance reform, basic
services for the Somali people and a functional
political coalition that can govern and stabilize
Somalia at large.
We expect the TFG to take advantage of advances
by AMISOM to make progress towards achieving its
transitional tasks and expanding outreach throughout
Somalia, a critical objective in our view. We also call
on the TFG to immediately take steps to improve its
financial institutions and procedures. We are looking
for greater accounting of assistance funds provided by
the international community and from revenue sources
such as the port of Mogadishu. In this regard, the
United States has provided financial advisers to the
Ministry of Finance to assist with revenue
accountability. We call for the TFG to substantively
improve its governance and security efforts and to
provide a sustained demonstration of commitment
towards that end.
Finally, the United States does not support the
unilateral three-year extension of the Transitional
Federal Parliament. Similarly, we oppose any assertion
that the current TFG should simply be extended past
August 2011, absent a clear Somali road map for how
the TFG would make the transition into a
representative Government within a defined time frame.
For credible progress to be made, we believe that
the TFG and Parliament must enter into serious
discussions
with
regional
partners,
Special
Representative Mahiga and key supporters in the
international community to identify a sensible, realistic
way forward. I would especially like to note our
appreciation for Special Representative Mahiga’s
continued work and leadership in this regard. The
outcome of this process must advance the goal of
building a comprehensive political solution and a
strategy for reconciliation and lasting peace.

16

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): The political,
humanitarian and security situation in Somalia
continues to pose a major threat not just to peace and
development in Somalia but also to regional peace and
global security. The international community has thus
far been dealing with the situation in Somalia in a
piecemeal manner. We therefore welcome the initiative
of the Chinese presidency to convene this timely
debate to discuss a comprehensive strategy for the
realization of peace and security in Somalia.
We thank His Excellency Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of Somalia, the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Diarra of the
African Union for their statements. We also thank His
Excellency Mr. Henry Bellingham for his message
today, and we appreciate the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador
Mahiga through video link.
The end of the transition period, on 20 August, is
fast approaching. It is critical that the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), with the assistance of the
international community, redouble its efforts in
completing the remaining transitional tasks. This
would require the full implementation of the Djibouti
peace process and the road map for the implementation
of the remaining transition tasks announced by Prime
Minister Mohamed. All efforts should be geared
towards the completion of the constitution-building
process, outreach to those outside the Djibouti process
and political reconciliation. This would also require
unity of purpose among the Somali political leadership
as they address these daunting challenges. National
ownership over Somalia’s future dispensation remains
critical for ensuring the sustainability of these
processes.
My delegation welcomes and fully supports the
efforts of Special Representative Mahiga in engaging
key stakeholders during the remainder of the
transitional
period
and
on
post-transitional
arrangements.
We
encourage
the
Special
Representative to engage in broad political
consultations with all stakeholders in Somalia, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union. The inclusivity of the future
dispensation in Somalia remains critical for ensuring
the sustainability of these processes. In that regard,
rapprochement must be extended to all Somalis who
wish to contribute towards a political solution in
Somalia. Somaliland, Puntland and other local entities

11-25831

S/PV.6494

also have an important role to play in the political
process in Somalia.

troop allowances and reimbursement for contingencyowned equipment, as well as the provision of air
capabilities and enablers to enhance the effectiveness
South Africa welcomes the recent adoption of the
of AMISOM. South Africa welcomes the ongoing
joint regional strategy by the United Nations and IGAD.
support provided by bilateral partners to the Trust Fund
This strategy seeks to promote a common approach to
for AMISOM. We encourage partners to provide that
political, security and humanitarian challenges, as well
support without caveats.
as to deal with institutional and financial challenges
affecting the Somali peace process and the
A comprehensive strategy for Somalia should
management of the TFG’s transition. We believe that take cognizance of the fact that bolstering AMISOM is
this will give further impetus to galvanizing efforts by not an end in itself. AMISOM is undertaking the
key stakeholders in managing the transition.
important task of supporting the Government, but we
must do more than just keep the Government alive. The
We are convinced that the success of the
long-term strategy must contribute to building
Transitional Federal Government depends on its ability
Government institutions to enable them to survive on
to deliver political and socio-economic dividends and
their own. Key in the fight against the armed
provide security for its people. Recent events
opposition will be the strengthening of Somalia’s own
elsewhere clearly show that human security is key to
security institutions. A strong and effective Somali
stability and sustainable development in the long run.
Security Force will enable the Government to extend
Efforts at the political level must therefore be
its area of control and provide a safe environment for
complemented with the delivery of basic services to
facilitating an expanded United Nations presence in
the people of Somalia. We call on the international
Mogadishu.
community to provide all of the necessary support to
the TFG in that regard. This will not only enhance the
With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia,
credibility and legitimacy of the TFG but also address my delegation supports the ongoing efforts to address
the plight of Somali citizens.
this challenge. We are of the view that addressing the
scourge of piracy would require a holistic approach
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
that addresses the underlying causes of the problem,
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Somalia, where
promotes economic opportunities and addresses the
it is reported that hundreds of civilians are killed and
political and security dimension of piracy. Developing
thousands of casualties are admitted to hospital on a
coastal income-generating activities and the fishing
monthly basis, with the number of internally displaced
industry, as well as investigations into illegal fishing
people alarmingly high. We encourage the international
and toxic dumping allegations, should assist in
community to contribute to the 2011 Somalia
reversing the growing trend of piracy. We remain
humanitarian appeal, amounting to $529 million, to
convinced that piracy is but a symptom of the
alleviate this human suffering.
insecurity challenges faced on land. For that challenge
The efforts of the TFG and the international to be addressed comprehensively, increased attention to
community will be in vain if a conducive security the insecurity on land must be prioritized.
environment is not guaranteed in order to allow the
The months ahead provide the TFG and the
Government to focus on critical governance and
international community a window of opportunity to
institution-building tasks in the remaining period
ensure that the people of Somalia are afforded the
leading to the end of the transitional period.
peace and security that has escaped them for too long.
Despite successes of Government forces and the My delegation believes that renewed vigour on the part
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we of Somalis and the international community is required
regret the loss of the lives of the dozens of troops to bring them closer to realizing that goal. The Security
killed around Mogadishu and its environs. Given the Council, on its part, should continue regularized and
severity of the security situation in Somalia, it is vital focused attention on all issues pertaining to Somalia, in
that AMISOM be strengthened and supported to a level line with their comprehensive strategy on dealing with
commensurate with the severe challenges on the the issues facing Somalia.
ground. That should include the provision of funding
through assessed contributions for the payment of

11-25831

17

S/PV.6494

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
place on record our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate, which is very
timely and gives us an opportunity to discuss the
situation in Somalia comprehensively. I would also like
in particular to thank the Secretary-General for setting
the coordinates and tone for our discussion today. Our
thanks also go to Ambassador Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union.
The Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, deserves our special appreciation
for his comprehensive outline of the achievements of
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) thus far, as
well as its plans for the immediate future. I draw
inspiration in particular from the Prime Minister’s
expressed determination to regain his land, his identity
and his dignity from the extremists. I would like to
assure the Prime Minister of India’s continued
commitment to supporting every meaningful effort
aimed at furthering peace, reconstruction and
institution-building in Somalia.
In keeping with discussions held earlier this week
in Mogadishu by our Ambassador, including with the
Prime Minister, we will examine ways of intensifying
our cooperation aimed at building capacity in the
various areas identified by the Prime Minister in
dealing with the scourge of piracy.
India and Somalia are linked by two millenniums
of shared history and culture. We are neighbours across
the sea. In recent times, Mogadishu, Kismayo and
other Somali cities have had thriving Indian
communities. Even today, India is home to many
Somalis. Indian teachers are fondly remembered by
many Somalis. In recent times, as Somalia fell into
difficult circumstances, India contributed significant
numbers of peacekeepers and naval and air assets to
the Unified Task Force and to the United Nations
Operation in Somalia II. The work of Indian medical
units among the civilian population is still recalled. We
also remain active in the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, while continuing existing
measures to protect our seafarers and maritime
commerce.
The peace and security issues confronting
Somalia, as well as the immediate and greater region,
are matters that concern us all. I join in commending

18

the TFG forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for their recent successes. I also
take note of the Secretary-General’s assessment that
that effort is currently fragile and needs to be
supported, and we have every intention of doing so.
We extend our sincere condolences on the
sacrifices that have been made. We have had reports of
the trying circumstances in which the various
contingents operate. We also wish to record our
appreciation for the good work being done by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. The
Council should examine the recommendations made by
the African Union and others for supporting AMISOM
and Somalia and its people.
However, international efforts to re-establish
security in Somalia will not be successful so long as
Al-Shabaab continues to generate internal resources for
its activities. We would therefore like to see TFG
forces control Kismayo port so that port earnings are
not misappropriated by Al-Shabaab. Simultaneously,
all stakeholders should undertake serious efforts to cut
off arms supplies to Al-Shabaab.
It is important to break any nexus between
domestic destabilizing forces and external support
agencies that is intended to introduce outside
combatants or arms and ammunition. That requires
effective monitoring of existing sanctions and a
common commitment to honour them.
The drought in Somalia and in neighbouring
countries has assumed alarming proportions in lands
that even in normal times are not adequately blessed
with water resources. We would be prepared to work
with the TFG to assist the Somali people in this regard.
One of the unfortunate outcomes of the larger and
ongoing tragedy in Somalia is piracy. It has not only
had a destabilizing effect on global and regional trade
and security, but has also brought about much suffering
to seafarers and their families. The recent killing of
four United States citizens by the pirates is only an
example, and we strongly condemn that.
As I mentioned in the Council’s debate on
25 January 2011 (see S/PV.6473), Somali pirates are
operating further and further from the Somali coast.
Recent incidents of piracy have taken place about
250 nautical miles away from the Indian coast. The
shift of attacks to the south and east of the Indian
Ocean reflects the pirates’ ability to adapt to bypass the

11-25831

S/PV.6494

security corridor established by naval forces and to
extend their reach to approximately 1,000 to 1,200
miles from Somali Coast. The Indian Navy and Coast
Guard have stepped up their vigil against pirates in
India’s exclusive economic zone. They have recently
neutralized two mother ships being used by the pirates.
The issue of sailors taken hostage by pirates and
their plight is one that the Security Council has not
addressed. My delegation feels that the ways and
means to address this issue require the most urgent and
serious consideration of the United Nations.
The International Maritime Bureau reported that
in 2010 alone, 1,016 sailors of all nationalities were
taken hostage by Somali pirates, and 638 of them
remain hostages. It is a matter of serious concern for us
that 53 Indian nationals aboard the hijacked ships are
being held captive by pirates. The hostages are
generally from working-class backgrounds and are
often the only bread-winners of their families. The
primary responsibility for the release of hostages lies
with the owners of the ships concerned. In many cases
it has been observed, regrettably, that those ship
owners do not take responsibility or display adequate
interest in securing the release of the sailors in their
employ. In many circumstances sailors must endure
very harsh conditions under captivity and are often
tortured by their captors.
My delegation views this issue with the greatest
concern. Democracies in particular are sensitive to
public opinion and are impacted by a public sense of
need to act on the adverse situations faced by their
citizens. There has to be more effective action that the
international community can collectively take. I was
encouraged by the remarks of my Russian colleague
and look forward to receiving details of his initiative
on piracy and to being able to support it.
India has been fully engaged in the efforts of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and
we will continue to work with other countries. The
Indian Navy has been undertaking anti-piracy patrols
in the Gulf of Aden since October 2008.
We will work with Somali authorities and support
the work of the African Union and this Council in a
constructive manner. We are happy that even through
trying times, bilateral cooperation programmes such as
the Pan-African e-Network are being successfully
implemented in Somalia. We look forward also to a
visit by the Deputy Prime Minister for Planning and

11-25831

International
Cooperation,
His
Excellency
Mr. Abdiweli Ali. We will remain engaged with
Somalia.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and to warmly welcome
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
Somalia, and Mr. Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, and to express our gratitude
to them. Additionally, I would like to warmly welcome
His Excellency Mr. Henry Bellingham, Minister for
Africa of the United Kingdom.
Let me underline that Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully aligns itself with the statement of the European
Union to be delivered later this morning. I shall now
highlight a few additional points.
I wish to begin our statement by congratulating
the Chinese presidency for organizing this important
and timely debate on Somalia as the end of the
transitional period approaches.
Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the opinion of the
other delegations that the peace process is at a critical
juncture and that it is of crucial importance to adopt a
comprehensive strategy for peace and stability in
Somalia. We reiterate our full support to the
Transitional Federal Government, having in mind that
the Djibouti peace process remains the only viable
framework for conciliation, confidence-building and
long-term stability in the country. We urge all parties
outside the Djibouti peace process to join in and work
together in the interest of the Somali people. In that
regard we wish to stress the importance of national
ownership of the transition process in Somalia. We call
on all stakeholders in Somalia to do their utmost,
through unity and full commitment, to implement the
commitments undertaken without delay and share the
successful completion of the transition period.
We consider it highly important that the
Transitional Federal Institutions refrain from any
unilateral actions so as not to have negative impacts on
the overall political, security and humanitarian
situation. Furthermore, we call on the Transitional
Federal Institutions to redouble their efforts in the area
of national reconciliation, completing the constitution,
capacity-building, building up national security forces
and expanding the political space in the country
through inclusive dialogue.

19

S/PV.6494

Another important aspect in insuring peace and
stability throughout Somalia is strengthening State
institutions in order to ensure delivery of basic services
to the people. To reach that goal it is important that the
international community make additional efforts and
provide the necessary support to the Transitional
Federal Institutions, including through training and
equipping the Somali security forces.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned about the security situation in Somalia. We
condemn all terrorist activities and attacks in the
country, especially those aimed at the civilian
population. We are gravely concerned at the reports of
violations of the human rights of women and children
and of the recruitment of children by parties to the
conflict, including recruitment by pirates.
One of the main reasons for the recruitment of
youth and children by pirates and insurgents is lack of
financial security. Therefore, socio-economic recovery
should be one of the priorities of the Transitional
Federal Institutions and the international community.
Furthermore, we urge the Transitional Federal
Government to do its utmost to end the culture of
impunity through genuine efforts to establish the rule
of law.
The role of the African Union Mission to Somalia
is significant in assisting and protecting the
Transitional Federal Government and maintaining
security in Mogadishu. In that regard we pay homage
to the troop-contributing countries — Burundi and
Uganda — for their dedication and commitment. We
commend the troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and appreciate the efforts of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development.
We are encouraged by reports of some territorial
gains in Mogadishu by the Transitional Federal
Government’s forces. We are of the view that the
recent endorsement by the Security Council of the
proposal by the African Union to increase the
AMISOM troop level up to 12,000, as well as the
requisite logistical support package for AMISOM, will
have a positive impact on expanding the security and
political space in the country. We call upon the
international community to provide additional support
for AMISOM to reach its mandated strength and for it
to have the necessary capabilities to fulfil its mission.

20

We express our deep concern regarding the
worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia, where
reportedly around 2.3 million people still depend on
humanitarian aid. The obstruction of the delivery of
much needed humanitarian assistance to the people of
Somalia is another issue of major concern. A serious
decline in the provision of humanitarian aid has been
evident. We thus appeal to the international community
to address the humanitarian situation and provide
indispensable assistance.
On piracy, we share the view that there is a great
urgency in establishing effective counter-piracy
measures before a spillover effect produces further
instability in the region. The phenomenon of piracy is
one of the challenges that still awaits an adequate and
effective response from the international community,
although some security, judiciary, prevention best
practices and awareness-raising measures have been
taken.
We should continue to concentrate and cooperate
on the elimination of the root causes of piracy. In that
regard, we welcome the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral on possible options to further the aim of
prosecuting and imprisoning persons responsible for
acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia, as well as the proposal of Mr. Jack Lang,
Special Adviser on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Secretary-General and Mr. Augustine Mahiga, his
Special Representative for Somalia, for their hard work,
dedication and ongoing efforts aimed at securing a
better future for the people of Somalia.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your timely
initiative in convening this debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement.
Our appreciation also goes to the Prime Minister of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, for his presence and for his remarks to the
Council.
May I also express our recognition for the work
of the African Union in Somalia, as presented by the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Boubacar
Diarra. We are also pleased that Special Representative

11-25831

S/PV.6494

Augustine Mahiga is able to join us today through
video link.
As the second decade of the conflict in Somalia
comes to a close, one realizes with sadness that the
goal of achieving peace and security for the country
has so far eluded us, in spite of the efforts carried out
by the Somali people with the support of the
international community. Continued instability in
Somalia has effects that are devastating for its
population and reach far beyond its borders. The time
has come to review our collective approach and design
a strategy that takes into account the multiple
dimensions of the situation.
A strategy that leads to a lasting solution is one
that will consider how best to combine efforts to
generate security and stability, promote political
reconciliation and support reconstruction, economic
revitalization and capacity-building. Peace and
development must go hand in hand in Somalia. The
India, Brazil and South Africa ministerial declaration
issued on 8 March reiterates our readiness to support
international
efforts
aimed
at
reconciliation,
reconstruction and development in Somalia.
Recent progress, such as the appointment of a
new Government with a professional Cabinet and the
improvement of the security situation in certain areas
controlled by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), are important and should be commended. The
challenges, however, remain daunting. Efforts must
continue to be made to consolidate security gains. The
deployment of the additional 4,000 troops to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as
authorized by the Security Council, should be
implemented as swiftly as possible.
We commend the African countries that have
contributed troops to AMISOM, in particular Burundi
and Uganda, and extend our condolences for the
sacrifices made. In order to be more effective,
AMISOM must be given adequate conditions for its
operation, including through strengthened United
Nations support. The same goes for the Somali
Security Forces in order to address the problems of
retention and integration of personnel, under a unified
chain of command.
The security challenges in Somalia have severely
hindered humanitarian assistance. As we have learned
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, drought has affected almost 2.5 million people

11-25831

and caused alarming levels of malnutrition and massive
migration. There is a need to step up humanitarian
funding and create conditions for secure aid delivery.
The situation in Somalia is also deeply affected
by the growing scourge of piracy. The recent killing of
hostages and new reports of kidnappings seem to
confirm the worst predictions regarding piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The report (S/2011/30, annex) of
Special Adviser Jack Lang contains important
recommendations. The Security Council must react to
them in a timely manner. Again, a comprehensive
strategy is required so as to combine repressive and
punitive measures with preventive ones, through
initiatives on land that can help mitigate the problems
at sea.
The efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government towards stability and institution-building
deserve our support. As the Council set out in its latest
resolution regarding Somalia (resolution 1964 (2010)),
significant progress by the TFG on the remaining
transitional tasks, in particular the constitution-making
process and the delivery of basic services to the
population, is essential to the recovery efforts in
Somalia.
We note that the decision of the Transitional
Federal Parliament to unilaterally extend its mandate
has raised strong reaction and may not be conducive to
a lasting political solution to the situation in Somalia.
An inclusive dialogue among all Somalis and key
stakeholders may pave the way for progress towards
stability. Transitional authorities must demonstrate
their statesmanship for the success of this crucial
endeavour.
As we approach August, a clear strategy for the
post-transitional period needs to be devised. It will
require a solid and encompassing political settlement
enshrined in a new constitution and significant
improvement in the security situation. These steps will
help to establish a virtuous cycle in which stability can
take hold.
Today’s debate and the draft presidential
statement before us signal the Security Council’s
commitment to a process that can lead to a peaceful
and stable Somalia.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this meeting. I would also like to extend my

21

S/PV.6494

thanks to the Secretary-General for his preliminary
observations, as well as to welcome the participation of
the Prime Minister of Somalia’s Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed. I thank him for his invaluable statement. We
would also like to draw attention to the statement made
by Ambassador Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia.
In a country where nearly a third of the
population needs humanitarian assistance because of
war, displacement, drought and the like, focusing only
on a military solution and on fighting a rebellion will
lead to no sustainable results. Somalia needs an
inclusive strategic solution that goes beyond the
security situation to buttressing Somali institutions and
economic development.
We reiterate our support for the Djibouti peace
process, in particular as it is currently the sole political
track to save Somalia. We call for reactivating and
energizing that process. Lebanon welcomes the Somali
Government’s development of a political road map. We
hope that the Government will continue to carry out the
remaining transitional tasks, implement reconciliation
initiatives, reach out to opposition groups through
dialogue and finalize the draft constitution with the
participation of all parties. In that connection, we
express our regret that the Transitional Federal
Parliament had to extend its mandate without
accomplishing the requisite reforms.
With regard to security, we condemn the attacks
undertaken by anti-Government militias and at the
same time stress the need for all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians. We also emphasize the need to
lend expeditious support to the regular forces of
Somalia in order to allow the Government to extend its
authority. We welcome the fact that the TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have
made significant gains in Mogadishu. At the same time,
we express our concern over the fragility of the
security situation in southern and central Somalia,
which impedes most humanitarian activities.
Piracy and armed robbery constitute a threat to
international commercial navigation and impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We endorse the
African Union’s call on the Security Council on
15 October 2010 to approach the issue of piracy in a
comprehensive manner in order to address its

22

underlying causes and other threats adversely affecting
the livelihoods of Somalis, particularly illegal fishing
and the dumping of toxic wastes off the shores of
Somalia.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, we
express our deep concern over the apparent recruitment
of child soldiers and reports of the coercive evacuation
of internally displaced persons and of threats to
humanitarian workers and assistance. In that regard, we
stress the need for humanitarian workers to reach out to
all Somali parties with a view to providing
humanitarian assistance to all those who need it,
particularly those who need it most and who reside in
areas under rebel control.
In the absence of an international peace force,
Lebanon agrees with the Secretary-General that the
elements of support for AMISOM should conform with
support given to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we call on the Security
Council to enhance its support, including through the
possible funding of AMISOM through assessed
contributions. We call on donors to increase their
reimbursements of AMISOM through unconditional
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund. We
support the expeditious deployment of a United
Nations presence in Somalia with a view to sending a
message of support from the Security Council for the
Djibouti peace process.
In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of the meeting.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria’s appreciation to the Chinese delegation for
convening this important and timely meeting on
Somalia.
I warmly welcome Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed to the Council and thank him for
sharing his Government’s strategic vision with us. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
remarks and tireless efforts to promote peace in
Somalia. I also wish to thank Ambassador Diarra,
Special Representative for Somalia of the Commission
of the African Union, for his incisive assessment of the
situation in Somalia.
Nigeria is encouraged by the priorities that Prime
Minister Mohamed has outlined to move Somalia
beyond its security, political and socio-economic
challenges. With the official transition mandates set to

11-25831

S/PV.6494

terminate in August, Somalia is now at a critical
juncture. We should therefore work towards achieving
a consensus on the remaining transition tasks agreed
under the Djibouti Agreement with a view to
cementing recent gains in the post-transition period.
Nigeria believes that the full implementation of the
transitional tasks — especially stabilizing Somalia,
delivering a new constitution and undertaking political
reconciliation — will lay a solid foundation for a
peaceful post-transition era in Somalia.
However, these goals can be realized only
through concerted international support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG). The
appointment of the 18-member Cabinet by the Prime
Minister was a positive step. The Government should
be strengthened to become more effective, accountable
and responsive to the needs of the people of Somalia.
On its part, the TFG must prioritize forging political
alliances and achieving wider reconciliation. It should
also demonstrate a willingness to work closely with
local institutions in accordance with the Transitional
Federal Charter of the Somali Republic. In addition, it
should enhance its relationship with both Puntland and
Somaliland, and do all it can to maintain its powersharing agreement with the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a.
The growing insecurity in southern Somalia and
the merger between Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam are
of grave concern. Stabilizing Somalia’s security
environment is vital to strengthening the Government
and to building State capacity and institutions.
Consequently, increased support is required if Somali
forces are to fight piracy and insurgency and extend the
TFG’s authority throughout the country.
Nigeria reiterates its firm support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). AMISOM
should be supported to an extent commensurate with its
operational mandates. If recent military gains are to be
extended, there is a need for greater progress in the
deployment of 4,000 troops in accordance with
resolution 1964 (2010). We still believe that the
Council’s endorsement of an increased AMISOM force
strength to 20,000 is necessary to strengthen Somalia’s
security capabilities.
We fully back the commitment of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to the rehatting of
AMISOM as a United Nations force, in accordance
with the Security Council’s statement of intent
expressed in resolution 1863 (2009), and call for the

11-25831

establishment of a timeline for its deployment. Nigeria
reiterates the need for the support package for
AMISOM to be identical to that provided to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Parity between
reimbursement rates for AMISOM contingent
personnel and United Nations contingent personnel is
also essential, and we appeal to donors to emulate the
United Kingdom by making uncaveated contributions
for the refund of donors’ contingent equipment.
The fragile socio-economic environment in
Somalia and the absence of effective governance
structures are the bases of the piracy problem. We
therefore share the sense of urgency expressed by the
Special Adviser during his most recent briefing to the
Council (see (S/PV.6473) when he called for swift
action to address the threat of piracy in Somalia. We
also agree with his recommendations concerning the
judicial and correctional components of the counterpiracy strategy. In that connection, we call for the swift
adoption of anti-piracy legislation in Somalia and
throughout the region. Clear standards for the
transportation and detention of pirates will aid the
transborder prosecution of maritime lawlessness.
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) should be included in developing
local prosecutorial capacity, a Somali coast guard
authority and a UNODC-supported training office for
local authorities.
The mounting allegations of illegal fishing and
toxic dumping lead us to call for the establishment of
an independent international investigation. Many
Somalis view such activities as a legitimate
justification for piracy. Consequently, we believe that
such an investigation would present a major
opportunity for international intervention to address the
intertwined roots of Somalia’s instability — a
sentiment expressed in statements issued in 2008.
Notwithstanding the strong partnership between
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations in Somalia, the
international community still needs to pay more and
greater attention to the views of the African Union on
Somalia. We therefore reiterate the African Union
Peace and Security Council’s request for increased
funding for AMISOM from United Nations assessed
contributions, for the imposition of a naval blockade
and a no-flight zone over Somalia and for the effective
implementation of sanctions.

23

S/PV.6494

In conclusion, we salute the gallant men and
women of the military forces of Uganda and Burundi
for their efforts and commitment to the cause of peace
in Somalia. We also salute the dedication of
international aid and humanitarian workers in the
country. The work of these important actors can be
underpinned by a concerted international effort to bring
about sustained peace in a unified Somalia.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): As others have
done, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely and central debate, a clear
indication that the Security Council and the
international community cannot, and will not, turn a
blind eye to Somalia at this critical juncture. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing and for setting the framework for our
discussion. Allow me as well to express a word of
appreciation to Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed for his encouraging statement and his
personal commitment to furthering peace and
institution-building in Somalia. I also thank
Ambassador Diarra for his very useful comments. And
I welcome Ambassador Mahiga in Mogadishu, whom
we are very pleased to have with us here today.
In January, when we last discussed the situation
in Somalia (see S/PV.6473), the Council reaffirmed its
support for the Djibouti Agreement as the basis for the
resolution of the conflict in Somalia and reiterated its
full support to the Transitional Federal Government.
Today, we wish to stress the importance of capitalizing
on the progress that has been made. We believe that it
is crucial to improve Somali institutional capacity and
achieve political stability.
In that regard, it is important for the Transitional
Federal Government to undertake further concrete
measures towards transition, in particular the timely
conclusion of the constitution-making process and the
delivery of basic services to the population. As I have
said, it is essential that Somali institutions build on the
progress achieved so far. In that endeavour, one must
comprehensively address all the challenges Somalia
faces at the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and socio-economic development levels. Also of
paramount importance is to ensure the strengthening of
civilian capacity-building and to engage Somalis in the
process, as well as in public life in general.
Portugal subscribes to the view expressed in the
very useful concept note (S/2011/114, annex) prepared

24

for this debate that an inclusive and strengthened
dialogue with all Somalis and key stakeholders will
help map the way forward for Somalia. We therefore
welcome and encourage the work of Ambassador
Mahiga in assisting the Somali people in reaching
agreement on post-transitional arrangements, in
consultation with the international community.
Portugal also recognizes the progress made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
national security forces in consolidating security and
stability
in
Mogadishu.
We
encourage
the
strengthening of the Somali Security Forces, as the
Transitional Federal Government bears the primary
responsibility for safeguarding peace and security in
Somalia. Nevertheless, AMISOM continues to play a
vital role in Somalia. We therefore reiterate our support
to AMISOM and encourage the full deployment of
4,000 additional troops.
Regrettably, those gains have been overshadowed
by the tragic losses of life suffered in recent fighting in
Mogadishu. We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda, the Transitional
Government and the Somali people.
The most serious impact of ongoing violence and
insecurity in Somalia is on the Somali people
themselves. We condemn in the strongest terms all
attacks on the Transitional Government, AMISOM and
the civilian population. We are particularly concerned
about the situation of women and children, the most
vulnerable victims of violence. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment by the Transitional
Government to halt the recruitment of children, as well
as the appointment of a high-level focal point for child
protection and human rights, namely, State Minister
Zahra Ali Samantar. We wish her every success in her
endeavours. We also urge the parties to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
ensure full and unhindered access to all populations in
need by humanitarian workers.
Portugal echoes the concerns shared by other
members with regard to the threat posed by piracy,
including the increasing violence and their increasingly
sophisticated methods, which we strongly condemn.
We have been engaged with international partners and
allies in the fight against piracy. We took part in NATO
operations and currently participate in the European
Union’s Operation Atalanta. Portugal will assume
command of that mission beginning in May.

11-25831

S/PV.6494

We
believe
and
strongly
support
a
multidimensional response to the problem of piracy off
the coast of Somalia that includes tackling the root
causes of the problem, improving the current responses
and embracing new economic, security and
jurisdictional/correctional solutions, including an
extra-territorial specialized court in the region, as
proposed in the recent report (S/2011/30, annex)
presented by Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
Jack Lang. As I have previously stated in the Council,
Portugal strongly supports the proposals contained in
that report.
We do not underestimate the difficulties in
Somalia. That is why we underline that the continuing
commitment, engagement and close cooperation of all
parties will be necessary to achieve peace in Somalia,
foster national cohesion and open the way for
economic and social development. We strongly support
the continuous engagement of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional organizations. In that context, we of
course share the position of the European Union, which
will be set out later.
But let me also stress that while the international
community must carry on showing its commitment and
acting in a concerted way, affording the Somali people
the support and encouragement they deserve, concrete
steps can only be achieved if there is real commitment
from Somali leaders and institutions in laying the
foundations for peace and stability in the country. I
hope that today’s debate will help to achieve that goal.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the statements delivered by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia Ambassador Diarra. I also welcome
Ambassador Mahiga, who is with us from Mogadishu.
My delegation welcomes this timely debate on a
comprehensive strategy for peace and security in
Somalia, especially given the worrying security
environment, which is intensifying in several regions
of the country. We are grateful for this initiative by the
Chinese presidency of the Council.
The recent fighting in Mogadishu has resulted in
many dead, wounded and displaced people. The
intensification of the conflict has contributed to

11-25831

deepening the alarming humanitarian situation, which
has further deteriorated owing to the prevailing drought.
Somalia remains one of the most complex
environments in which to carry out humanitarian work.
It is therefore necessary to ensure that all parties to the
conflict respect humanitarian principles and facilitate
access to assistance, in particular for the most
vulnerable populations.
Moreover, the increase and geographical
expansion of pirate attacks and the recently heightened
use of violence, including protracted periods of
detention and the murdering of hostages, are all highly
disturbing. This crime has become one of the most
lucrative activities in Somalia, with those responsible
in part utilizing ransoms to improve their arsenals and
make their operations more efficient and effective. The
latest estimates indicate that pirates remain in
possession of 819 individuals and 51 boats.
Piracy is one of the disastrous consequences of
institutional weakness and poor economic conditions.
There are also some reports indicating that armed
groups such as Al-Shabaab are increasingly benefiting
from the profits of piracy. This criminal activity is
penetrating local economies and establishing a
progressive dependence on the criminal industry
developed around it.
Although international cooperation to provide
security for navigation, prevent attacks and arrest
pirates has yielded some positive results, the solution
to this problem must comprehensively involve both the
main source and primary victim of this problem,
namely, Somalia.
The seriousness of the situation urgently requires
a comprehensive approach that includes strengthening
the rule of law and the creation of institutions to ensure
good governance and allow social and economic
development in Somalia.
With regard to security as a precondition for
strengthening the rule of law, it is essential to provide
more resources and to train security forces so as to
enable them to patrol and provide security on land as
well as the waters off the coast. In that regard, we are
concerned that the flow of weapons remains constant,
which, according to the Monitoring Group on Somalia,
has devastating effects in the context of chronic armed
conflict, the absence of effective central authority and
a serious humanitarian crisis.

25

S/PV.6494

With regard to the justice sector, it is necessary to
adopt reforms to facilitate the prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates in the context of applicable
international law. We agree with what was set out in
the report of Special Adviser Jack Lang (see S/2011/30,
annex) on the need for Somalia to assume ownership of
judicial and imprisonment processes so as to end the
impunity that pirates enjoy. The assistance provided by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
coordination with the Contact Group on Piracy, to
reform criminal and procedural legislation and to
include provisions for the investigation and
prosecution of piracy is of paramount importance.
Community-based investments and the need to
create opportunities for young people are vital. In that
regard, fishing has been mentioned as an economic
option suited to the characteristics of the country.
However, Somalia must also resolve a very serious
pending issue, namely, the delimitation of its maritime
borders with neighbouring States.
Adopting a sustainable and comprehensive
strategy aimed at the capacity-building of national
institutions and the provision of basic services requires
consistency in the efforts of the various United Nations
entities and the effective use of existing mechanisms,
including the regime envisaged in resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) to impose sanctions on
individuals who threaten the reconciliation process.
In recent months, the Council has had the
opportunity to consider various proposals that offer
options for viable and comprehensive actions with
regard to the general crisis faced by Somalia. In view
of the end of the transition period and given the gravity
of the situation, the United Nations must lead an early
and decisive international response that has
stabilization and strengthening of the Somali State as
the primary goal.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
The transitional period in Somalia will come to
an end in August, which will usher in a new stage in
the settlement of the question of Somalia. It will
present daunting challenges while also providing
significant opportunities. The many problems facing
Somalia are interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and
therefore require an integrated response.

26

China believes it is necessary to formulate and
implement a comprehensive strategy for the early
realization of peace, security and development in
Somalia. That comprehensive strategy should reflect
Somalia’s ownership and give full play to the
important role of the United Nations. In our view, that
important strategy should comprise five pillars.
First is the effective promotion of political
reconciliation in Somalia. We hope that the
Transitional Federal Government will work within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement, complete its
constitutional process and other transitional tasks as
planned and enter into dialogue as soon as possible
with the relevant national parties and international
cooperation partners on post-transitional arrangements,
with a view to reaching consensus at an early date. We
hope that the various Somali parties will seize this
opportunity to effectively promote national political
reconciliation.
Second is strengthening capacity-building in the
security sector. We call on the Transitional Federal
Government, with the assistance of international
partners, to step up efforts to strengthen the security
sector so as to establish at an early date a professional
army, capable of maintaining national peace and
stability and of protecting the security of the Somali
people. We urge the parties concerned to continue to
provide donations to the Somali Security Sector
Institutions Trust Fund.
Third is the promotion of economic and social
development. Supporting the people is a decisive factor
in the future of Somalia, and the key to winning the
people’s support is to show the Somali people the
prospect of a good life so that they can have
confidence in their country’s future. China calls on the
United Nations and donors to mobilize more financial
and material resources to help Somalia to bring about
development. Somalia should have a greater say on
questions such as the distribution and implementation
of financial assistance.
Fourth is fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia.
China calls for deep reflection by the international
community on its strategy to combat piracy. Greater
attention should be paid to effectively addressing the
land-based origins of piracy through political,
economic and judicial means.
Fifth is support for the leading role of the African
Union. China highly values the important role of

11-25831

S/PV.6494

regional organizations, such as the African Union, and
of the African Union Mission to Somalia, and calls on
the international community to provide more support to
the African Union. We support the Security Council in
responding positively to the relevant requests of the
African Union and in giving favourable consideration
to the deployment of a peacekeeping operation in
Somalia at an appropriate time.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council stresses the need for
a comprehensive strategy to encourage the
establishment of peace and stability in Somalia
through the collaborative efforts of all
stakeholders in the fields of the political process,
security sector building, humanitarian relief,
protection of civilians, human rights, socioeconomic development, counter-terrorism and
combating piracy. The Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued instability in Somalia,
which has led to a multitude of problems,
including terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, and a dire
humanitarian situation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the Djibouti Agreement as the basis for the
resolution of the conflict in Somalia. It urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to broaden and
consolidate the reconciliation process, intensify
efforts to complete the outstanding transitional
tasks, and prioritize the timely completion of the
constitution and the delivery of basic services to
the population, paving the way for a better future
for Somalis, including their economic and social
development and the realization of their human
rights.
“The Security Council welcomes the work
of Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to support the Somali
people in reaching agreement on post-transitional
arrangements
in
consultation
with
the
international community. It strongly urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to engage in this
process in a more constructive, open and
transparent manner that promotes broader
political dialogue and participation in line with

11-25831

the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to assess, in his
regular reports delivered to the Council before
the end of the transitional period, the respect for
these principles. These principles are essential for
future cooperation between the international
community and the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The Security Council notes that the
transitional period will end in August 2011. The
Council regrets the decision by the Transitional
Federal Parliament to extend its mandate
unilaterally, without carrying out necessary
reforms, and urges the Transitional Federal
Institutions to refrain from any further unilateral
action.
“The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahiga, welcomes his
efforts and those of the United Nations, and calls
for an increased United Nations presence and
increased coherence of United Nations activities
in Somalia.
“The Security Council affirms the
importance of the development of Government
institutions and the strengthening of civilian
capacity-building across Somalia, including
ensuring the participation of women in public life,
the prevention and resolution of conflict,
peacebuilding and socio-economic reconstruction.
The Council urges the international community to
mobilize additional support to the Transitional
Federal Government and local and regional
administrations in that regard.
“The Security Council expresses its serious
concern about the worsening humanitarian
situation in Somalia, and the impact of the
current drought, which have left over 2 million
Somalis in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
and have resulted in significantly higher flows of
refugees to neighbouring countries.
“The Security Council also expresses
concern at the continuing decline in humanitarian
funding for Somalia. The Security Council
commends the work of humanitarian aid workers
and urges all Member States to contribute to
current and future consolidated humanitarian
appeals.

27

S/PV.6494

“The Security Council strongly condemns
the targeting and obstruction of the delivery of
humanitarian aid by Al-Shabaab and other armed
groups in Somalia and demands that all parties
ensure full, safe and unhindered access for the
timely delivery of humanitarian aid.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of strengthening the Somali security
forces, including the development of effective
command and control. While emphasizing that
the Somalis hold the primary responsibility for
achieving political stability, security and the rule
of law, the Council urges Member States and
regional and international organizations to
contribute generously and promptly to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security
institutions, and to provide assistance to the
Somali security forces.
“The Security Council recognizes the
progress made by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Security Forces in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu. The Council deeply
regrets the loss of life in the recent fighting and
recognizes the significant sacrifices made by
AMISOM and the Somali National Security
Forces. The Council expresses its sincere
gratitude to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment to AMISOM, and
expresses its condolences to them and to the
Transitional Federal Government and the Somali
people.
“The Security Council condemns all attacks,
including terrorist attacks on the Transitional
Federal Government, AMISOM and the civilian
population by armed opposition groups and
foreign fighters, particularly Al-Shabaab.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of predictable, reliable and timely
resources for AMISOM in order for it to better
fulfil its mandate. The Security Council calls on
the
international
community
to
make
contributions urgently and without caveats to the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM or
directly in support of AMISOM. It notes the
recommendations on Somalia of the Africa Union
Peace and Security Council of 15 October 2010
and underlines its intention to keep the situation

28

under review. It encourages the full deployment
of 4,000 additional AMISOM troops as
authorized by Security Council resolution 1964
(2010) as soon as possible.
“The Security Council stresses the
responsibility of all parties and armed groups in
Somalia to comply with their obligations to
protect the civilian population from the effects of
hostilities, in particular by avoiding any
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. The
Security Council expresses deep concern about
the continuing violations and abuses committed
against children in Somalia by parties to the
conflict and urges the immediate implementation
of all conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict in Somalia.
“The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the threat posed by piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia,
especially by the extended range of the piracy
threat into the western Indian Ocean, the increase
in pirate capacities and the increasing violence by
the pirates. The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms such violence, including hostagetaking, murder and other acts of violence against
individuals. The Security Council recognizes that
the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to
the problem of piracy and armed robbery, and
stresses the need for a comprehensive response to
tackle piracy and its underlying causes.
“The Security Council calls upon all
Member States, in particular those in the region,
to refrain from any action in contravention of the
Somalia and Eritrea arms embargo and to take all
necessary steps to hold violators accountable, and
affirms the importance of enhancing the
monitoring of the Somalia and Eritrea arms
embargoes through persistent and vigilant
investigation into the violations, bearing in mind
that strict enforcement of the arms embargoes
will improve the overall security situation in the
region.
“The Security Council welcomes the
endeavours of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional organizations to promote peace and
stability in Somalia and reiterates its full support
to AMISOM and its troop- and police-

11-25831

S/PV.6494

contributing countries, especially Burundi and
Uganda.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/6.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to congratulate the
Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General, the Prime
Minister of Somalia, and the Special Representative for
Somalia of the African Union Commission, Mr. Diarra,
for their statements. We welcome and strongly support
the elements contained in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/6). I shall highlight a few important
points. The longer version of my statement will be
circulated.
Turkey is very concerned about the continuation
of the cycle of violence in Somalia. Likewise, we are
alarmed by the humanitarian crisis.
We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
thank all troop-contributing countries, especially
Uganda and Burundi, and convey our condolences for
their loss. We believe that AMISOM should be
provided with adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding so that it can effectively implement its
mandate. To that end, we think that the Security
Council should consider authorizing an enhanced
support package, which would be drawn from United
Nations assessed contributions.
Turkey believes that military means should be
coupled with steps to be taken on the political front.
First and foremost, the Transitional Federal Institutions
should redouble their efforts to reach out to other
groups and try to engage them in the Djibouti political
process and strengthen their relations with local
authorities in the country. The pending tasks, especially
the drafting of the new constitution, should be
completed after August, when the transitional period
ends.
Turkey, in principle, supports the idea of the
extension of the transitional period as long as decisions
to that effect are taken in a coordinated and consensual
fashion. We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
reach compromise solutions on the matter.

11-25831

We appreciate that Prime Minister Mohamed and
his Government are truly committed to achieving the
targets for a functional State with all of its structures in
place. We believe that it is incumbent upon the
international partners of Somalia to empower the TFG,
especially by providing the necessary financial
resources and refraining from taking steps that could
undermine the authority of the central Government.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia, Ambassador Mahiga, has the full support
of Turkey. We praise the constructive efforts of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development towards finding a durable solution to the
problem in Somalia.
On 21 March, Turkey will chair the eighth
plenary meeting of the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. With the recent
increase in hijackings and the escalation of violence by
pirates, there is an urgent need for a strategic plan to
tackle and systematically combat piracy.
We believe that the upcoming plenary will
provide a good opportunity to discuss this issue in a
holistic manner. We also believe that today’s meeting
will provide valuable inputs for our discussions within
the Contact Group. In that sense, we believe that the
two meetings are mutually reinforcing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
on behalf of the States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for the initiative to hold this debate. We are pleased to
see the presence at this meeting of His Excellency the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) of Somalia. We fully subscribe to the statement
delivered by Ambassador Diarra, for which I thank him
heartily.
The situation in Somalia continues to be critical.
The reasons are obvious. First, the end of the transition
period is fast approaching. We realize that those tasks
that the TFG needed to carry out during the transition
period have not been completed. For this and other
reasons, it is impossible to say that the TFG has
discharged all of its responsibilities. However,
allowing the transition period to lapse and thereby
allowing the collapse of the Djibouti peace process

29

S/PV.6494

cannot be an option. That explains why IGAD and the
African Union (AU) have taken the steps they have. It
is now a matter of greatest urgency that the TFG carry
out those tasks as speedily as possible.
Secondly, we have seen over the past few days
that it is entirely possible for the TFG to enhance its
viability and to make progress in the security area,
which is absolutely critical as the minimum
requirement for everything that the TFG has to do in
other sectors. The momentum generated recently needs
to be maintained and expanded. This is very critical,
both for raising the credibility of the TFG and for
conveying the message that extremism is far from
being the wave of the future. The more the momentum
is sustained and additional gains are made, the fewer
the chances the enemies of peace will have to benefit
from the fear they have instilled in the minds of
citizens.
From this perspective as well, the current
situation in Somalia is indeed very critical. There are
opportunities that should be seized. The question is:
Are all stakeholders ready? It does not help much to
harp on the weaknesses of the TFG. But, still, it is
important for the TFG to ensure the full
implementation of the 15 March 2010 agreement with
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a, particularly in the security
area, as well as to strengthen its cooperation with all
those committed to peace and the Djibouti peace
process. We want to underline how critical it is to
adhere to the principle that the Djibouti Agreement
remains the basis for consolidating the process of
national reconciliation in Somalia.
However, a great deal more is expected from
others, including from the Council. Resolution 1964
(2010) only partially addressed the request submitted
to the Council by the African Union regarding the
authorized strength of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), on an enhanced support package
for the Mission from United Nations assessed
contribution, and on the imposition of a naval blockade
of and no-fly zone over Somalia, as well as effective
implementation of sanctions on spoilers. This is
becoming ever more urgent, including as a result of the
worsening humanitarian situation in the country. The
needy should not remain hostage to those who brutalize
them.
I am pleased to note that the IGAD countries
continue to do their share. In this regard, we are deeply

30

grateful to Uganda and Burundi for the sacrifices they
have been making. We are encouraged by the enhanced
cooperation that we have managed to create between
AMISOM, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and IGAD, as exemplified by the
memorandum of understanding signed between them in
April last year, providing for enhanced consultation
and coordination, which became the basis for a joint
regional strategy agreed in February of this year.
Perhaps, this might serve as a template for other
regions.
I wish to conclude by thanking you personally,
Sir, for this very welcome initiative, by appealing to
the Council to give the Somalia situation far greater
attention than it has received to date, and by extending
our gratitude to all States that have rendered assistance
to the TFG, AMISOM, IGAD and the AU.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you for
convening this timely open debate on the situation in
Somalia. I thank the Secretary-General, the Prime
Minister of Somalia and the Special Representative of
the African Union for Somalia for their statements, to
which I listened attentively.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the head of the delegation of the European
Union, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Italy continues to support the invaluable
endeavours of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador Mahiga,
and remains fully engaged in all the relevant
multilateral forums, as well as bilaterally, in promoting
the Somali peace process. Indeed, Somalia continues to
represent a risk in terms of worldwide terrorism,
international organized crime and humanitarian crises.
The Islamic extremist group Al-Shabaab is still a
serious threat to the Transitional Federal Institutions in
Mogadishu, to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and, above all, to all Somalis, who have
been suffering now for some 20 years. The ongoing
drought could easily turn into a humanitarian
catastrophe. In all regions controlled by Al-Shabaab,
international aid is barred, while food and water
provided by United Nations agencies in the territories
beyond their reach are at risk of running short. Piracy

11-25831

S/PV.6494

remains a clear and present danger to a widening area
of the Indian Ocean.
Somalia needs stronger international efforts for
stabilization and security and to prevent the risk of
terrorism spilling over. Like other countries, Italy
strongly supports AMISOM and the Somali security
forces and Police in their strategy to establish effective
control of the territory. We are also engaged in
sustaining the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
in its reconstruction, and thus in implementing a
civilian strategy of economic and social recovery.
The European Union Training Mission, in which
Italy has been taking part since its inception, is
working well. The United States and Italy have
renewed their financial support for 8,000 additional
soldiers. This, however, is not enough. The TFG’s
security forces remain in dire need of a serious
overhaul of their organization, command and control.
The Somali Prime Minister has today renewed his
appeals for stronger political and financial assistance to
the TFG from the international community. The short
time left until the natural end of the transitional
mandate, despite the ongoing discussions on its
extension, calls for immediate action. Addressing the
need for a new institutional set-up following August,
through concrete actions and a coordinated approach
by the international community, remains crucial.
Key international actors seem to share the notion
that the open-ended political outreach efforts set by the
Djibouti peace process need to be intensified. Thus, the
role of local entities must also be increased if the
legitimacy and representation of any institutional
architecture is to be secured. To this end, we advocate
increased cooperation between the TFG and the local
administrations.
To encourage this enhanced cooperation and
better coordination between the central institutions and
local Powers, the international community, while
remaining steadfast in its support for the TFG, should
guarantee greater assistance to the stable regions that
have not fallen under the control of Al-Shabaab, such
as Puntland, Galguduud and Somaliland.

Italy deems it necessary to have stronger and
urgent international efforts to help the TFG tackle the
serious problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
which has grown in scope and intensity. Despite the
ongoing efforts of various navies in the area, piracy
remains a major threat, and the situation has
deteriorated. We have been actively participating in the
European Union Atalanta and the NATO Ocean Shield
naval operations, and Italy is keen to hold the
command of the NATO fleet in the second half of 2011.
Italy continues to prioritize the prosecution and
detention of captured pirates, which represent the most
logical consequence of the huge patrolling effort and a
necessary requirement for an effective fight against
piracy. We therefore support the recommendation put
forward in the report of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia (S/2011/30, annex) to create an
extraterritorial Somali court with an international
component, and would welcome the adoption of
Security Council measures to that effect.
Furthermore, Italy supports the call for increased
efforts to control illicit financial flows linked to piracy
off the coast of Somalia, and is willing to facilitate
discussion among interested members of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia on the
appropriate way forward. We are also ready to lead an
international effort to develop actionable proposals for
disrupting piracy-related financial networks and to
report our findings to the plenary meeting of the
Contact Group.
Somalian instability represents a threat for the
region and fosters a multitude of problems, including
terrorism. As a matter of urgency, the international
community must come together on a comprehensive
strategy to encourage development, peace and security
in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I therefore intend, with the concurrence of the
members of the Council, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

11-25831

31
