S/PV.9432

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9432nd meeting

Tuesday, 10 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moretti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Bambissa
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-eighth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2023/698)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2682
(2023) (S/2023/700)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-29605 (E)
*2329605*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2023/698)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2682 (2023)
(S/2023/700)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq; and Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi,
Country Manager, Iraq Foundation.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/698, which contains the thirty-eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2023/700, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2682 (2023).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Today we are roughly
one year on from the formation of Iraq’s current
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Mohammed Shia’ Al Sudani. Since its inception,
several important steps and promising initiatives have
emerged. To name but a few, long-awaited reforms in
the banking and finance sectors are now under way.
One example is the launch of an electronic platform
for foreign currency sales, which demonstrates the
Government’s commitment to both transparency and
efficiency. A new Iraq Development Fund has been
established. This, coupled with the change ushered in
by the recently adopted federal budget, has the potential
2/20

10/10/2023

to spur private sector investment. The passing of a new
law on social security means that, for the first time, all
Iraqi workers can benefit from public entitlements such
as health insurance, and maternity and unemployment
benefits. As most members will know, a trailblazing
initiative for regional infrastructure, known as the
Development Road project, was launched some months
ago. Meanwhile, Iraq is taking further steps towards
leveraging its own natural resources more effectively
and responsibly, thereby aiming to reduce energy
waste and shore up its energy independence. Also, and
importantly, to address the concerning issue of rapid
drug proliferation, the Government has developed a
national strategy for the prevention of narcotics and
psychotropic substances, among other measures.
I already briefly mentioned the recently adopted
federal budget. It charts an ambitious course for the
country until the end of 2025 and includes allocations
with the potential to address critical needs, such
as infrastructure development and reconstruction.
Notably, this budget represents the highest proportionate
allocation to the delivery of social services yet, and will
hopefully expand access to health care, education and a
number of other essential public services.
To cut a long story short, with last year’s gains
in political stability and an ambitious federal budget
in hand, Iraq is well-positioned to seize the many
opportunities in front of it. That said, and as we all
know, the country’s complex and at times fast-evolving
environment also means that this is not an easy feat, let
alone a given.
Corruption is still pervasive, and combatting it,
as the Prime Minister recently said, is something the
Government has been working on, is still working on
and will continue to work on. He rightly added that,
without fighting corruption, the Government will not be
able to implement its economic vision and development
programmes. It is true that the Government has made
admirable commitments, from efforts to, for instance,
increase transparency around custom revenue collection
to pursuing the extradition of individuals implicated
in the theft of federal resources. A new campaign,
called “Where did you get this?”, has seen the Federal
Integrity Commission audit the financial records of
electoral candidates. At the same time, it is clear that
the intricate web of graft and vested interests, built up
in Iraq over decades, will not be dismantled overnight,
especially when those who stand to lose can draw from
myriad financial, political and security resources,
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

creating the community of collusion I have referred to
in previous briefings.
Also, and as spelled out numerous times, Iraq’s
economic structure is in a precarious place, heavily
reliant on oil and a public sector so big that it is
simply unsustainable. Although steps taken thus far
surely signal positive momentum, further structural
reforms are going to be critical. Otherwise, a thriving
private sector with high levels of employment will
remain elusive.
All of that must be understood alongside Iraq’s
rapidly growing population, with predictions that it
could double over the next three to four decades. Why
am I saying this? Because with more Iraqis coming
of age without corresponding job opportunities or
advances in quality of life, it is not difficult to see
where this trend may go: the embers of discontent could
flare up easily again and again.
Climate change and water scarcity are, of course,
other obvious threat multipliers. This past summer,
again, temperatures in Iraq exceeded 50 degrees
Celsius. Last June, the International Organization
for Migration recorded almost 14,000 families as
internally displaced because of drought conditions
across 10 of Iraq’s governorates. Needless to say, if
left unaddressed, this is only the beginning of a rather
nightmarish situation. Hence, it is for good reasons that
the Government has made the issue of water security
one of its top priorities.
Another issue that should not be underestimated
are the feelings of exclusion, marginalization and
stigmatization. Why does that matter for stability in
Iraq? It matters because if those sentiments are left
to simmer, among other spillover effects, people will
again become vulnerable to extremist propaganda.
I am, of course, aware of the ongoing efforts by the
Government to end displacement, but further progress
on enabling people to return to their areas of origin,
including Jurf Al-Sakhar and Sinjar, remains critical.
Equally important is much-needed momentum to enact
legislation on enforced disappearances, as well as the
amendment to the amnesty law.
A further topic that cannot be overlooked is the
influence of non-State armed actors in certain areas,
which not only undermines confidence in the State, but
also creates an environment of fear and anger.

S/PV.9432

The Government continues to proactively engage
with countries throughout the region on issues related to
energy, water, economic cooperation and security. That
is important, as regional partnerships and integration
are obvious catalysts for stability in Iraq and beyond.
Now, within that context, I wish to highlight the
implementation of the Iraq-Iran security agreement.
Great efforts have been made by Iraq, including the
Kurdistan region, to secure its borders, and further
work to sustain those achievements is ongoing. All
sides consider long-term security as essential, and we
can only emphasize Iraq’s genuine commitment to
the agreement.
As I said on many occasions, this is the way to go
about addressing security concerns: through dialogue,
joint committees and the actual implementation of
agreements — all, of course, in accordance with
international law. With that in mind, I wish to express
hope that Iraq and Türkiye will also embark on a
sustainable way forward. Türkiye’s security concerns
are well understood. And on that note, I would like
to echo the Secretary-General’s condemnation of the
recent attack in Ankara. In saying that, constant crossborder attacks are a risky way to advance interests
and one with numerous adverse effects. We therefore
welcome ongoing efforts on the activation of bilateral
committees between Iraq and Türkiye aimed at
addressing border security concerns.
And, of course, I cannot talk about stability in
the region without mentioning the unprecedented
and horrendous developments in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory, which have already
had a catastrophic human toll and could impact the
entire region.
Still focusing on the Middle East, I would also like
to flag a recent decision of Iraq’s federal Supreme Court
regarding the 2012 agreement between Iraq and Kuwait
regulating navigation in the Khor Abdullah waterway.
Taking into account the separation of powers, Iraq’s
Government has meanwhile made its commitment to
the principles of international law and its respect for
bilateral agreements and United Nations resolutions
crystal clear. Legitimate concerns have been addressed
by Kuwait and the Cooperation Council for the Arab
States of the Gulf. Given the priority attached by the
Iraqi Government to dialogue as a means to finding
solutions, as well as its commitment to maintaining
positive relations with its neighbours, we hope and
expect that cooperation and good neighbourliness will

23-296053/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

prevail. Bearing in mind the risks of miscalculation
and escalation, it is essential to resolve the matter
expeditiously, and also important is the continuation of
talks to demarcate the rest of the maritime border.
With regard to Baghdad-Erbil relations, to discuss
the Kurdistan region’s financial challenges, a high-level
delegation from the Kurdistan Regional Government,
headed by its Prime Minister Masrour Barzani, visited
Baghdad on 14 September. Soon after, Iraq’s Council
of Ministers agreed to provide financial relief in the
form of loans for the next three months. That enables
the Kurdistan Regional Government to pay, for the
time being, the salaries of its public servants — a
positive development and, frankly speaking, one that
was overdue. That said, the agreement is temporary
in nature and therefore not enough. Hence, more and
urgent work lies ahead so as to avoid a new period of
uncertainty for the region’s public servants. I said this in
past years and will repeat it now: civil servant salaries
should be shielded from political disagreements.
Similar to any other Iraqi civil servant, those working
in the Kurdistan region have families to look after and
obligations to fulfil.
In August 2020, I highlighted in my briefing to
the Council (see S/2020/845, annex I) that the lack of
specificity in Iraq’s 2005 Constitution continued to
shape the debate between Baghdad and Erbil. With the
situation persisting today, what does that mean? It means
that 18 years have gone by without an agreement on the
gradual enhancement of the federal system; 18 years
without a sustainable framework for natural resource
distribution or disputed territories; 18 years without
laws delineating rights and obligations. Instead, we
continue to witness constant ad hoc crisis management.
What I am essentially saying is that, 18 years on from
the Constitution’s adoption, it is imperative to move to
comprehensive and solid solutions.
As for the Sinjar Agreement, I regret to inform the
Council that no progress has been made. Sadly, instead,
we continue to witness different power competitions in
which non-State armed actors have the upper hand.
Recent events in Kirkuk, resulting in a number
of deaths and injuries, are also of concern. While the
situation has calmed down for now, the precariousness
of that context cannot be overlooked. As Council
members know, in past years, UNAMI has facilitated
dialogue sessions among the representatives of
Kirkuk’s components. And we are still convinced that
4/20

10/10/2023

an agreement can be reached. But for that to happen,
it is imperative that the needs of people be prioritized
over political gain. Of course, the provincial council
elections on 18 December are of great importance as
well, especially because Kirkuk has not seen local
elections since 2005.
There is something else. Previously Council
members heard me say that the Kurdistan region’s
parliamentary elections are long overdue. Initially
scheduled for October 2022, they were postponed to
November this year and recently further delayed to
25 February 2024. To state the obvious, we expect all
parties to ensure that this new election date will not
again fall victim to internal political strife. With the
current administration in a caretaker capacity, the
region’s democratic process must prevail. There is so
much at stake.
On a different note, as any other Member
State, Iraq has committed, through its Constitution
and international human rights treaties, to protect
the fundamental rights of all its citizens, without
discrimination. That point bears repeating in the light of
recent debates on the use of universally accepted terms.
Turning to the issue of Al-Hol returnees, in the past
month, a further 173 households returned to Iraq. In
other words, Iraq continues to serve as an example for
other States with nationals in Al-Hol.
There is no denying it, challenges on the ground
abound. The accessibility of core civil and identity
documents, in particular their timely issuance, must be
addressed as a matter of priority. And, as Iraq grapples
with the vast needs of returnees and host communities,
the criticality of continued international support cannot
be overemphasized.
I will zoom in on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. The adoption
of innovative DNA technology by the Government
of Kuwait has led to the identification of one more
missing person. I extend my deepest condolences
to the family involved. I further welcome the longanticipated handover by Iraq to Kuwait of 22 genetic
profiles that were discovered in March 2022 in Najaf.
The regular exchange of genetic data is much needed
to shed light on the fate of those still missing. And of
course, we continue to engage the Government of Iraq
on the retrieval of missing Kuwaiti property, including
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

the national archives. Swift and decisive action is
now needed.
I can only emphasize the importance of Iraq’s
upcoming provincial council elections. For many
reasons, including the stepping up of service delivery,
they represent a critical imperative for all Iraqis. As a
former politician, I know how tempting it is to go allout in an election campaign, but things can get ugly
and even risky if campaigns turn into platforms for
whipping up rage or fear about others. I therefore call
on all actors, be they at the national or regional levels,
to play their part in maintaining stability in the run-up
to the December elections — and that should include
efforts to counter misinformation and disinformation.
With the Government now one full year into
its tenure, driving forward the many good plans
Iraq has committed to implementing remains a
collective responsibility.
I cannot conclude without acknowledging the
devastating fire that occurred in Al-Hamdaniya last
month, which claimed the lives of more than 100
people. We again convey our sincere condolences to all
those affected.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Jarahi.
Ms. Al-Jarahi (spoke in Arabic): I am honoured
today to represent civil society organizations in Iraq, in
particular those that have supported the file of women’s
political participation, as my organization was among
the first to work on that file and has done so from 2004
until the present day. Since the theme of today’s meeting
is political participation, I will focus my statement on
the efforts that civil society organizations have made to
support the political participation of women.
The Iraq Foundation and the organizations under
its umbrella have worked tirelessly to support women,
especially in areas affected by terrorist organizations.
We have also been active in southern Iraq and the central
Euphrates region, which to this day have witnessed
major security challenges and threats facing women.
Although Iraq is considered a pioneer in developing
policies and plans that support women’s participation
in society compared to countries in the region, genderbased discrimination against women by men remains
an obstacle to women’s formal participation in the

S/PV.9432

decision-making process and their participation through
investing in material and political resources. Women
have still not achieved equality with men in political
status or in the power of their political influence.
Despite that, we cannot compare the current
situation of women in Iraq with what it was before. The
past two decades have witnessed remarkable progress
in the political participation of women in Iraq, and
the number of women’s organizations, networks and
movements has increased, as reflected in the strength
of their influence in local, national and international
policies. A number of women have been able to hold
important political positions, and there has been an
increase in women’s political participation in terms of
the percentage of women in the House of Representatives
and their membership in political parties, as well as
their participation in decision-making positions and
in the protest movements that Iraq has witnessed in
recent years. We look forward to increasing women’s
representation in senior and leadership ranks, which
influence the decision-making process.
Iraqi civil society organizations have done an
outstanding job in supporting women’s participation
and have conducted many studies that have shown the
extent of the challenges and threats facing women, as
well as ways to confront and overcome those challenges.
We have also trained hundreds of young women
leaders, while urging them to participate in the political
process. I am confident that civil society organizations
have exerted an exceptional moral influence in urging
the Government to adopt comprehensive policies and
plans to advance women’s rights.
In the context of the ongoing efforts to promote
women’s rights and participation in political life, we
reiterate our call to the international community to
provide the necessary support to Iraq. We must all
come together to provide continued support to enhance
women’s political participation. We all know that
international support plays a vital role in providing the
resources and expertise that promote progress. That is
why we urge international stakeholders to provide full
support for the projects and programmes that promote
women’s rights and to support women’s participation in
the political arena.
We also call on the Iraqi Government to complete
the plans and policies it is working on, including the
National Strategy for Iraqi Women 2023–2030, in
cooperation with the United Nations, and to support all

23-296055/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

actors working on the women’s file, regardless of their
official governmental designations, and strengthen
their role and involve them fully in formulating public
policies and implementing relevant programmes.
Therefore, the Government must ensure the provision
of sufficient financial and human resources and support
to enable those actors to perform their roles effectively
and efficiently.
In conclusion, the goal of achieving equality and
supporting women’s participation in political life
must be a joint and cooperative undertaking by the
international community and the Iraqi Government,
especially since Iraq is approaching an electoral
process in the coming months. We look forward to the
Iraqi Government providing the full and necessary
protection for the women who participate in those
elections, thereby contributing to Iraq’s stability and
progress towards a brighter and more just future.
The President: I thank Ms. Al-Jarahi for her
important briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hennis-Plasschaert and Ms. Al-Jarahi for
their briefings.
We appreciate the Special Representative’s
steadfast leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in Baghdad and her support
for other United Nations missions in Iraq. Her briefing
and the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
this topic (S/2023/700) are testament to Iraq’s progress
in reconstruction and reconciliation.
As President Biden has said, a strong Iraq capable
of self-defence is essential for achieving stability in
the region. We encourage the Government of Iraq to
maintain its commitment to essential economic reforms,
combating corruption and improving public services to
meet the demands and aspirations of the Iraqi people.
UNAMI has played an important role in that regard. We
welcome its completion of the project to rehabilitate the
Tigris riverfront in Baghdad and its partnership with
other United Nations agencies to upgrade wastewater
treatment plants in Iraq. UNAMI is well-positioned to
provide assistance in other areas of reform consistent
with its mandate, including on elections, promoting the
protection of human rights and combating impunity for
6/20

10/10/2023

violations, and facilitating cooperation with respect to
the adverse effects of climate change.
The United States welcomes the Government of
Iraq’s ongoing preparations to hold provincial council
elections on 18 December, as well as the preparations
of Iraq’s Independent High Electoral Commission to
support the holding of parliamentary elections in the
Iraqi Kurdistan region next February. To further that
progress, we also encourage the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to resolve
all outstanding issues through mutually agreeable and
durable solutions.
Iraq and UNAMI have achieved considerable
progress in recent years. We commend UNAMI’s
efforts to promote women’s political participation by
holding consultations across Iraq this past summer. We
also laud the partnership between Iraq and UNAMI to
support religious and ethnic minority communities,
including the implementation of the Sinjar Agreement.
Iraq’s progress towards the full implementation of and
funding for the Yazidi female survivors law, which
provides much-needed support and rehabilitation for
survivors of atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), should also be recognized.
Those welcome developments have taken on
particular importance in the wake of Qur’an burnings
earlier this year. We took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s condemnation of such acts of Islamophobia
and citation of Human Rights Council resolution 53/1,
on countering religious hatred constituting incitement
to discrimination, hostility or violence. At the same
time, following the attack on the Swedish embassy
in Baghdad, we welcomed the Iraqi Government’s
reaffirmation of its commitment to protecting
diplomatic missions in the country.
An essential element of our shared campaign to
ensure the defeat of ISIS is our collective efforts to
help bring ISIS perpetrators of genocide and other
atrocities to justice, wherever they reside. Repatriating
individuals from north-eastern Syria is also a critical
line of effort and we commend the Iraqi Government
for its continued leadership on the issue.
We fully support Iraq’s desire to further integrate
into the region and foster good relations with its
neighbours. We welcome recent statements by Prime
Minister Al Sudani and other senior Iraqi officials
affirming Iraq’s full respect for Kuwait’s sovereignty
and its continued commitment to bilateral agreements
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 833 (1993), which finalized the work of the
Iraq-Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission. We
appreciate both Governments’ efforts to hold a dialogue
on resolving all outstanding issues.
We look forward to seeing UNAMI’s independent
strategic review team start work. The team’s
assessment will ensure that UNAMI can continue to
provide Iraq with meaningful support as the country
builds momentum in its transition from conflict to
peace and prosperity. We would like to see the review
take a forward-looking focus on how UNAMI can
most effectively support Iraq’s political stability and
economic development.
In conclusion, the United States stands strongly
in support of UNAMI’s mandate and looks forward to
seeing how much more progress the Mission and the
Iraqi Government can achieve in the coming year.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ms. Al-Jarahi for their briefings. I also welcome the
representative of Iraq to today’s meeting. I would first
like to affirm France’s solidarity with Iraq following the
tragic fire in Qaraqosh on 26 September. Our thoughts
are with the families of the victims.
France reaffirms its full support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
continues to provide welcome assistance to Iraq in full
respect for its sovereignty. I also thank the Special
Representative for the remarkable commitment she has
demonstrated. France stands ready to contribute to the
independent strategic review of UNAMI, which should
make it possible to take into account Iraq’s requests
regarding the future of the Mission.
France reiterates its commitment to Iraq’s
sovereignty and the stability of the region as a whole.
We strongly condemn all violations of Iraqi sovereignty,
including attacks targeting the autonomous region
of Iraqi Kurdistan. We call on the actors involved to
cease all interference in Iraq’s internal affairs. In
conjunction with its partners in the Global Coalition
against Da’esh, France will continue to stand alongside
Iraq in its fight against terrorism, with full respect for
Iraqi sovereignty and for as long as necessary. In that
regard, we acknowledge the work done by the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq

S/PV.9432

and the Levant since its establishment, which has been
contributing effectively to the fight against impunity.
France also reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kuwait. We
welcome the diplomatic efforts undertaken by the Prime
Minister of Iraq to provide the necessary assurances to
his country’s Kuwaiti neighbour and partner. France
stands ready to provide assistance in achieving a
lasting solution to the border dispute between Iraq
and Kuwait and emphasizes the importance of their
close cooperation on the issue of missing Kuwaitis
and third-country nationals. Regional dialogue efforts
are more necessary than ever. The aim of the Baghdad
Conference is to set the conditions for diplomatic,
regional and economic dialogue in the face of shared
challenges, with the economic integration of the
region and the response to climate and environmental
challenges being priorities.
In my final point, France welcomes the Iraqi
Government’s efforts to carry out the reforms that the
population is expecting, and we urge that they continue.
We particularly welcomed the country’s adoption of a
budget in June, and we encourage it to continue with
reforms aimed at diversifying the Iraqi economy and
combating corruption and impunity. We also welcome
the initiatives that Iraq has taken to combat the effects
of climate change, and we should continue to assist it in
that regard based on the Paris Agreement. Concerning
relations between Baghdad and Erbil, France continues
to encourage the federal and regional authorities to
hold a constructive dialogue, particularly regarding
the sharing of revenue from oil resources and security
issues, and we believe that UNAMI can facilitate
that cooperation.
Lastly, France underlines the importance of holding
transparent and inclusive elections that involve women,
young people and of course civil society. We welcome
the role of UNAMI in supporting the Independent High
Electoral Commission in preparing for the elections.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I join others in thanking
Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and
Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi for their briefings. I too welcome
the representative of Iraq and express our deepest
condolences to the people of Iraq in the wake of the
tragic fire on 26 September.
Malta is encouraged by the Government of
Iraq’s commitment to building a peaceful, stable and
prosperous country. We continue to support the reform

23-296057/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

agenda that seeks to tackle corruption, improve public
services and develop the private sector. We hope
that the passage of a federal budget law will enable
the Government to transform those long-standing
commitments into tangible improvements for all Iraqis.
We welcome the federal Government’s intention of
holding provincial council elections in December. It
will be essential to ensure that the Independent High
Electoral Commission is provided with the necessary
resources to conduct them in an effective, orderly and
timely manner.
Inclusive political and electoral processes are
vital elements for a peaceful and stable democratic
environment. We therefore welcomed the Government’s
decision in May to establish a committee to support
women’s participation in the provincial council
elections and its inclusion of measures to boost
women’s safe political participation. In addition, along
with commemorating the genocide of the Yazidi on
3 August, we want to highlight the importance of the
2021 Yazidi Survivors Law. We call for speeding up its
implementation and eliminating unnecessary obstacles
to that. We reaffirm our support for the work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in ensuring accountability for atrocities
committed by Da’esh in Iraq, which include crimes
of sexual and gender-based violence. We also feel
compelled to express our concern about the ongoing
failure to enact a law against domestic violence.
On the political front, we welcome the constructive
steps taken by the federal Government and the
Kurdistan regional Government to address several
outstanding issues, including Kurdistan’s commitment
to holding regional parliamentary elections in February
2024. We commend the positive role played by Iraq
in the region and particularly note its diplomatic
efforts to advance stability, including through its
engagement and facilitation of dialogue with regional
partners. We call on all States, particularly Iraq’s
neighbours, to refrain from unilateral military actions.
Respect for Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
democratic political process is essential to enhancing
regional stability. Malta also stresses the importance
of respecting democratic principles and the human
rights of all persons in all their diversity. In that vein,
we welcomed the constructive discussions between
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Government of Iraq during the High
8/20

10/10/2023

Commissioner’s visit last month. We are nevertheless
deeply concerned about the 59 civilian casualties
documented by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, the 23 grave violations committed against
children and the high incidence of casualties caused by
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices. In that regard, we welcomed the decision of
the Government of Iraq in June to allocate budgetary
funding to operational demining, which is crucial to
ensuring sustained survey and clearance efforts.
Malta welcomes the Government of Iraq’s public
commitment to addressing the challenges of climate
change and water scarcity as a priority. We echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the need to foster regional
cooperation to collectively tackle those challenges. If
left unaddressed, such climate security challenges can
exacerbate existing insecurities. Urgent assistance from
the international community is therefore imperative.
In conclusion, while welcoming an improvement
in the overall humanitarian situation, we note that as
of August, approximately 1.5 million people remained
internally displaced. Regrettably, funding shortfalls
remain a challenge. We therefore urge the international
community to remain committed to supporting the
humanitarian and development priorities of Iraq and
its people.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and
Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi, Country Manager of the Iraq
Foundation, for their briefings. I also welcome the
presence of the representative of Iraq.
Once again, we recognize the work carried out
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), in particular the support it provides the Iraqi
Government in the latter’s efforts to consolidate political
alliances with neighbouring countries and carry out
reforms in order to foster trust, energize the economy
and normalize the provision of basic services in the
country. The results of the internal negotiation process
to conduct the provincial elections and the Kurdistan
Regional Government elections are encouraging. We
congratulate the Supreme Committee for the Support of
Women’s Participation in Provincial Council Elections
on its workplan, which includes measures to prevent
hate speech against women candidates and advocates a
code of conduct for political actors.
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/76) on the
persistent threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other non-State armed groups to peace
and security in the region continues to elicit concern.
Ecuador hopes that bilateral, regional and multilateral
strategies will contribute to addressing the root
causes of violence, terrorism and violent extremism
and to preventing and mitigating their consequences,
above all to protect the lives and security of the
civilian population.
We deplore the humanitarian situation of internally
displaced persons, migrants and refugees, including
women, children, persons with disabilities and ethnic
or religious minorities, who are extremely vulnerable.
The international community’s support in seeking
a sustainable solution will be crucial to promoting
their return and reintegration and to preventing their
recruitment by terrorist groups.
We acknowledge the progress made by local
technical teams and the International Committee of
the Red Cross in the search and repatriation of the
remains of Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and in
the process of identification of bodies in mass graves.
The results of the visit of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Volker Türk,
to Iraq last August call for work to be done to ensure
the expansion of civic space and to assess the effects
that drought and other phenomena may have on the
already fragile humanitarian situation. It is necessary
to return to the path of national reconciliation and
to push forward processes that will allow Iraqis to
enjoy security and well-being. Ecuador rejects actions
that exacerbate discrimination and radicalization,
such as extrajudicial executions. It also opposes the
institutionalization of the death penalty and restrictions
on freedom of expression.
To conclude, I encourage UNAMI to continue
supporting the Iraqi Government in ensuring
transparency in electoral processes, raising awareness
of the impact of hate speech and disinformation,
formulating a demining plan and building capacity
to combat impunity and establish a culture of
accountability, non-recurrence and respect for the
fundamental rights and freedoms of all social groups.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
valuable briefing. We also appreciate the statement

S/PV.9432

delivered by Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi. I welcome the
participation of the representative of Iraq in our
meeting today.
I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate the Government and people of Iraq on the
occasion of their National Day a few days ago, wishing
them continued prosperity and progress.
As we heard, Iraq has achieved remarkable
progress since the formation of its Government last
year, particularly in the reform of public services,
the economic sector and the private sector. It has also
approved a federal budget law spanning a three-year
period. Nevertheless, the upcoming period requires
firm measures to be taken to finish carrying out those
reforms and strengthen long-term security and stability,
especially in the light of the challenges facing Iraq.
On the political front, we look forward to the
provincial elections in Iraq at the end of this year and to
the postponed parliamentary elections in the Kurdistan
region of Iraq, to be held in February 2024. We stress
that they should take place on the scheduled dates.
We appreciate the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for
the holding of elections, in line with its mandate. We
also urge concerted efforts to promote the meaningful
participation of Iraqi women in the upcoming elections
and to ensure their effective and equal representation
in the Government and in decision-making processes.
In the same vein, we continue to stress the need to
empower Iraqi youth and provide them with more
opportunities to play active roles in development,
especially as this group accounts for more than half
of Iraq’s population. We believe that the decision to
establish the Higher Council for Youth in Iraq is a
positive step in that direction, in line with the important
efforts made in our region to involve young people in
governmental programmes.
On the economic front, we hope that the necessary
internal consensus can be reached concerning the
enactment of the federal law on oil and gas, in support
of the country’s economy. We also call for all other
outstanding issues between Baghdad and Erbil to
be resolved.
With regard to the efforts to address the
repercussions of climate change in Iraq, that issue
must remain a top priority, with a focus on building
Iraq’s capabilities in that domain. We hope that
UNAMI will play a greater role in support of the

23-296059/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

governmental efforts in that regard, given that Iraq is
one of the countries most affected by the phenomenon
of climate change. As the water crisis in Iraq persists,
my country urges all concerned parties in the region to
engage in constructive efforts to reach agreements that
will facilitate the optimal and equitable use of shared
water resources.
The security situation in Iraq continues to face
several challenges that must be addressed through a
comprehensive approach. Despite the gradual decline
in the frequency of Da’esh attacks, developments in
recent months have highlighted the urgent need to
ensure that the possession of weapons is restricted
to the Government, strengthen law enforcement and
consolidate government control over all Iraqi territories.
Such actions would help to foster security in Iraq and
the region.
In that connection, we stress the importance
of resolving existing issues between Iraq and
neighbouring countries. The persistence of those issues
over a long time and the absence of any prospects for
resolving them undermines trust between the countries
of the region and threatens to exacerbate tensions. We
continue to call for bridge-building in the region and
for a reduction of escalation, especially during this
period, in which the region is witnessing acute crises.
We stress that any regional dialogue must be built on
respect for the principle of good neighbourliness. We
also stress the need to refrain from any steps that may
undermine such efforts.
We are concerned about the recent growing
hostilities between Türkiye and Iraq. We reaffirm
the need to adhere to the principles of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
We reaffirm once again the position of the Gulf
Cooperation Council calling on Iraq to seriously
address the implications of the recent decision of
its federal Supreme Court regarding the agreement
with Kuwait on the regulation of navigation in Khor
Abdullah. We stress the importance of completing the
demarcation of the maritime borders between those two
countries beyond point 162 and adhering to Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 833 (1993),
and to bilateral agreements in a way that supports the
two countries in moving forward towards consolidating
bilateral relations and opening broad horizons.
10/20

10/10/2023

Regarding the issue of the missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, we call for further
progress on this file. We commend the efforts of
the Tripartite Commission, led by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to determine the fate of
the remaining missing persons, the efforts of which
recently resulted in determining the fate of one of
the Kuwaiti missing persons. We express our sincere
condolences to his family.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its support for the Iraqi people in their endeavours to
turn the page on the past and live in prosperity. We look
forward to the outcomes of UNAMI’s ongoing strategic
assessment. We hope the assessment will contribute to
shaping the features of UNAMI’s support for Iraq in
the upcoming years, in accordance with current needs,
leading to the complete handover of the Mission’s tasks
to the Government of Iraq.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and Ms. Al-Jarahi for their briefings. Switzerland
commends the work of the Special Representative and
all UNAMI staff. We also welcome the presence of the
representative of Iraq among us.
Like others before me, I would like to express our
heartfelt condolences to Iraq and to the families and
friends of the victims of the recent tragic fire at a
wedding celebration.
Iraq has a young, dynamic and rapidly growing
population, which represents a promising future for
the country. We note the Government’s commitment to
giving them opportunities to realize their aspirations
and, more broadly, to build a peaceful, secure and
prosperous future. However, as we have just heard,
significant challenges remain.
I would like to focus on four points.
First, Switzerland welcomes the Government’s
efforts to implement reforms. We hope that the adoption
of the budget and the envisaged diversification of
the Iraqi economy will enable them to yield tangible
improvements. Progress is important on the economic
front, including in the fight against corruption. The
effects of climate change and water scarcity have
become major risk multipliers for Iraq’s stability.
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Proactive governance that takes those factors into
account in the implementation of reforms is essential.
Secondly, on a political level, it is encouraging that
dates have been set for provincial council elections
and for elections in the Kurdistan region. We hope that
those elections can be held on schedule. Many women
are active in politics in Iraq, as evidenced by their
participation in the federal Parliament, as well as in the
Government. The two forthcoming elections provide
another opportunity for women candidates. Hate speech
and violence against women must be prevented. We
welcome the creation of the High Committee to Support
Women’s Political Participation in Provincial Council
Elections, which will address those issues. In addition
to ensuring inclusive elections, intensifying dialogue
on outstanding issues between Baghdad and Erbil is
also important for the country’s stability and progress.
Thirdly, the rule of law and respect for human
rights are essential to prevent recurring cycles of crisis.
It is important for the stability of the country that civic
space be protected, thus allowing a multitude of voices
to be heard.
Furthermore, for national reconciliation to
succeed, the perpetrators of human rights violations
must be held accountable for their actions, including
the violence unleashed against demonstrators four
years ago. And it is obviously very important that the
atrocities committed by Da’esh do not go unpunished.
Before concluding, on a regional level, we
welcome the ongoing efforts on the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-countries nationals. We also renew
our commitment to Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. In recent years, Iraq has made great efforts
to become a force for dialogue and cooperation in the
region. We encourage Iraq to continue to play that role
and to maintain good relations with its neighbours.
Dialogue and the respect for international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions are essential for
the stability of the region as a whole.
In conclusion, we underline that UNAMI is well
placed to provide support on all the issues raised. We
also welcome the fact that the independent strategic
review of UNAMI is about to begin. The results will
analyse current and future threats to Iraq’s peace and
security. They will enable UNAMI to support Iraq as
it continues its journey towards a stable and prosperous
future for all its people.

S/PV.9432

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert and
the representative of the civil society organization for
their briefings and welcome the representative of Iraq
to today’s meeting.
Last month, a devastating accidental fire in
Nineveh, Iraq, led to heavy casualties. I would like to
take this opportunity to convey my sincere condolences
to the representative of Iraq and, through him, to the
bereaved families and the injured.
Since the beginning of the year, the Iraqi
Government has been promoting economic reform,
creating job opportunities, cracking down on
corruption and actively improving public services.
It has successfully adopted its national budget and
made remarkable progress in all its efforts, which
China commends. Strengthening unity, reconciliation
and development among all Iraqi parties is in the
fundamental interests of the Iraqi people. We support
the continued efforts of the Iraqi federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to enhance
dialogue and consultation on outstanding issues, with
a view to finding sustainable solutions.
With the ongoing grave security situation in
Iraq, the international community should continue
to firmly support Iraq in eliminating the remaining
terrorist forces and consolidating its hard-won counterterrorism gains. The United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant should fully
implement the relevant Council resolutions in a timely
and comprehensive manner, transfer the gathered
evidence to Iraq, finish strong in the last mile of its
mandate and complete its historic mission of supporting
Iraq in holding terrorists accountable.
Peace in Iraq cannot be achieved without a
stable regional environment. In recent times, Iraq
has protested, on many occasions, against unilateral
military operations conducted by foreign countries
in its territory. We urge the relevant countries to
truly respect Iraq’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
China has taken note of the issue of the Khor
Abdullah waterway just now mentioned by Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert. The development
of good-neighbourly and friendly relations between Iraq
and Kuwait is in the common interest of both countries.
We hope that the two countries will resolve the issues

23-2960511/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

through dialogue and consultation on the basis of
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. China supports Iraq and
Kuwait in continuing their joint work towards further
progress in the search for missing Kuwaiti nationals
and property.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We support the Secretary-General’s
request in accordance with resolution 2682 (2023) for
an independent strategic assessment of UNAMI and
for recommendations on streamlining and optimizing
UNAMI’s mandate and rationalizing its allocation of
personnel and resources. On that basis, the Council
should also carefully study the medium- and longterm prospects of UNAMI so as to better adapt to the
developments on the ground and respond to the needs
of the country concerned.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), and Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi of
the Iraqi Foundation for their briefings.
Today I would like to highlight the following three
areas concerning the situation in Iraq.
First, Japan is encouraged by the steady progress
made by the Government of Iraq in tackling pressing
domestic issues, including in fighting corruption and
pushing forward with economic and fiscal reforms.
The Security Council should encourage the Iraqi
Government to make the utmost effort to ensure that
those initiatives will benefit all people in Iraq, including
women and young people, as well as internally displaced
persons. Looking ahead on the political front, we urge
that the provincial council elections and the Kurdistan
region’s parliamentary elections be held in an orderly
manner in accordance with the specified timeline.
Secondly, in the sphere of regional and
international relations, the Iraqi Government continues
its active engagement in building confidence among
neighbouring countries through regional dialogues,
including by convening the third Baghdad Conference
for Cooperation and Partnership, which we commend.
Good-neighbourly relations are a cornerstone of Iraqi
and regional stability, and we expect to see them further
advanced. A prerequisite for peace and stability in
Iraq is full respect for both sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Any attack that threatens the sovereignty and
12/20

10/10/2023

territorial integrity of Iraq, including in the Kurdistan
region, is contrary to international law and must cease.
Japan welcomes the steady cooperation between Iraq
and Kuwait on missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, and takes note
of the progress made towards a mutually agreeable
conclusion. As shown by Iraq’s strong commitment, any
damage from a war should be compensated. Regarding
the Kuwait-Iraq agreement on the regulation of
maritime navigation in the Khawr Abdullah waterway,
we stress the importance of resolving issues through
dialogue, in accordance with international law and
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Thirdly, on the humanitarian and development
front, we emphasize the continued importance of
collective efforts to find durable solutions for internally
displaced persons and returnees, and to repatriate
people from Al-Hol camp. That is an irreplaceable
foundation for stability and further development in Iraq.
Timely humanitarian assistance remains critical, while
investments also need to be directed at strengthening
basic public services that can facilitate social
reintegration for returnees. The need for appropriate
resource allocation is becoming increasingly important.
In conclusion, we highlight our steadfast support
for UNAMI’s work. With Iraq at a critical juncture
in its transition towards peace and prosperity, we
trust that UNAMI will continue its indispensable role
in providing support to the Government of Iraq by
mobilizing various actors, including United Nations
funds, agencies and programmes and international
donors, in line with their respective strengths, the
changing needs on the ground and the wishes of the
people of Iraq.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
factual briefing on the current situation in Iraq. I also
appreciate the insights shared by Ms. Al-Jarahi and
welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
On behalf of Albania, I would like to offer our
deepest condolences to the people of Al-Hamdaniya
in the light of the tragic fire incident that occurred on
27 September. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
affected families, and we stand in solidarity with Iraq,
wishing all those injured a swift recovery.
Albania commends the Government of Iraq for
its continued commitment to the reform agenda and
its shift from a security focus to an economic one.
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

We encourage the Government to move swiftly in the
key priority areas of the fight against corruption, the
diversification of the economy, confidence-building for
the private sector and the green transition.
We applaud the Government of Iraq and the
Independent High Electoral Commission for their
determination to hold provincial council elections,
scheduled for 18 December 2023, and parliamentary
elections in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, scheduled for
25 February 2024. Albania also welcomes the workplan
initiated by the relevant Supreme Committee, which
includes various measures, such as addressing hate
speech against women candidates and advocating for
an electoral code of conduct among political parties.
A democratic nation embraces diversity and
offers equal opportunities, regardless of gender. The
contribution of all components of society, including
women and young people, is essential for genuine
progress and prosperity. In that context, we echo
the High Commissioner’s emphasis that gender and
women’s empowerment are universal values that
should not conflict with culture, religion or tradition.
The protection of human rights must also be integral to
the Government’s reform initiatives. In that regard, we
are encouraged by its efforts to compensate survivors
eligible under the Yazidi female survivors law, as well
as to care for the most vulnerable, especially returning
Iraqis and internally displaced persons.
We cannot but express concern about acts targeting
religious symbols, such as Qur’an burnings, as they
contribute to tensions and radicalization and may
result in violence. Albania stands firmly for religious
freedom and peaceful dialogue and emphasizes the role
of political and religious leaders in countering hate
speech, discrimination and religious hatred.
Turning to Iraq’s security situation, Albania remains
concerned about the ongoing attacks, particularly by
Da’esh, and supports the Government’s endeavours to
establish State control over armed militias. We firmly
support Iraq’s territorial integrity and sovereignty
and oppose any attempts to undermine its political
independence and stability.
Iraq’s engagement with its neighbours to enhance
regional cooperation is commendable. In that vein,
we commend the Government’s commitment to
strengthening bilateral cooperation with regional and
international partners, with a focus on reinforcing

S/PV.9432

economic connections and addressing climate change,
water scarcity, terrorism and drug trafficking.
We welcome the update on the handover of Kuwaiti
property, which marks a positive development, and
we call on the Government of Iraq to build on that
momentum and intensify efforts to locate the remaining
missing property.
In conclusion, we commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for its role in assisting Iraq
in finding sustainable solutions, and we reiterate our
appreciation and support for the valuable work done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and her team.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Mozambique
and my own country, Ghana (A3).
We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi of the Iraq Foundation for
their briefings. We also welcome the participation of
the representative of Iraq in today’s meeting.
We would like to start by addressing our deep
condolences to the Government and the people of
Iraq, as well as to their representative, following the
tragic fire that occurred on 26 September during a
wedding, resulting in the deaths of at least 100 people
and injuring more than 150 others. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the bereaved families and the injured.
Today we will focus on three main points — the
political situation, the security situation and the impact
of climate change. On the political front, the A3 is
encouraged by the commitment of the Government
of Iraq to improving public services, carrying out
economic reforms and building confidence in the
private sector. We hope that the enactment of a budget
law will enhance the Government’s ability to address
the challenges facing the country in order to meet the
aspirations of the Iraqi people.
We also take note of the efforts of the Government
of Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission
to move forward with provincial council elections in
December, the first since 2013. We reiterate that the
measure is a significant indication of the continued
maturity and resilience of Iraq’s democratic journey, and
we welcome UNAMI’s continued electoral assistance

23-2960513/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

activities in support of the Commission’s preparations
for the elections. An inclusive electoral process is
essential to Iraq’s democracy. We note from the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/700) that the number
of women registered as candidates for the upcoming
provincial council elections constitutes 27 per cent of
the total number of candidates. Such efforts should be
greatly encouraged. The launch in July of the workplan
of the committee to support women’s participation in
the elections, with measures designed to boost women’s
participation in political processes, was an important
step towards ensuring greater participation by Iraqi
women in the country’s political life. Similarly, we
commend the decision to hold the delayed parliamentary
elections of Iraq’s Kurdistan region on 25 February
2024, giving the people of the region the opportunity to
choose their representatives in the regional Parliament,
duly elected in a fair, credible and transparent manner.
Ensuring a continued path to Iraq’s stability also
depends on constructive relations between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
The A3 echoes the Secretary-General’s call for both
sides to engage in an institutionalized and structured
dialogue to address remaining issues, especially
economic development and political stability in Iraq.
The security situation in Iraq remains fragile.
Notwithstanding the overall decline in attacks
attributed to Da’esh in the first half of 2023 compared
to the first half of 2022, Da’esh continues to carry out
asymmetric attacks in Iraq and poses a serious threat to
its sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity,
as well as to international peace and security. It is
therefore important for Iraqi security forces to sustain
their efforts to counter the threat posed by Da’esh
in order to improve the overall security situation,
including by strengthening regional and international
cooperation. At the regional level, we welcomed the
holding on 19 May of a meeting of the Iraqi-Saudi
political, security and military committee, with a
particular focus on countering illegal narcotics. Illicit
drug trafficking contributes to the financing of terrorist
groups and to the destabilization of the region, which
particularly affects the security environment.
The A3 is concerned about acts targeting religious
symbols, such as the recent burning of the Qur’an. Such
acts contribute to discrimination and radicalization,
and exacerbate tensions. We therefore hope that all
parties can respect the right to freedom of religion and
avoid any provocative acts that could foment violence.
14/20

10/10/2023

We also note with concern the grave violations that
have occurred against children in situations of armed
conflict during the reported period, including killing,
abduction and sexual violence. The activities being
undertaken by the country task force in support of
the action plan to prevent the recruitment and use of
children and to institutionalize child protection in
Iraq are essential and will go a long way to helping
to reduce human rights violations and abuses against
Iraqi children.
We reiterate the importance of addressing Iraq’s
growing vulnerability to climate change. The increased
frequency of climate-related crises constitutes a serious
threat multiplier, as it heightens the risk of poverty,
food insecurity, biodiversity loss, displacement,
forced migration and related instability. This relates
to the arguments being put forward by the A3 in
favour of raising the Council’s profile on climate,
peace and security. In relating to strategies targeting
Iraq, consideration must therefore be given to the
climate-security nexus and its humanitarian impact. We
acknowledge the active engagement and efforts of the
Iraqi authorities in mitigating the challenges posed by
climate change and water scarcity, and we welcome the
assistance that UNAMI is providing to the Government
of Iraq on climate change, which remains essential to
Iraq’s quest for sustainable solutions to that complex
issue. Addressing climate change in Iraq also requires
the cooperation of other States. Once again, the A3
echoes the Secretary-General’s call to the international
community to increase its technical support with a
view to enhancing Iraq’s endeavours in mitigating and
adapting to such challenges.
Concerning the issue of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, we
acknowledge the significant progress being made with
the continued cooperation of the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
authorities, and we look forward to seeing further
advances on this important issue.
To conclude, the A3 reiterates it strong support
for UNAMI’s efforts in the implementation of its
mandate, including the commitment to supporting the
Government and the people of Iraq.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
extending the United Kingdom’s condolences to the
families of all who were killed and injured in the tragic
fire at Qaraqosh on 26 September. I would also like
to express thanks to Special Representative Hennis23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Plasschaert and Ms. Al-Jarahi for their briefings today,
and in particular to Ms. Al-Jarahi for highlighting
the vital issues of women’s rights and meaningful
participation. And I want to thank all the staff at the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
for their important work. The positive partnership
between UNAMI and the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi
people and civil society on issues from regional stability
to women’s rights and participation is playing a vital
role in its success.
The United Kingdom remains committed
to supporting the Government of Iraq and the
implementation of its ambitious reform agenda. In
particular, we welcomed the adoption of the budget in
June — a crucial step in delivering the Government’s
priorities, including on economic reform and
energy diversification.
We share the concerns of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General about the Kurdistan region,
and we urge the Kurdistan Regional Government to
take all necessary steps to ensure that the planned
elections take place on 25 February next year without
further postponement. It is incumbent on all political
parties to exercise unity, to compromise and to engage
in constructive dialogue to ensure an electoral process
that adheres to international standards and upholds the
right of all citizens, including women and minorities, to
participate in the democratic process.
We also welcome Iraq’s commitment to tackling
climate change, including through ending gas
flaring by 2030. Iraq’s exposure to multiple climate
hazards, including floods, droughts and sandstorms,
climate-related epidemics and earthquakes, makes this
an important shared priority. Progress here will bolster
Iraq’s security, and we stand ready to support it.
We welcome the update from the Special
Representative today on missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals as well as missing Kuwaiti
property. Regarding Khor Abdullah, we would like
to wholeheartedly echo the point made by the Special
Representative. We welcomed Prime Minister Al
Sudani’s renewed commitment expressed during
the high-level week to international law and to the
resolutions of the Security Council, and like others
we would particularly like to recall the importance
of resolution 833 (1993). We look forward to seeing
outstanding issues between Iraq and the Government
of Kuwait resolved through dialogue.

S/PV.9432

Finally, following the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) last
month, we are committed to ensuring that UNITAD’s
legacy is preserved and that international efforts to
deliver justice for Da’esh atrocities continue. Noting
Iraq’s recent request, we will work closely with the
Government of Iraq, the United Nations and the
Council to improve evidence-sharing arrangements in
accordance with UNITAD’s terms of reference, as well
as options for the future of UNITAD’s work.
Once again, I would like to conclude by renewing
the United Kingdom’s commitment to the stability and
security of Iraq and to the essential role that the Mission
plays in support.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing on the situation
in Iraq and confirm our unwavering support for the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). We listened carefully to civil society
representative Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi.
We regret to note that Iraq is continuing to face
complex internal political and socioeconomic challenges
against the backdrop of ongoing region-wide instability
and terrorist threats. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the Council of Ministers, headed by
Mohammed Shia’ Al Sudani, to improve the situation
in the country, to ensure stability and security and to
combat international terrorism. Furthermore, we note
the commitment of the Iraqi Government to implement
economic reforms in order to, among other objectives,
improve the quality of State services and build the trust
of the population in the authorities. We hope that the
implementation of that programme will help to find
solutions to issues that are pressing for the Iraqi people,
such as tackling unemployment and providing support
to vulnerable groups.
We consistently and unswervingly support the
Government of Iraq. That was confirmed again during
the visit of Mohammed Shia’ Al Sudani to Moscow,
which is currently under way. During his meeting with
President Putin, a whole range of pressing issues for
the Middle East were discussed, including the recent
escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which
can be overcome only if the deep-rooted interests of

23-2960515/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

10/10/2023

the Palestinian people are addressed and the relevant
Security Council resolutions are implemented.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.

We trust that all Iraqi political forces will continue
to take a responsible approach and seek to settle the
existing disputes solely through dialogue, for the benefit
of all with all ethnic and faith-based communities and
social groups of the country. We are convinced that an
inclusive dialogue is necessary to facilitate the smooth
holding of elections in the Iraqi governorates and
the parliamentary elections to be held in the Kurdish
Autonomous Region.

I join others in thanking Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Dhefaf
Al-Jarahi for sharing her experience and opinions with
Council members on the promotion of women’s rights.
And I welcome the Iraqi delegation to this meeting.

In that context, we commend the ongoing substantive
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil to settle existing
disputes, first of foremost, in the oil and gas sector. We
are convinced that further improvement of relations
between them will benefit economic development and
political stability throughout Iraq.
Despite Baghdad’s achievements in the area of
counter-terrorism, the security situation remains
volatile owing to, among other factors, the increased
activity of terrorist cells. According to the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/700), they
regularly conduct attacks in various governorates in
the country. We continue to believe that this challenge
can be effectively addressed only through the broadest
possible coordination of counter-terrorism efforts while
respecting Iraq’s sovereignty and with agreement with
Baghdad on all actions.
We welcome Baghdad’s efforts aimed at establishing
good neighbourly relations and welcome the expanding
role of the country in regional normalization efforts.
Furthermore, we are convinced that the increase in
Iraq’s foreign policy initiatives and the establishment
of constructive cooperation with partners in the region
will promote peace, stability and security in the Middle
East. We support a swift and lasting normalization
of the situation both within and outside Iraq. In that
regard, we underscore once again that attempts to turn
Iraq’s national territory into an arena for confrontation
and settling scores by third countries are unacceptable.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to once
again express our support for the multifaceted efforts of
UNAMI to improve the public and political life of the
country and the functioning of the State. At the same
time, we consistently oppose any attempts to refocus
UNAMI’s mandate on issues that are not characteristic
of special political missions, such as climate change
and cross-border environmental disputes.
16/20

I also add my voice to those who express their
sentiments and sympathy to the people and the
Government of Iraq for the tragic fire that broke out
on 26 September and claimed more than 100 lives
in Hamdaniya.
Brazil values the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in helping the
Iraqi authorities to achieve their objectives as set out
in Iraq’s governmental programme. As a Chapter VI
Mission, UNAMI’s mandate responds to the request
by the Iraqi Government to support domestic efforts
and processes, in full respect of Iraqi sovereignty
and ownership.
In line with the letter by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Fuad Hussein, addressed to the
Council in May, the latest renewal of UNAMI’s mandate
offers an opportunity for the Mission to prioritize
and streamline the areas in which assistance is most
requested by the Government of Iraq.
Brazil commends the progress achieved by Iraq
on many domestic fronts since last May. That includes
the passing of the federal budget, the scheduling of
provincial and regional elections and the launching
of a national plan to enhance women’s political
participation. We also highlight Iraq’s accession to the
Paris Agreement on climate change in December 2021.
I would like to highlight some points of the
most recent report of the Secretary-General’s on the
implementation of resolution 2682 (2023) (S/2023/700).
The Secretary-General refers to the link between
power shortages in Iraq and the effects of unilateral
coercive measures. Iraq’s impossibility to make
payments for foreign gas does not contribute to the
country’s stability.
The Secretary-General’s report also provides
information on the repercussions in Iraq of deplorable
episodes of Qur’an desecrations in other countries. They
are a reminder of the importance of promoting religious
tolerance to achieve a culture of peace. We welcome
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq’s firm commitment to protecting diplomatic and
consular premises in the country.
Counter-terrorism is another important aspect of
the report. In their legitimate efforts to combat the threat
posed by Da’esh or any other non-State actor, Member
States must cooperate and abide by the prohibition on
the use of force in their international relations, as per
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Brazil
acknowledges the willingness of Iraq to cooperate with
the international community, including neighbouring
countries, in its fight against terrorism.
The facilitation of regional dialogue is part of
UNAMI’s mandate. Brazil welcomes the Mission’s
offer to support negotiations between Iraq and Kuwait
about their maritime border. We hope that the parties
can engage in dialogue in good faith in order to reach
mutually acceptable solutions. The collaboration
between the two countries in other areas, as in the
repatriation of Kuwaiti property and missing nationals,
exemplifies that constructive and forward-looking
diplomatic engagement can settle complex disputes.
Finally, Brazil commends the ongoing efforts
by the Government of Iraq, supported by the United
Nations, to facilitate the return of displaced persons
and repatriate nationals from Al-Hol camp in Syria.
We acknowledge the Special Representative’s role in
assisting Iraqi authorities in those efforts, including the
reintegration of women and children within Iraq. That
is an example of how to curb the threat that detention
camps in the Middle East become breeding grounds for
the radicalization of young generations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Fatlawi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate His Excellency
Ambassador Sérgio França Danese, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, on his assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like also to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Ferit Hoxha, Permanent Representative of Albania,
for presiding over the Council in September. I would
like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
for her briefing, as well as Ms. Dhefaf Al-Jarahi for her
participation in this meeting.

S/PV.9432

I am very grateful to Council members for their
condolences and sympathy regarding the Al-Hamdaniya
fire accident, and I also thank them for their welcoming
words regarding my participation in today’s meeting.
During the year that has passed since its formation,
the Government of the Republic of Iraq continues
to focus on achieving the goals of its ambitious
ministerial reform programme, which it presented in
accordance with the principle of national partnership.
The programme prioritizes issues that affect the lives
of citizens and basic services, including focusing on
projects to repair infrastructure, combat the scourge
of drugs, corruption and oil smuggling networks
and prosecute those involved, and strengthen law
enforcement and support to the judiciary in that regard.
We are also focusing on development and economic
projects through engagement at the regional and
international levels, concluding agreements with major
companies in important countries and concluding
strategic agreements with companies specializing in
natural gas investments and upgrading electricity grids.
The Iraqi Government is cognizant of the
importance of reforming and modernizing the work of
public institutions, especially those providing public
services. My Government has also achieved success on
the diplomatic front by distancing itself from conflict
and adopting the path of diplomatic mediation and
approaches for resolving emerging issues in the region
or affairs pertaining to the Arab and Islamic world, with
a view to making Iraq a force for stability regionally
and internationally.
Allow me to give a brief summary of the most
important developments that have taken place in Iraq
over the past four months. Regarding the relationship
between the federal Government in Baghdad and
the Kurdistan Regional Government, coordination
continues between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government and is aimed at reaching
understandings and agreements on fundamental issues,
including those related to the implementation of the
general budget law, the Kurdistan region’s federal
budget allocations from the federal budget and the
protection of the constitutional rights of the region, in
addition to continuing coordination with the Ministry
of Finance, the Ministry of Oil and the federal Board of
Supreme Audit.
Iraq emphasizes the importance of working
continuously to approve bills submitted to the Council

23-2960517/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

of Representatives, especially the draft law on
transforming the city of Halabja into a governorate, the
draft law on the establishment of a federation council
and the oil and gas law, as well as the cancellation
of the decisions of the dissolved Revolutionary
Command Council.
Regarding the security file, Iraq believes that
fighting terrorism is the collective responsibility of all
countries. Iraq therefore pledges to continue our efforts
to combat terrorism and achieve security and peace. On
World Humanitarian Day, Iraq condemned the terrorist
bombing that targeted the United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad on 19 August 2003, which killed the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Mr. Sérgio Vieira de Mello, and 22 other people
and wounded many other United Nations personnel.
They gave their lives out of their commitment to
continue to help people around the world by upholding
humanitarian values. Iraq also recalls and condemns
the terrorist incident that occurred at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs in Baghdad on the same date in 2009,
which led to the martyrdom of 45 Ministry employees
in addition to the wounding of dozens of others. It is
worth noting that that cowardly bombing was not the
only attack against the Ministry or Iraqi institutions
and cities, as it was preceded and followed by a number
of bombings and assassinations targeting a number of
Ministry employees and innocent citizens.
We take this opportunity to express our deep
gratitude for the efforts of the international coalition
and the sacrifices it is making in partnership with the
Iraqi forces. We express our sincere condolences for the
killing of paratrooper Sergeant Nicolas Mazier in Iraq,
whose unit was providing support to an Iraqi military
unit in counter-terrorism operations. Iraq affirms its full
commitment to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations, which regulates diplomatic relations among
countries, and confirms to the permanent diplomatic
missions that the Iraqi Government is responsible for
the protection, responsibility and safety of diplomatic
personnel in all those missions.
Concerning violations and assaults, Iraq denounces
and categorically rejects all land and air military
operations that violate or threaten the security and
sovereignty of Iraq. Iraq renews its constitutional
commitment not to issue any threats from its territories
towards its neighbours.
As for supporting liberated areas and internally
displaced people, the Government of the Republic of Iraq
18/20

10/10/2023

continues its tireless efforts within the national measures
and programmes established to return the displaced
persons and integrate them into their communities. We
confirm that closing the displacement file is one of our
priorities. From this standpoint, the Iraqi Parliament
voted on article 49 of the General Budget Law for
Iraq, including the establishment of a fund called the
Sinjar and Nineveh Plain Reconstruction Fund, with a
capital of 50 billion Iraqi dinars. The Iraqi Council of
Representatives also approved the proposal to add the Al
Qahtaniyah and Zummar districts to the aforementioned
Fund, especially since the majority of the residents
of those two districts are Yazidi Kurds, and they will
benefit from including their areas, which were damaged
as a result of the war against Da’esh. In that regard,
Iraq calls on the international community to support
the Iraqi institutions concerned with this file, especially
the Ministry of Immigration and Displacement,
with an international effort for the rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes.
Concerning the Iraqi families living in the Al-Hol
camp, the Government of the Republic of Iraq has been
able to transfer 10 batches of Iraqi families coming from
the camp to Iraq thus far, and the total number of families
returning has reached 1,561, amounting to 6,204 people,
including 840 families that have been rehabilitated and
reintegrated into seven governorates, while the number
of families under rehabilitation has reached 553.
Iraq urges countries to evacuate their nationals
from Al-Hol camp in order to dismantle and close it
permanently, as it represents a threat to international
peace and security.
Iraq praises the ministerial meeting of the
international counter-Da’esh coalition, which was held
in Riyadh, in which it announced the accession of Togo,
which became the eighty-sixth member. It also praises the
announcement of the coalition ministers that they would
launch a campaign called the stabilization pledge, with
the aim of collecting $601 million for the areas liberated
from Da’esh and supporting the efforts of the coalition
seeking to promote reconciliation and reintegration to
create conditions conducive to achieving stability.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq stresses
its commitment to follow up and prosecute all those
accused of terrorism in coordination with friendly and
brotherly countries, especially since Iraq has received
more than 3,000 Iraqi terrorists who were formerly
imprisoned in north-eastern Syria. They were transferred
to the competent authorities to be presented to the Iraqi
23-29605

10/10/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

judiciary and tried legally, in order to apply the principle
of non-impunity.
Regarding
government
programmes,
the
Government of the Republic of Iraq launched its plan for
a general restructuring of the transport sector in Iraq,
in particular ports, airports, railways and land transport,
and the exploitation and investment of Iraq’s location as
a crossing point between the Gulf, the Mediterranean,
Asia and Europe, and the activation of all types of transit.
The Development Road project is an extensive transport
network of 1,200 kilometres of interconnected roads
and railways. The project aims to transform Iraq into a
regional transport hub, connecting Europe and the Gulf,
with the participation of 10 regional countries, namely,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Türkiye, Syria, Jordan,
Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and
Iran. The project will contribute to the creation of job
opportunities and will lay the foundation for a sustainable
non-oil-dependent economy. The project will also
promote opportunities for economic diversification, as
well as efforts to combat climate change and strengthen
regional cooperation.
The Iraqi Government has made investment projects
in the gas, petrochemical and electricity sectors a top
priority in order to meet national needs and participate in
the global economy in terms of energy sources, especially
since the Iraqi market is large and very promising.
Iraq is about to sign a contract for the implementation,
construction and purchase of an elevated train project
in Baghdad with a consortium of the French company
Alstom and the Korean company Hyundai. That is one
of the most important projects the Government is trying
to implement to help solve traffic congestion problems in
the capital, Baghdad. Furthermore, the foundation stone
has been laid for a railway connectivity project with Iran,
the Basra-Shalamcheh line, to transport passengers and
visitors between Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
It will also transport travellers and visitors from Central
Asian countries to Iraq.
Major Gulf companies are turning to the Iraqi
market to invest and start projects in agriculture,
manufacturing, tourism, health and infrastructure. Iraq
is also preparing to host the third iteration of the Bagdad
Conference for Cooperation and Partnership late next
month with the participation of brotherly, friendly and
partner countries. The Conference will be the starting
point for major projects for Iraq and the region and will
contribute greatly to strengthening solid ties among
those countries and supporting regional stability and
the desired economic development. Most recently, a

S/PV.9432

tripartite meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Iraq, Egypt
and Jordan was held to discuss means of promoting
cooperation, coordination and joint integration in the
areas of economic cooperation and to consider updates
on the progress made in the implementation of joint
projects among the three countries in various areas,
including civil and economic projects on the JordanianIraqi borders and the electricity interconnectivity project,
phase one of which is close to completion.
Turning to the empowerment of women, the national
strategy for Iraqi women for the period 2023–2030
was launched and will contribute to strengthening
participation in planning and aligning priorities with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals on the empowerment
of women and girls. The strategy includes five main
pillars, namely, participation, political, economic and
social empowerment and the protection of women,
including addressing violence against women and
strengthening the role of women in managing the risks
of climate change. The Committee to Support Women’s
Political Participation in the forthcoming provincial
council elections was formed with the aim of providing
support to women, ensuring their participation in local
elections at the level of all governorates and enabling
them through plans and programmes that contribute to
protecting female candidates from all types of violence
they may be exposed to or perpetrated against them. It
also sets up and provides training and support to women
in the context of their political participation. Women in
Iraq hold the highest positions and are represented in
three ministries of the Government, as well as in other
leadership positions. Today women have exceeded the
quota for women in Parliament, growing from one fourth
to one third of the membership.
Iraqi Law No. 8 of 2021, the Yazidi Female Survivors
Law, was implemented through the establishment of the
Directorate of Female Survivors’ Affairs in Nineveh
governorate. It provides for the implementation of the
provisions of the law, including reparation for damages
and moral and financial compensation for female
survivors, providing them with a decent life, preparing
them with the means to integrate into society and
preventing the recurrence of violations against them. On
7 August, he Supreme Judicial Council approved on the
admissibility of online testimonies from those women.
Turning to the fight against desertification and climate
change response, combating climate change and water
scarcity is one of the Iraqi Government’s top priorities.
The Government is taking many comprehensive national

23-2960519/20

S/PV.9432

The situation concerning Iraq

measures, especially since climate change has caused
damage to more than 7 million Iraqi citizens, in addition
to the displacement of hundreds of thousands of Iraqis due
to the loss of their livelihoods in the areas of agriculture
and fishing. We should also mention the most depressing
aspect, namely, water scarcity and severe drought, which
have affected the marshes and increased desertification
and dust storms.
In addressing climate change, Iraq is seeking to use
more solar energy, restore damaged ecosystems, reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions, invest in emission-reducing
infrastructure and renewable power plants, recycle
mor, fund green companies and start-ups working in
renewable and green energy and agriculture, conserve
water, modernize all irrigation methods, preserve
the country’s biodiversity and reduce carbon dioxide
emissions. Serious efforts are being made to establish the
High Council for Water to find the necessary solutions,
through coordination and cooperation with neighbouring
countries, to ensure a fair and adequate share of Iraq’s
water needs and to conduct negotiations with upstream
countries. The Iraqi Government has taken many
decisions and measures to introduce modern agricultural
and irrigation technologies, adopt good management and
reduce water loss. The Government has launched an
initiative to plant 5 million palm trees in various Iraqi
governorates to address the decline in agriculture land
relative to the growth of the population. Iraq calls on
countries that are parties to international environmental
agreements to strengthen international cooperation in
the joint management of transboundary river basins and
to preserve the rights of riparian countries. Upstream
countries’ sole control over water resources increases the
vulnerability of countries to the effects of climate change
and damage. Iraq will actively participate in the twentyeighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which will
be held next month in the United Arab Emirates. The
Conference is intended to discuss and adopt sustainable
measures and solutions to address the negative effects of
climate change.
As for relations with the brotherly State of Kuwait,
Iraq is governed by a standing Constitution based on
the principle of separation of powers, which rejects
the methods used by the former regime in dealing with
neighbouring countries. That has cost Iraq so much. Iraq
also stresses the need for a peaceful resolution of all
problems and the renunciation of violence in relations
with neighbouring and other countries. We stress the
need to use negotiation and dialogue as a means of

20/20

10/10/2023

peaceful resolution. Iraq respects the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the sisterly State of Kuwait and
is committed to all bilateral agreements with States and
Security Council resolutions. That includes resolution
833 (1993), which was adopted on 27 May 1993 and
approved and ratified by Iraq on 10 November 1994.
Iraq and Kuwait continue to cooperate in order to
overcome all obstacles to joint work. That includes the
holding of a joint Iraqi-Kuwaiti committee to discuss the
memorandum of understanding on joint oil fields between
the two countries, as well as mechanisms for investment in
those fields, in favour of the two neighbouring countries,
in particular after the extension of the memorandum of
understanding signed between the two countries. Official
visits between our two countries are ongoing at the
highest levels, and discussions are taking place on many
topics of common interest, including international issues
of mutual interest, the development of relations in various
aspects, the facilitation of visits, the strengthening of
trade relations, the demarcation of borders and drug
control through various technical committees.
Iraq and Kuwait continue to work together to resolve
the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
in cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, which chairs the relevant Tripartite
Commission. A missing Kuwaiti national was recently
identified using genetic fingerprint analysis. The Iraqi
Ministry of the Interior and Ministry of Defence continue
to extend a humanitarian appeal to anyone who may have
potentially helpful information on possible sites where
the remains of Kuwaiti or Iraqi nationals who went
missing during or in the aftermath of the second Gulf
War may be buried. They also appeal to anyone who may
have other information on locations of missing property,
including the Kuwaiti national archives, with a request
to present the relevant information as soon as possible
and to contact the two Iraqi Ministries or their agencies.
A monetary reward has been allocated for payment to
anyone who provides useful information leading to a
positive outcome.
In conclusion, I thank Secretary-General Guterres
for the unwavering stance of the United Nations in
supporting Iraq and respecting its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I also note that the Government of
the Republic of Iraq is grateful for the work of UNAMI
and the continuing efforts of other United Nations entities
and international organizations operating in Iraq.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-29605
