S/2017/511

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 15 June 2017 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to Ambassador Elbio Rosselli’s letter of 2 May 2017, I have the
honour to confirm that the members of the Security Council have agreed to send a
mission to Haiti from 22 to 24 June 2017. They have also agreed on the terms of
reference of the mission (see annex).
I have the honour to lead this mission in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to the United Nations and as
President of the Security Council for the month of June 2017.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia (Plurinational State of))
Ambassador Wu Haitao (China)
Mr. Ihab Moustafa Awad Moustafa (Egypt)
Ambassador Mahlet Hailu Guadey (Ethiopia)
Ms. Anne Gueguen (France)
Ambassador Inigo Lambertini (Italy)
Ambassador Yasuhisa Kawamura (Japan)
Ambassador Kairat Umarov (Kazakhstan)
Mr. Evgeny T. Zagaynov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Gorgui Ciss (Senegal)
Mr. Joakim Vaverka (Sweden)
Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Stephen Hickey (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ms. Amy Noel Tachco (United States of America)
Mr. José Luis Rivas (Uruguay)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz
President of the Security Council

17-09978 (E)

190617

*1709978*

S/2017/511

Annex to the letter dated 15 June 2017 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Terms of reference of the Security Council Mission to Haiti
Security Council Mission to Haiti, led by the Plurinational State of Bolivia
during its chairmanship of the Council
1.
The Security Council will carry out its Mission to Haiti in the context of its
resolution 2350 (2017).
2.

The objectives of the mission are as follows:

(a) Reaffirm the support of the Security Council to the Government and
people of Haiti to strengthen their country and institutions, in order to contribute to
the stability and development of Haiti;
(b) Conduct a review of the implementation of resolution 2350 (2017),
focusing on the successful conclusion and closure of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the smooth transition between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), including the orderly and progressive drawdown of the military
component;
(c) Identify on the ground the necessary requirements for the successful
implementation of the mandate of MINUJUSTH.
3.
Upon returning to New York, the Mission intends to orally report back to the
Council on the closure of MINUSTAH and the transition towards MINUJUSTH.
4.
The mission will seek to accomplish these objectives by holding meetings with
the following key stakeholders:
• President of Haiti
• Prime Minister of Haiti
• Main government officials of Haiti
• Superior Council of the National Police
• Conseil supérieur du pouvoir judiciaire
• Ombudsman
• Bureau of the National Assembly (Presidents of the Senate and Deputies)
• United Nations country team in Haiti
• Main authorities of MINUSTAH
• Troop-contributing countries/police-contributing countries
• Other actors (private sector): civil society, entrepreneurial sector, core group
(diplomatic corps)

2/2

17-09978
