A/63/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

68

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 11 December 2008, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tommo
Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 42?
It was so decided.

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 42 (continued)

Agenda item 65 (continued)

Sport for peace and development

Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/466)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.51)

Draft resolution A/63/L.48

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.51, entitled
“Sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace”.
Since the draft resolution was submitted, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary,
Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Myanmar,
the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine and Uruguay.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.51?
Draft resolution A/63/L.51
(resolution 63/135).

was

adopted

(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolutions A/63/L.47, A/63/L.49 and
A/63/L.53
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolution A/63/L.45
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution A/63/L.50
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on this agenda item and
its sub-items at its 43rd to 45th meetings, on 10 and
11 November. Members will also recall that the
Assembly adopted a resolution under sub-item (b) at
the 45th meeting.
I call on the representative of Indonesia to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.47.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-64421 (E)

*0864421*

A/63/PV.68

Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the tsunami-affected countries,
draft resolution A/63/L.47, entitled “Strengthening
emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
prevention in the aftermath of the Indian Ocean
tsunami disaster”.
The Indian Ocean tsunami on 26 December 2004
is still considered one of the unprecedented natural
disasters in recorded history. The casualties of this
natural disaster reached historical and enormous
proportions; the lives of more than 260,000 people
were claimed.
Beyond the initial emergency relief, affected
countries have the arduous task of reconstructing and
rehabilitating the damaged areas. We attach great
importance to the role of the international community
and the United Nations in supporting affected countries
in the emergency relief phase and in the process of
transition from relief to development.
While continuing the post-tsunami disaster
recovery, the affected countries have agreed that this
draft resolution will be the last. In this regard, on
behalf of the tsunami-affected countries, I wish to
express our deepest gratitude for the General
Assembly’s continued support and its endorsement of
past draft resolutions.
The Indian Ocean tsunami was a hard reminder
that disasters can happen at any time. Years of
development could easily be wiped out in a matter of
minutes. This tragic event called attention to the
pressing need to reduce risk and improve the
management of natural hazards. For this reason, the
efforts being made are not simply to restore
communities to their pre-tsunami vulnerability, but
instead to place them in a better position to avert and
respond effectively to tsunamis.
For the tsunami-affected countries, the priority is
to rebuild and rehabilitate the damaged areas so that
they are better than before. We therefore urge
continued strengthening of partnerships and continued
support for the medium- and long-term rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs of the affected countries.
Within the last four years, with the support of the
international community, progress has become visible
in the tsunami-affected countries. Their Governments
are working hard to prevent the same devastation in a
possible future tsunami. Disaster management

2

institutions have been developed or strengthened, so
that they can enhance their rapid response to disaster.
In the channelling and utilization of resources,
measures to ensure accountability and financial
transparency have also been taken. Despite the
lingering trauma, towns and communities, individuals
and families are slowly returning to their normal way
of life.
In this final draft resolution on the Indian Ocean
tsunami, the key actions emphasized are: first,
enhancing prevention, risk reduction and humanitarian
assistance measures through the sharing of lessons
learned by the tsunami-affected countries and other
relevant stakeholders with other disaster-affected and
disaster-prone countries; secondly, improving legal and
institutional frameworks of government and regional
organizations for disaster management; thirdly,
functionalizing tsunami early warning systems and
focal points capable of receiving and disseminating
tsunami advisories around the clock; fourthly, having
the continued support of the international community,
including the United Nations system, for the tsunamiaffected countries as their efforts are mainstreamed
into long-term development assistance projects and
programmes.
On behalf of the tsunami-affected countries, I
express our deepest and sincere appreciation to
Member States that have shown interest in and
supported this final draft resolution. We truly hope that
it can be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.45.
Mrs. Osode (Liberia): On behalf of the sponsors,
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.45, entitled “Humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction of Liberia”. The draft is similar to
resolution 61/218, adopted by consensus, and other
consensus resolutions on the subject adopted by the
General Assembly since 1990, updated to take into
consideration new developments.
Draft resolutions on this subject have always
signified an important act of solidarity by the
Assembly with the people of Liberia in their
determination to overcome conflict and dictatorship
and in their hope to build a new democratic and
prosperous society.

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

In the sixth preambular paragraph, after the
words “Taking note,” we have added the words “while
conscious of further challenges,”.
Moreover, the preambular part has three new
paragraphs: the fifth, seventh and ninth. We considered
it appropriate to include the fifth preambular
paragraph, on national reconciliation, which is one of
the focus areas for peacebuilding and a precondition
for sustainable peace after conflict. In Liberia,
legislation establishing the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission was passed in 2005. Its hearings, which
included testimony from very high-level officials,
started in January this year and will be concluded this
month.
By the seventh preambular paragraph, the
Assembly would strongly condemn all acts of genderbased violence, including sexual violence committed
against civilians, in particular women and children, and
would underline the need to implement the
Government
of
Liberia/United
Nations
joint
programme to prevent and respond to sexual and
gender-based violence (2008-2012). The joint
programme is a tool for intervening in the fundamental
issues of victims’ lives.
The ninth preambular paragraph reflects the
reality of the situation in Liberia today, which is
generally stable but fragile.
Turning to the operative part, there is a minor
editorial change to paragraph 3: after “Renews” the
words “its invitation” should also be italicized.
Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 are all new, as is subparagraph
(b) of paragraph 9.
The legacy of rape and other forms of sexual
violence that were so pervasive during the conflict
years continues to be felt today, with rape remaining
the most frequently committed serious crime in postconflict Liberia. Against this backdrop, a nationwide
campaign against rape has been established, and the
Government
of
Liberia/United
Nations
joint
programme to prevent and respond to sexual and
gender-based violence, signed in June this year, will be
implemented over the four-year period 2008–2012 as
indicated in paragraph 4.
During the past year, Liberia has made steady
progress in meeting its reconstruction and reform
objectives. In March, the Government’s poverty
reduction strategy was finalized, and it was strongly

08-64421

endorsed at the Liberia Poverty Reduction Forum, held
in Berlin in June, as indicated in new paragraph 5.
By new paragraph 6 the Assembly would strongly
encourage
“the international community to translate the
tremendous goodwill expressed at the ... Forum
into tangible resources and support for the
Government’s national reconstruction agenda,
including its poverty reduction strategy and
actions for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals”.
The task of national reconstruction is principally
the responsibility of the people of Liberia, who possess
the political will and potential to make possible this
vision.
The Government and the people of Liberia are
deeply grateful to the many organizations, agencies and
partners within the United Nations system that have
responded with manifest goodwill since 1990 to the
need for humanitarian assistance for Liberia. It is
hoped that in two years the Assembly will be able to
consider moving more confidently from humanitarian
assistance to concrete commitments to the development
of Liberia.
In view of this, by paragraph 9 (b) the Assembly
would request the Secretary-General
“to present to the General Assembly, at its sixtyfifth session, the final and comprehensive report
on implementation of humanitarian assistance
and reconstruction of Liberia under the item
‘Strengthening
of
the
coordination
of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic
assistance’, taking into account the peacebuilding
activities in this country financed through the
Peacebuilding Fund”.
I would like to express my appreciation to all
participants in the Informal Working Group on the
Humanitarian Assistance and Reconstruction of
Liberia. I would also like to thank the European Union
for its contributions, which enriched the text, and the
Russian Federation for its flexibility and amendments
which improved the draft.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief

3

A/63/PV.68

Coordinator, for improving the coordination of the
United Nations humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance in areas around the globe.
In particular, I wish to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/63/295), dated 15 August 2008.
The draft resolution has many supporters, but I
regret that owing to a colleague’s sickness it was not
possible to obtain the names of all of them. We have a
number of sponsors which have given their names to
the Secretariat, and I express my appreciation to them.
I submit draft resolution A/63/L.45 for adoption
by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
call on the representative of France to introduce draft
resolutions A/63/L.48 and A/63/L.50.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): It is my
pleasure, on behalf of the European Union, to
introduce draft resolutions A/63/L.48, entitled “Safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel”, and A/63/L.50, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”. Turkey, Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and
Montenegro and Serbia align themselves with this
statement.
While humanitarian workers and United Nations
personnel provide vital assistance to populations in
distress throughout the world, their own security keeps
worsening. The rise in the number of deliberate attacks
against them is very worrying and calls for a firm
reaction on our part. Responding to that call is the
purpose of draft resolution A/63/L.48. I am grateful to
all delegations that took an active part in the
negotiations on the draft for their cooperation, thanks
to which we have a text representing substantial
progress.
The draft resolution stresses three main
imperatives. The first is full respect of their
international obligations by all. All States must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
and all parties involved in armed conflict must ensure
the security and protection of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and associated personnel.
Similarly, all States and parties must respect the
principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and
independence of humanitarian action, and fully respect

4

their obligations relating to distinctive elements of the
Geneva Conventions.
Under the draft resolution the Assembly would
emphasize that the security of humanitarian personnel
is a fundamental condition for their safe and
unhindered access to populations in need, and require
that the relevant actors ensure that their public
statements do not compromise the security of
humanitarian personnel. It would also urge States to
end impunity for acts of violence against humanitarian
and United Nations personnel.
The second imperative is more effective
coordination between all actors. The Assembly would
stress the need to strengthen coordination between the
United Nations and host Governments to facilitate the
deployment and use of essential safety and security
equipment, and to plan emergency operations,
exchange information and assess the risks. For their
part, host States must as soon as possible facilitate the
use of communications equipment by United Nations
personnel by limiting and expeditiously lifting the
restrictions placed on them.
The final imperative is strengthening of the
normative framework for protecting United Nations
personnel and associated personnel. By the draft
resolution the Assembly would call on Member States
to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and recommend that the
Secretary-General continue to seek the inclusion of key
provisions of the Convention in host country
agreements and other related agreements negotiated
between the United Nations and the countries
concerned.
The Assembly would also reaffirm the need to
ensure appropriate protection for locally recruited
personnel, who account for the majority of victims and
cases of arbitrary detention and harassment, and call
for the provision by the United Nations of an adequate
level of security for that category of personnel.
We hope that draft resolution A/63/L.48 will
contribute to improving the security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel. My delegation and the 80 co-sponsors also
hope that it can be adopted by consensus.
I now turn to draft resolution A/63/L.50, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”. Turkey, Croatia

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia, as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
providing assistance to the Palestinian people. The
sustained support from international community
donors, working in collaboration with the parties, is
essential in order to improve Palestinian economic and
social infrastructures and meet the humanitarian needs
of the Palestinian people.
The International Donors Conference for the
Palestinian State, which was held in Paris on
17 December 2007, was an important milestone in the
political process set in motion in Annapolis, as it gave
the international community a unique opportunity to
support the economic and financial development of a
future viable Palestinian State, to which the
international community has pledged to donate more
than $7.7 billion over three years. The aid mobilized at
the Paris Conference is a sign of the confidence that
the international community places in the reforms
undertaken by the Palestinian Authority.
The European Union would like to underscore the
important role played by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, which met in London on 2 May, in
addition to its meeting alongside the General Assembly
on 22 September. The Committee should allow careful
follow-up to the outcome of the Paris Conference to be
carried out in order to ensure that the promises made in
Paris translate into real financial assistance. The
European Union also commends the Conference in
Support of Palestinian Civil Security and the Rule of
Law, which was held in Berlin on 24 June 2008.
For its part, the European Union has continually
increased its assistance. The total amount of European
Union aid to the Palestinian people, including
humanitarian and non-humanitarian assistance, as well
as contributions to the European Commission’s
specialized mechanism, will this year exceed 540
million euros, meaning that once again the European
Union and its member States are the Palestinian
Authority’s biggest donor.
The European Union remains determined to lend
its support to the ongoing negotiations between parties
which began in Annapolis, and is ready to work closely
with the Palestinian Authority, the Quartet and regional
partners to contribute to the recovery of the Palestinian

08-64421

economy as well as to the well-being, safety and
security of all people in the region. To this end, last
year, the European Union adopted an action strategy in
order to adapt and strengthen its activities in areas such
as security, law and order, strengthening of institutions,
good governance, contributions to civil society and
support for the economy. It has a Special
Representative who is primarily responsible for
coordinating these efforts on the ground, in partnership
with the European Commission.
We would also like to highlight the decisive role
played by the Quartet Special Representative, Mr. Tony
Blair, commend the work which he has accomplished,
and encourage him to continue his efforts.
The European Union, however, remains deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people, in particular in the Gaza Strip, and
urges that barriers be removed so that there is free
access to goods and basic services, in particular of a
humanitarian nature, but also to those which can help
facilitate a genuine economic recovery.
The situation in the West Bank also gives cause
for concern, as the numerous checkpoints and the route
of the security fence are severely hindering efforts to
maintain a viable economy, especially with regard to
agriculture.
Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to
the delegations that requested to be put on the list of
sponsors of draft resolution A/63/L.50. The European
Union and the other sponsors hope that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus.
We would also like to thank the Palestinian and
Israeli delegations for their cooperation during these
negotiations.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.49.
Mr. Örnéus (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, a draft resolution
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations,
contained in document A/63/L.49.
We would like to thank all delegations for the
good and constructive spirit of cooperation and
partnership in which the consultations were held. We
are pleased that consensus for this important draft

5

A/63/PV.68

resolution could once again be reached. This draft
resolution has confirmed the established consensus on
the humanitarian agenda, and strengthened our shared
possibilities to face disasters of different kinds.
The draft resolution reaffirms the unique and
leading role that the United Nations has to play in
humanitarian emergencies. Since its origin, at the
forty-sixth session in 1992, national and international
emergency response capacity has been strengthened
considerably. The United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the other
mechanisms for inter-agency coordination have
enhanced coordination in assistance, and the
operational agencies of the United Nations have
improved rapid and effective response in humanitarian
relief.
At the same time, significant challenges remain.
As the demands grow, the humanitarian system needs
to further improve its capacity and have adequate and
timely resources to respond. It is important to further
enhance the respect for humanitarian principles and to
better understand the role of humanitarian assistance in
support of Governments and their populations. As in
previous years, the draft resolution addresses issues
related to efforts to strengthen international
humanitarian response, as well as issues of principles
for humanitarian protection and assistance.
The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
has been a true success. The independent review of the
CERF, considered in this draft resolution, shows that
the Fund has become a valuable tool in ensuring a
more timely and predictable response to humanitarian
emergencies. The draft resolution stresses the
importance of addressing the findings and
recommendations in the report in order to further
improve the Fund to ensure that the resources are used
in the most efficient, effective and transparent manner
possible.
During the high-level conference on CERF last
week, the Fund’s already wide donor base was
expanded to 100 donor countries, which together
pledged a total of approximately $380 million for
humanitarian assistance through CERF in 2009. This
year’s draft resolution calls upon all Member States to
consider increasing their contributions to CERF.
By the draft resolution the Assembly would
express deep concern about the increasing challenges
of the consequences of natural disasters, including the

6

impact of climate change, and encourage the
international community to provide adequate resources
for disaster risk reduction.
The Assembly would also express deep concern
about the impact of the current global food crisis and
its humanitarian challenges.
It would note with grave concern that genderbased violence, including sexual violence, continues to
be deliberately directed against civilian populations in
many emergency situations, and urge all Member
States to address gender-based violence in
humanitarian emergencies.
The Assembly would condemn the increasing
number of deliberate violent attacks against
humanitarian personnel and facilities in many
emergency situations, and highlight their negative
implications for the provision of humanitarian
assistance to populations in need. In this context, we
would decide to designate 19 August as World
Humanitarian Day, in order to increase public
awareness about humanitarian assistance worldwide as
well as to honour all humanitarian and United Nations
and associated personnel who have worked in the
promotion of the humanitarian cause and those who
have lost their lives in the cause of duty.
I emphasize that by the draft the Assembly would
once again reaffirm the principles of neutrality,
humanity, impartiality and independence for the
provision of humanitarian assistance. It would also call
upon Governments and parties in complex
humanitarian emergencies to cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies and
organizations to ensure safe and unhindered access to
affected populations.
My delegation and the more than 70 other
sponsors hope that the draft resolution will once again
be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda to introduce
draft resolution A/63/L.53.
Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to address the Assembly on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.53, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”. I am further honoured to
inform the Assembly that Mexico and the Russian

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

Federation have joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
I should like to make an oral revision to
paragraph 28, which will now read:
“Requests the Secretary-General to continue
to improve the international response to natural
disasters, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, and to
include in his report, within existing resources, an
analysis of the possible existing gaps in the
assistance provided in the period between
emergency relief and development, taking into
account information provided by Member States
and relevant United Nations entities, with a view
to formulate recommendations on how to address
any problems identified in a systematic manner
and to ensure sustainable solutions, particularly
in rehabilitation and reconstruction”.
Efforts to achieve economic growth and
sustainable development and to realize the
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals, can be adversely
affected by natural disasters. A single natural disaster
can result in massive loss of life, livelihood and
property, and set back development by several decades.
While there is no substitute for effective national
efforts to minimize the impact of natural disasters, a
national response alone can sometimes be inadequate.
The draft resolution emphasizes that States must
cooperate to find collective and cooperative solutions
to the challenges that disasters present and to promote
a more responsive, prompt, fair and needs-based
humanitarian assistance system. The relevance of this
cooperation has multiplied with the increase in the
number and scale of natural disasters and their impact
in recent years.
The United Nations system and the international
community have a unique role to play in assisting
developing countries to enhance their existing
humanitarian capacities, knowledge and institutions,
including by inter alia, promoting access to and
transfer of new technology, funding and expertise to
developing countries.
Such assistance will help developing countries to
strengthen preparedness, including through the
development and maintenance of early warning
systems; to respond rapidly to natural disasters; to

08-64421

mitigate their impact; to address the long-term
challenges of the post-recovery period; to accelerate
relief and rehabilitation; and to reduce the risks
associated with future natural disasters.
We believe that the transition from relief to
development is an important juncture to transform
disasters
into
opportunities
for
sustainable
development. In this regard, by the draft resolution the
Assembly would request that the Secretary-General
continue to improve the international response to
natural disasters, with a view to identifying possible
gaps in the assistance provided in the period between
emergency relief and development, as well as outline
recommendations that address any challenges.
In recognition of the practical concerns
expressed, we agreed not to insist on a separate
comprehensive study detailing that information, which
will undoubtedly assist developing countries to
determine best practices and where improvements need
to be made. Instead, we agreed to the reasonable
suggestion of having those issues incorporated into
next year’s report of the Secretary-General on this
item.
The sponsors of draft resolution A/63/L.53 are
convinced of the need for continuing international
engagement in the post-disaster period, for restoring
livelihoods, building resilience and reducing
vulnerability. We believe that the draft resolution
reflects this common understanding among all our
partners in this regard.
The Group of 77 and China would like to express
our deep appreciation to Mr. Anupam Ray of India for
accepting the enormous challenge of coordinating
negotiations on the draft resolution on behalf of the
Group. We also thank all delegations that have lent
their support and contributed to the outcome of the
final text. As in years past, we look forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: I should like to consult
the Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately
to consider draft resolution A/63/L.53. In this
connection, since the draft resolution was circulated
only this morning, it will be necessary to waive the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General

7

A/63/PV.68

Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/63/L.45, A/63/L.47,
A/63/L.48, A/63/L.49, A/63/L.50 and A/63/L.53.
Before giving the floor to those who wish to
speak in explanation of vote or position before action
is taken on the draft resolutions, I remind delegations
that explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil): My delegation wishes to
thank those delegations that contributed to the drafting
of draft resolution A/63/L.49, entitled “Strengthening
of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations”. I should also like to
take this opportunity to highlight one of its main
accomplishments.
Today, Member States are deciding to establish
19 August as World Humanitarian Day. The date
19 August 2003 marks the sad event when 22 people
were killed in an unprecedented deliberate attack
against the headquarters of a United Nations assistance
mission in the field. Among those who lost their lives
in the attack was the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, a symbol of
commitment and dedication to the humanitarian cause
and the ideals represented by this Organization.
Brazil, together with Japan and Switzerland,
proposed the establishment of World Humanitarian
Day in order to pay tribute to all humanitarian workers
and United Nations and associated personnel who have
worked in the promotion of the humanitarian cause, in
particular those who lost their lives doing so.
Observance of World Humanitarian Day should
contribute to raising awareness of the importance of
humanitarian activities worldwide and therefore have a
positive impact on the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel.
We are encouraged to think that by
commemorating the day we will pass on to future
generations the importance of achieving and preserving

8

such high goals of the United Nations, to ensure that
all can live in peace, security and dignity. We
acknowledge the dedication of people who, in choosing
to work for the United Nations, believe that it is
possible to make a difference. We pledge to continue to
work for the safety and security of those people, and
for an Organization that is fully committed to fulfilling
its lofty ideals.
Mr. Mercado (United States of America): First,
we thank the delegation of India for its leadership in
guiding the informal negotiations for draft resolution
A/63/L.53,
on
international
cooperation
on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development, in a positive and
constructive manner.
However, the United States is deeply
disappointed by the introduction at this late date of
revised language after delegations had reached
agreement on the text, based on open and informal
negotiations.
As one of the largest contributors to international
disaster assistance, we appreciate the importance of the
General Assembly’s humanitarian resolutions in
addressing issues of urgency and relevance to
communities around the world that have been
negatively impacted by natural or manmade disasters.
In this light, the United States believes in the need to
agree to the humanitarian draft resolutions by
consensus.
A healthy process requires openness and
transparency, which have been lacking in the final
moments of negotiations on this draft resolution.
However, in the interests of reaching consensus, we
will not oppose its adoption, although we shall not be
able to sponsor it, as we had planned, due to
shortcomings in the final phases of the process.
The United States hopes that next year the
process will be more open, inclusive and transparent,
leading to a successful consensual outcome.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union in
explanation of its position on draft resolution
A/63/L.53.
First, I strongly stress that the European Union
attaches the greatest importance to humanitarian
assistance in the event of natural disasters. It thanks
India for conducting the negotiations on the draft, but

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

regrets the introduction of a last-minute amendment
when the text was finalized. It recalls the major
concessions that Member States made on certain
subjects during the negotiations, and regrets that some
delegations, having accepted consensus, went back on
their position. The text, therefore, does not match that
agreed during the consultations.
For that reason, the member States of the
European Union will not sponsor the draft resolution.
In spite of those observations of principle, the
European Union will join the consensus for the
adoption of the draft resolution. It hopes to continue
working constructively and transparently on such a
draft resolution with all other delegations during the
sixty-fourth session.
Ms. Grau (Switzerland): Switzerland would like
to explain its position on draft resolution A/63/L.53.
Switzerland is disappointed with the way in
which the latest changes have been introduced into the
draft resolution. It is an important achievement that the
General Assembly is able to adopt humanitarian draft
resolutions by consensus, a consensus that is very dear
to my delegation. But the consensus approach can work
only if negotiations are undertaken in a transparent and
inclusive manner, with a clear and shared
understanding of procedures and deadlines.
Regrettably, that has not been the case with this
draft resolution. The way in which the latest change to
the draft has been made has not only put delegations
that opposed the language throughout the negotiations
in a difficult position, but also is not consistent with
the spirit of rule 78 of the Rules of Procedure, and it
leaves the Secretariat with almost no time to analyse
whether the draft resolution triggers a statement of
programme budget implications.
It is for the sake of consensus only that
Switzerland does not oppose adoption of the draft
resolution.
Ms. Sunderland (Canada): Canada strongly
supports efforts to enhance the coordination of
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
including by addressing the transition from the
emergency relief period through reconstruction and
rehabilitation stages to the development phase.
Canada participated constructively throughout
negotiations on the text of draft resolution A/63/L.53.

08-64421

However, we are disappointed that language that had
been agreed in principle last week, after lengthy
discussions and compromises by all sides, has been
reopened at a late stage in the negotiations.
Limited flexibility has been shown to consider
taking on board the concerns and drafting suggestions
clearly expressed by Canada and other delegations. We
remain concerned that the study proposed in paragraph
28 could place an undue burden on the Secretariat,
especially unfortunate given that numerous similar
studies are already available for Member States on the
assistance provided in the period from relief to
development.
Despite those concerns, Canada fully supports
efforts led by the United Nations to strengthen the
coordination of humanitarian assistance, including in
the period from relief to development, and therefore
will join consensus on the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions A/63/L.45,
A/63/L.47 to A/63/L.50, as well as A/63/L.53.
We turn first to draft resolution A/63/L.45,
entitled “Humanitarian assistance and reconstruction of
Liberia”. Since the submission of the draft resolution,
the following countries have become sponsors: Brazil,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Egypt, Greece,
Guatemala, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Lesotho, Lithuania,
Morocco, Slovenia and Spain.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.45
(resolution 63/136).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.47 is entitled “Strengthening emergency relief,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention in the
aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster”.
Since the submission of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Brazil, Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, Congo,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy,

9

A/63/PV.68

Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen and
Zambia.

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.53, as orally revised, is entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”. Since
the submission of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Japan, Mexico and
the Russian Federation.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution?

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution, as orally revised?

Draft resolution A/63/L.47
(resolution 63/137).

was

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.50
(resolution 63/140).

was

adopted

adopted

Draft resolution A/63/L.53, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 63/141).

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.48 is entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”. Since the submission of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Botswana, Colombia, Gabon, Georgia,
Greece, Kenya, Saint Lucia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Uruguay.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position after the adoption of the draft resolutions, I
remind delegations that such statements are limited to
10 minutes, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.48
(resolution 63/138).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.49 is entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”. Since the submission of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Angola, Armenia, Cambodia, the Republic of
Moldova, Mozambique, Pakistan, Thailand and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.49
(resolution 63/139).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.50 is entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”. Since the submission of the draft resolution,
the following countries have become sponsors:
Belarus, Iceland, Namibia and the United States of
America.

10

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I take the floor to explain
Pakistan’s position on draft resolution A/63/L.48,
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
The subject of the draft resolution is important to
all of us, and we have therefore joined the consensus.
The Government of Pakistan has been taking all
necessary steps to ensure the safety, security and
protection of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel working across Pakistan, and remains
determined to take all necessary preventive steps to
ensure their safety, security and protection.
The Government of Pakistan allotted an
adequately sized piece of land to the United Nations in
Islamabad in the highly secure diplomatic enclave
eight years ago. In our discussions with the concerned
quarters we have been emphasizing the need for
consolidation of different United Nations offices,
currently scattered all over Islamabad, in one secure
location. We have been given to understand that the
United Nations inter-agency task force on common
premises has yet to allocate resources for this purpose.
It goes without saying that security considerations
should not be made secondary to procedural and
financial considerations.

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

The adoption of the draft resolution emphasizes
the need for a proactive role both by Governments and
the United Nations itself in ensuring the safety,
security and protection of humanitarian and United
Nations personnel. We would like to place on record
that the Government of Pakistan is taking all possible
measures in this regard, and expects the concerned
agencies of the United Nations to expedite the matter.

We regret, however, that a few delegations
objected to our proposals. Although those delegations
eventually agreed to noting the Brahimi panel and its
report, they refused to include any reference to the
Zacklin panel. They argued that noting the Zacklin
panel amounted to prejudging the panel’s findings and
those implicated, and would be tantamount to
interfering with the ongoing investigations.

Mr. Sim (Singapore): I am taking the floor to
explain my delegation’s position on the issue of
accountability, as reflected in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 19 of draft
resolution A/63/L.48, entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.

We disagree with the arguments. Our intention
was never to pronounce on the specifics of the panels’
reports per se, but merely to note the fact of their
existence. That was precisely to ensure due diligence
by the Secretary-General in taking up the panels’
recommendations, including the conduct of follow-on
investigations, as necessary, and the right of those
implicated to the full legal process.

Singapore places great importance on ensuring
the safety and security of all United Nations personnel
in the field. We therefore take very seriously the report
of the Independent Panel on Safety and Security of
United Nations Personnel and Premises Worldwide.
This independent body, also called the Brahimi panel,
was established to investigate last December’s attack
on the United Nations premises in Algiers. Among
others, Brahimi saw the need for a separate and
independent audit and accountability procedure to
review the responsibilities of key individuals and
offices associated with the incident. That led to the
establishment by the Secretary-General of a separate
Independent Panel on Accountability, or what has come
to be widely known as the Zacklin panel.
In October, Zacklin submitted a full report to the
Secretary-General and released an executive summary
to the public. Although not the full report, the
executive summary was sufficient to cause grave
concern to a number of delegations, including
Singapore. Among other matters, it pointed to a
dysfunctional security management system, a lack of
supervision and training, and lapses in judgement and
performance.
The mandates of Brahimi and Zacklin have a
direct bearing on the draft resolution that the Assembly
has just adopted. To underscore the importance which
Member States attach to the two panels, and to ensure
due process by the Secretary-General in following up
on their findings, my delegation had proposed specific
references to the two panels in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 19. Our proposals
were supported by many delegations.

08-64421

Given the gravity of the incident and the publicity
surrounding the panels’ establishment, we strongly felt
that it would be remiss of the General Assembly not to
mention the panels in its resolution. Worse, the
omission might even cast aspersions on the panels and
send the wrong signal to the Secretary-General that we
fault the panels’ findings. We certainly hope that that
was not the intention of the delegations which objected
to the reference to the Zacklin panel.
While my delegation eventually agreed to a
generic reference to “accountability” in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 19 instead of a
specific reference to the Independent Panel on
Accountability, we continue to associate all reference
to “accountability” in the two paragraphs with the
Zacklin panel. We expect the Secretary-General, as
chief administrative officer of this Organization, to
follow up, as necessary, on both the Brahimi and
Zacklin panels’ reports, and, for the sake of
transparency and accountability, to update Member
States, through the relevant Main Committee of the
General Assembly, on the actions taken.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its
position on draft resolutions A/63/L.48 and A/63/L.49.
The General Assembly has just adopted draft
resolution A/63/L.48, entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”. Our delegation joined the
consensus on the important concepts agreed in the
framework of strengthening the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance by the United

11

A/63/PV.68

Nations, because we believe that ensuring the safety
and security of all humanitarian assistance personnel
guarantees the continuity and successful delivery of
that noble assistance.
Our delegation would like in this respect to
explain its understanding of operative paragraph 11,
which states that “territories subject to their
jurisdiction” means, among other things, occupied
territories, so that the paragraph can be read by us as
meaning that the General Assembly “Calls upon all
States to comply fully with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including as provided
by the Fourth Geneva Convention, in order to respect
and protect all humanitarian assistance personnel in
occupied territories”.
Draft resolution A/63/L.49 includes human goals
that are extraordinary and appropriate measures
allowing us to meet the very serious and surprising
challenges that people throughout the world are
encountering because of natural disasters and complex
emergency situations that have a very serious
humanitarian impact.
Despite the positive issues dealt with in the draft
resolution, a vital question for people throughout the
world affected by such difficult challenges is how to
allow access for humanitarian assistance. There was
not full agreement on the issue because of the rejection
by some Western countries of the request by a large
number of Arab States that people suffering foreign
occupation be given access to humanitarian assistance.
The objective behind the request was to address the
humanitarian crisis caused by the inhuman Israeli
blockade of the Palestinian people and Israel’s
collective punishment policy against the unarmed
Palestinian people.
Our delegation simply requested respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter, by asking the
Organization to assume its responsibilities and put an
end to Israel’s inhuman and immoral activities, which
are a grave violation of the principles of international
law. Prohibiting access for humanitarian assistance to
the occupied Palestinian territories confirms our
concern, which we have repeated on many occasions,
about the double standards being applied by some
delegations, which have repeatedly politicized all
humanitarian issues and introduced considerations that
have nothing to do with access to humanitarian
assistance in the occupied Palestinian territories.

12

Mr. González (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to explain its position on draft
resolution A/63/L.49, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”, and share some thoughts.
First, we thank all delegations that worked for
consensus on the draft resolution, especially Sweden,
as the facilitator.
Costa Rica joined the consensus on this important
draft resolution, which we trust will continue to be a
useful tool for a timely and effective response by the
United Nations system to any humanitarian emergency,
whether of a complex character or resulting from
natural disasters.
My country is convinced of the vital importance
of cooperation and coordination for the provision of
effective humanitarian assistance. We trust that the
draft resolution will contribute to improving the joint
work of the United Nations and all other actors
involved.
We firmly believe that fundamental prerequisites
for effective humanitarian assistance are secure, rapid
and unhindered access for humanitarian personnel, as
well as for supplies and the equipment needed to give
humanitarian assistance to people in need. We are
aware of the sensitivity and complexity of this issue,
but our main concern is to save the victims of
humanitarian emergencies and ensure the safety of
humanitarian
personnel.
Therefore,
political
considerations must not be put before the lives and
well-being of populations in need of humanitarian
assistance, in any situation.
We recognize that humanitarian assistance cannot
be unrestricted, and that it must be provided in
conformity with international law and with full respect
for humanitarian principles worldwide. However, those
principles should facilitate the necessary operational
space for humanitarian personnel to be able to act
effectively and responsibly.
For those reasons, we regret that we were unable
to sponsor this year’s draft resolution. We note with
concern that for several years it has been virtually
impossible to adapt the language concerning
humanitarian access to the reality of millions of people
around the world whose lives depend on rapid, secure
and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid in

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

emergencies of all kinds, whether of a complex
character or triggered by natural disasters.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption of
the draft resolutions. We shall now hear general
statements after the adoption.
Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the draft resolutions adopted
under the theme “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance”. Colombia
co-sponsored several of the initiatives presented at this
session, including draft resolutions A/63/L.48,
A/63/L.49 and A/63/L.53.
The guiding principles established in resolution
46/182 define the fundamental framework of
humanitarian assistance. I would like to highlight the
fact that draft resolution A/63/L.49, on strengthening
of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance, included this year issues to which Colombia
attaches special importance.
Recognizing positively the role of the United
Nations in humanitarian assistance, Colombia
reiterates the importance of ensuring and strengthening
adequate, continuous coordination of this Organization
with the authorities of the affected States and their
humanitarian assistance policies. That is how to
guarantee effectiveness, consistency and a better
response, as well as a more efficient use of resources.
This issue is recognized in the draft resolution.
Furthermore,
Colombia
appreciates
the
achievements of the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF) as a mechanism for financing
humanitarian activities in which a rapid response is
vital to save lives. The contribution of CERF in dealing
with emergencies in our country is seen in resources
assigned to agencies of the United Nations system that
offer support complementing national programmes to
prevent and respond to disasters. All provisions to
strengthen the Fund have the full support of our
delegation.
We also reaffirm that humanitarian assistance
must be part of a sustainable process of reconstruction
of the social fabric of the communities affected.
Immediate assistance must be provided in a way that
contributes effectively to both rehabilitation and the
development of structures guaranteeing stability after
emergencies are over.

08-64421

Draft resolution A/63/L.49, on the strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations, reiterates the importance of ensuring
coordination and cooperation between the humanitarian
actors, the donors and the affected States in order to
make progress. This issue is also particularly stressed
in draft resolution A/63/L.53, on international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance, presented by
the Group of 77 and China.
Draft resolution A/63/L.48, on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel, includes relevant
considerations and recommendations for making
progress on this topic, which is why the Government of
Colombia decided to co-sponsor it. The security and
protection of humanitarian personnel are essential for
the accomplishment of the vital mission of national and
international institutions and organizations all over the
world. In this regard, the Government of Colombia has
continued to implement its policy of democratic
security, which has made it possible to restore
noteworthy security conditions throughout the country,
reflected by a reduction in the crime rate and acts of
violence by the terrorist organizations that still exist.
The Government of Colombia wishes to
announce that last Saturday, 6 December, in the
Department of Caquetá, the terrorist group Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC)
attacked a medical mission managed by the municipal
authorities of San Vicente del Caguán. The mission
included 20 public servants from the Colombian
Institute of Family Well-being and the local hospital. In
this terrorist attack a big explosion caused the death of
Yamid Correa, a psychologist at the institute, and a
driver, John Jáder Lape. Other public servants —
psychologist Diana Marcella Parra, nutritionist Laura
Melissa Barrios and social worker Claudia Elena
Gómez — were seriously injured.
This vile attack against a medical mission was a
serious violation of international humanitarian law.
Colombia has reported the facts to the United Nations
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Organization of American States (OAS). The
Secretary-General of the OAS has condemned the
attack.
Colombia will continue to be committed to
promoting the application of the recommendations and
parameters of action defined by the United Nations in
order to strengthen the humanitarian response to

13

A/63/PV.68

emergencies. Its Government has determinedly taken
the main responsibility for initiating, organizing,
coordinating and implementing the provision of
humanitarian assistance in its territory, and commends
the cooperation offered in this area by the international
community, including donor countries and the United
Nations and other international organizations.
We express our thanks to the delegations of India,
Sweden and France for the important part they played
in coordinating the consultations on the draft
resolutions.
Mr. Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation expresses its support for and commitment to
the draft resolutions adopted on strengthening the
coordination
of
United
Nations
emergency
humanitarian assistance, including special economic
assistance, in cases of natural disaster. It is grateful for
the interest of all delegations that participated actively
in the negotiations. Mexico was a sponsor of some of
the draft resolutions.
With regard to draft resolution A/63/L.49, on
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, my
delegation wishes to reiterate the importance of
maintaining consensus. However, it is regrettable that
one of the pillars of humanitarian assistance — access
to victims — still suffers from a lack of understanding
of its nature and importance. Mexico is concerned that
restrictive interpretations, inconsistent with any
humanitarian consideration, weaken the right of
victims to receive humanitarian assistance.
In emergencies States are called upon to consider
the limits of national capacities and to exercise the
prerogative of asking for assistance and receiving it in
the most appropriate way. There is no doubt about that.
However, those who in such conditions see
humanitarian assistance as something that overshadows
sovereignty, without considering the needs of the
affected population, shatter the pillars on which the
assistance is supplied and put at risk the lives, dignity
and health of that population.
Mexico will continue working to protect the
victims of emergencies, whether those emergencies
result from armed conflict, natural disasters or other
complex causes.
Moreover, Mexico shares in the spirit of draft
resolution A/63/L.53, on international cooperation on

14

humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development. It emphasizes that, while it
is necessary to have sufficient, flexible and sustainable
resources for the activities of recovery, preparation and
risk reduction related to such disasters, it is also very
important to make more significant commitments
linked to prevention. Mexico will continue to work to
that end.
The Acting President: I call on the observer for
Palestine.
Mr. Hijazi (Palestine): My delegation wishes to
make a brief general statement in connection with the
adoption of draft resolution A/63/L.50, under
sub-item (c).
We would like to take this opportunity to extend
our appreciation to the delegation of France, which
currently holds the presidency of the European Union,
for its efforts to reach a consensus on the draft
resolution.
Through the adoption of draft resolution
A/63/L.50, the international community reaffirms its
commitment to the Palestinian people and the ultimate
realization of their inalienable rights. Over the past six
decades that assistance has been key for the resilience
of the Palestinian people and for ensuring that they, the
majority of whom are dispossessed refugees, are not
forgotten or forsaken, despite the many years of
conflict, turmoil and suffering. That assistance has time
and again served as a reaffirmation of the right of the
Palestinian people to live a life of dignity and to build
their vital institutions to enable them to survive and
withstand the imposed misery of military occupation,
and to prepare for a tomorrow free from its shackles.
That assistance is a clear political message to
stand by international legitimacy and principles of
international law, a commitment for which the
Palestinian people will always extend their gratitude
and thanks to the international community.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of China, who wishes to speak on a
point of order.
Mr. Shao Changfeng (China): China attaches
great importance to co-sponsorship. We believe that
co-sponsoring draft resolutions is a strong commitment
to reflect support and solidarity.

08-64421

A/63/PV.68

China had expressed willingness to co-sponsor
draft resolutions A/63/L.45 and AS/63/L.47. I was in
the General Assembly Affairs main office yesterday
afternoon at about 3.30 p.m. to 4 p.m. trying to sign the
co-sponsorship list. It was a great pity that today I did
not find our co-sponsorship fully recognized.
China would like to seek ways to reaffirm our
support for and commitment to those two draft
resolutions and to see whether is any way we can track
the mistake by the General Assembly Affairs main
office staff and have our co-sponsorship reflected
officially here.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): On behalf of our office,
I would like to clarify that unfortunately there is no
i nd i c a t i o n t h a t d r aft res ol ut i on A / 6 3/ L. 45 was
co -s po ns or ed by the delegation of China.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in general remarks after the
decision on draft resolutions.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I take this
opportunity to thank Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg, for coordinating the
consultations and negotiations on the draft resolutions
adopted under agenda item 65.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items
(a) to (c ) of agenda item 65 and of agenda item 65 as a
whole?
It was so decided.

the following countries have become sponsors: Antigua
and Barbuda, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile, Croatia,
Denmark,
Hungary,
Luxembourg,
Netherlands,
Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, South Africa,
Suriname, Swaziland and United States of America.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.25/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/63/L.25/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 63/142).
The Acting President: Before I give the floor to
speakers who wish to make statements in explanation
of position, I remind delegations that such statements
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Çobanoğlu (Turkey): I wish to make the
following remarks about draft resolution A/63/L.27,
entitled “Promoting development through the reduction
and prevention of armed violence”, adopted under the
same agenda item on 17 November.
The inclusion of Turkey in the list of sponsors of
that draft resolution was a result of a technical mistake,
which the Secretariat subsequently kindly corrected,
and we thank the Secretariat for its cooperation.
For the record, we reiterate that Turkey did not
intend to sponsor the draft resolution. Indeed, Turkey is
not a signatory to the Geneva Declaration, and our
decision to go along with the consensus on that draft
resolution cannot be construed in any way as
endorsement of the Declaration.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 107.

Agenda item 107 (continued)

Agenda item 114 (continued)

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

Draft resolution (A/63/L.25/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on this agenda item jointly
with agenda items 44 and 112 at the 51st plenary
meeting, on 17 November, and that it took action on
draft resolution A/63/L.27, under this agenda item, at
the same meeting.
Draft resolution A/63/L.25/Rev.1 is entitled
“Legal empowerment of the poor and eradication of
poverty”. Since the submission of the draft resolution

08-64421

(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
Draft resolution A/63/L.41
The Acting President: The Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 114 and its sub-items (a) to (u)
at its 36th and 37th meetings, on 3 November.

15

A/63/PV.68

I give the floor to the representative of Portugal
to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.41.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): On behalf of the
States members of the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries (CPLP) — Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Guinea–Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, TimorLeste and Sao Tome and Principe — I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.41, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese–speaking Countries”.
This year, the draft resolution stresses the
progress made in the cooperation between the CPLP,
United Nations agencies and other bodies and
programmes, particularly the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the International Labour
Organization and the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS.
Cooperation agreements signed with the various
United Nations agencies and bodies have been central
tools for the exchange of experience, implementation
of programmes and development of partnerships aimed
at
promoting
cultural
diversity,
combating
desertification, rural poverty and water scarcity,
fighting against child labour and promoting decent
work. Reference should also be made to the steps taken
in addressing the HIV/AIDS pandemic in CPLP
countries.
The CPLP has been deeply engaged with the
United Nations towards the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and is a strong
advocate of multilateralism and of a joint address of
the global challenges.
Furthermore, both individually and as a
Community, we are committed to the promotion of
international peace and security and to the respect for
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as set out in the CPLP’s Declaration of
Establishment and its Statutes. Our role on mediation,
conflict prevention, promotion of good governance and
recovery, as well as in the strengthening of State
institutions, is well known in countries like GuineaBissau and Timor-Leste.
The draft resolution refers to the outcome of the
seventh Conference of the Heads of State and

16

Government of the CPLP, held on 25 July 2008 in
Lisbon, where a political commitment was reached
regarding the importance of promoting the Portuguese
language in the international community, namely, in
the international and regional organizations and the
United Nations system. We believe that such a
promotion will foster the ability of the United Nations
to respond to challenges related to peace and security,
development and inter-cultural dialogue in regions
where the United Nations has established operations.
Under the draft resolution the Assembly would
encourage the CPLP’s Executive Secretariat and the
United Nations Secretariat to initiate discussions on the
establishment of a formal cooperation agreement
between the two Organizations. We look forward to
jointly exploring and identifying areas for further
partnerships between the United Nations and the CPLP.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on the resolution’s
implementation to the General Assembly at its sixtyfifth session.
Finally, on behalf of the member countries of the
CPLP, I would like to express our profound gratitude
and appreciation to those countries that joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/63/L.41. Since the
submission of the draft resolution the following
countries have become sponsors: Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Croatia, Equatorial Guinea, Finland,
France, Liberia, Romania, South Africa, Spain and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.41. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.41
(resolution 63/143).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before adjourning the
meeting, I appeal to those Member States intending to
submit draft resolutions on the remaining sub-items to
do so as soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

08-64421
