S/2015/486

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 43 of Security Council
resolution 2211 (2015). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 10 March 2015 (S/2015/172), including with regard to
the situation on the ground and progress made by the country in the imp lementation
of its commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region; the electoral process; and
progress made by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the implementation of its
mandate, including an assessment of the outcomes of the strategic dialogue with the
Congolese authorities on the exit strategy of MONUSCO.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
The political situation remained tense in the context of the electoral process.
As outlined in my previous report, the electoral calendar published by the national
independent electoral commission was criticized by some political parties from the
opposition, which questioned its feasibility. Their concerns were echoed by some
political actors from the ruling coalition. On 5 March, a group of seven political
parties from the presidential majority, referred to as the “G7”, reportedly addressed
a letter to the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, in
which it raised concerns about a number of issues relating to the electoral and
decentralization processes and called for an internal debate. The concerns were
discussed in the National Assembly on 17 and 18 April, but did not result in any
formal decisions or recommendations to the Government.
3.
On 2 May, at the request of the President, the General Administrator of the
National Intelligence Agency, Kalev Mutond, initiated consulta tions with national
stakeholders from across the political spectrum with the aim of initiating a national
dialogue. On 14 May, during a meeting with the presidential majority, the President
reportedly clarified that the objectives of the dialogue were the consolidation of

15-10226 (E)

070715

*1510226*

S/2015/486

peace and security; continued economic stability; and national unity during the
electoral period. Many opposition political parties, including the Union pour la
nation congolaise (UNC) and the Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC),
declined to participate in the dialogue, which in their view risked delaying the 2016
presidential and legislative elections. There were divergent views within the Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS) on whether to participate in the
dialogue. On 1 June, however, the party announced that it would not take part, since
one of the preconditions for its participation had not been met, namely, the
involvement of an international mediator such as my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
4.
On 1 June, the President launched consultations with a range of stakeholders
and held a series of meetings with religious leaders. In a statement issued on the
same day, the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo welcomed the President ’s
initiative for dialogue and stressed the need to reach consensus with regard to the
electoral calendar while ensuring respect for the Constitution. On 2 June, the
archbishop of Kinshasa, Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, echoed the need to respect
the constitutional timelines for the elections and to avoid any transitional
government arrangement. On 11 June, the President briefed the diplomatic corps in
Kinshasa, including my Special Representative, on his consultations with national
stakeholders regarding the electoral process.
5.
In March, the alleged presence of a mass grave in Maluku commune
(Kinshasa) raised concerns among civil society and opposition leaders, as well as
human rights observers. On 12 April, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the
Interior, Evariste Boshab, and the Minister of Justice, Alexis Tambwe Mwamba,
confirmed that 421 bodies, including those of destitute or abandoned persons and
unborn babies, had been buried in a mass grave. The Government opened a judicial
investigation into the mass grave. Judicial and administrative investigations into the
case are being conducted by the Congolese authorities with the support of
MONUSCO. Concerns persist, however, that the bodies buried in Maluku may be of
individuals killed during “Operation Likofi” from November 2013 to February 2014
or of individuals killed during the demonstrations of January 2015, whose bodies
were taken away from the morgues of hospitals in Kinshasa with the intention of
dissimulating the killings.
6.
The national independent electoral commission continued preparations for the
local and provincial elections scheduled for 25 October. The main activities
included the registration of candidates for the provincial elections and the
refinement of the list of electoral districts to be included in the draft law on the
allocation of seats for elected local and municipal bodies. As at 9 June, a total of
6,287 applications had been submitted to the commission, including 5,720 from
political parties, 85 from coalitions and 482 from ind ependent candidates. A total of
19,669 candidates have been registered for the provincial elections, 12 per cent of
whom are women.
7.
Delays were registered by the national independent electoral commission in
the completion of key tasks in the electoral calendar. For example, the
Government’s general disbursement plan for the electoral process, which was to be
updated by 22 February, remains under discussion by the Government. The cost of
the electoral process is now estimated by the Government at $900 mi llion (down
from $1.1 billion), with most of it to be funded by the State treasury. On 14 May,

2/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

however, the commission received $20 million from the Government (of the
$43 million expected to have been disbursed in March). The procurement centre,
which was to commence operations on 1 March, has not yet been established by the
Government. The draft law on the allocation of seats for the elected local bodies
based on the number of voters per electoral district, which had been expected to be
promulgated by 20 April, was only submitted to the National Assembly on 5 June.
On 16 June, the National Assembly rejected the draft law on the grounds that its
provisions violated the Constitution by excluding some 8 million voters who had
reached the age of civil majority since the 2011 national elections.
8.
On 4 April, the Constitutional Court, provided for in the 2006 Constitution,
was installed, with the swearing-in of its nine members. The installation of the
Constitutional Court is an important step as it is the body mandated to adjudicate on
any dispute relating to the upcoming presidential and legislative elections. The nine
members of the National Human Rights Commission, including four women, were
appointed by the National Assembly on 1 April and confirmed by pres idential
decree. On 24 April, the Commission, with the support of MONUSCO, adopted its
internal rules and regulations, which are to be submitted to the Constitutional Court
for review.

B.

Progress in the implementation of national commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
9.
On 12 May, the mandate of the National Oversight Mechanism was extended
for an additional year by presidential decree. On 3 and 4 June, the Mechanism and
the Ministry of Planning convened a high-level seminar in Kinshasa aimed at
fostering high-level policy dialogue between the Government and development
partners, strengthening ownership by national authorities and identifying priority
actions and specific measures for the timely and effective implementation of
national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
MONUSCO and the Office of my Special Representative for the Great Lakes
Region supported and took part in the initiative.
Decentralization
10. Further progress was made in the decentralization process following the
promulgation of legislation redefining the provincial boundaries and subdividing the
11 provinces into 26 decentralized territorial entities, as provided for in t he 2006
Constitution. On 13 April, the Prime Minister, Augustin Matata Ponyo, signed two
decrees establishing the commissions tasked with the creation of new provinces and
appointing their members. The commissions were to initiate the administrative
establishment of the new provinces within 30 days and complete the task within
120 days. There were delays, however, in the deployment of the members of the
commissions to their respective provinces owing to financial constraints. On
15 June, the Parliament adopted the draft law on the Caisse nationale de
péréquation, the establishment of which will be an important step in the
decentralization process. It was established in the 2006 Constitution that the
provinces would receive 40 per cent of tax revenues. Of that, they would allocate
10 per cent to the Caisse nationale de péréquation and 40 per cent to the

15-10226

3/18

S/2015/486

decentralized territorial entities. The Caisse nationale de péréquation is expected to
play an important role in the establishment of the new provinces, inc luding by
ensuring public investment in development programmes and a more equitable
distribution of the national wealth.
11. The decision of the Government to advance the process of establishing the
new provinces within 120 days, while at the same time organizing local and
provincial elections, raised some concern with regard to its capacity to establish,
simultaneously with the ongoing electoral process, the new territorial entities within
the foreseen timelines and to fund them adequately. The decentrali zation process
continued to accentuate divisions between its supporters and opponents at the
provincial level, while increasing tensions among communities in certain areas.

C.

Security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and operations against armed groups by national security forces
12. In North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continued to pose a
significant threat to security in Beni, with increasingly deadly attacks against the
civilian population, the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC) and
MONUSCO. The FARDC-led Operation Sukola I registered some progress, notably
the clearing of one of the main ADF camps with MONUSCO support, during which
the newly appointed operations commander of ADF was killed. Since 1 April, a total
of five ADF elements have been killed and five others captured by FARDC.
However, ADF maintains its destructive capacity in spite of those gains and the
arrest in the United Republic of Tanzania on 20 April of its leader, Jamil Mukulu. It
continues to operate in small groups, attacking defenceless civilians to instil fear
while perpetuating insecurity and diverting the operational focus of FARDC and
MONUSCO. Between 1 April and 2 June, ADF reportedly killed 33 civilians,
bringing the total number of civilians killed since October 2014 to 347. It carried
out at least four ambushes, which resulted in the killing of five FARDC soldiers. On
4 May, alleged ADF elements fired on a MONUSCO helicopter carrying the Force
Commander, which was forced to make an emergency landing. On 5 May, a group
of suspected ADF elements ambushed a MONUSCO patrol between Oicha and
Eringeti, killing two Tanzanian peacekeepers and injuring 13 others. Two ci vilians
were also killed.
13. On 8 April, FARDC announced that during Operation Sukola II, 14 localities
in or around Virunga National Park (North Kivu) and 21 localities in South Kivu
formerly occupied by the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) had been liberated and that 162 FDLR elements had been captured, 62 had
surrendered and 13 had been killed. MONUSCO has not been able to verify those
figures. Despite progress in dislodging FDLR from some of its strongholds, the
command and control structures of the group re main largely intact, since operations
have not yet moved to the areas in North Kivu in which its leadership is
concentrated. In the area of operations, FDLR has generally dispersed into small
groups to avoid confrontation. In both North Kivu and South Kivu , FDLR has
reportedly been returning to previously cleared areas as FARDC is finding it
increasingly difficult to hold the ground effectively and continue operations at the
same time. In North Kivu, FDLR has been observed returning to the areas north -east
of Nyanzale, on the edge of Virunga National Park, and around Tongo and Mweso

4/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

in Rutshuru territory. In South Kivu, FDLR elements have allegedly begun to return
to mining areas in Mwenga territory and have resumed illegal taxation.
14. FDLR continued to be active across both provinces and to commit human
rights abuses against the civilian population. In North Kivu, FDLR remained active
in Lubero, Masisi, Nyiragongo and Rutshuru territories with an increase in acts of
banditry and extortion, especially as their revenue-generating activities in Virunga
National Park had been disrupted by the operations. On 26 May, between 30 and
50 houses in Kiseguru village were systematically looted by suspected FDLR
elements. Small groups of FDLR elements increased attacks on FARDC outposts in
Rutshuru territory, possibly to re-establish their freedom of movement or to capture
supplies and weapons. In South Kivu, FDLR continued to commit human rights
abuses and other acts of banditry, especially along the Mwenga to Bukavu axis, in
isolated villages and around artisanal mining sites.
15. In North Kivu, the security situation along the Goma -Rutshuru road has
deteriorated significantly, with an increase in incidents of armed robbery, murder
and kidnapping. On 8 April, unidentified elements fired on a MONUSCO night
patrol in Rutshuru territory, injuring six peacekeepers. On 21 and 23 April, two anti tank mines were discovered on the Goma-Rutshuru road. Three United Nations
Mine Action Service contractors were kidnapped by unide ntified armed men on
23 April and released on 28 April. On 10 May, the Governor of North Kivu publicly
stated that since October 2014 there had been 100 separate cases of kidnapping in
Nyiragongo and Rutshuru territories, and called for action by the nati onal
authorities.
16. In Fizi territory (South Kivu), skirmishes continued between Mayi -Mayi
Yakutumba and FARDC. In Kabare, Kalehe, Shabunda and Walungu territories,
Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki factions remained active, with reports of harassment of
the population, abductions, looting, extortion and rapes in the vicinity of mining
sites. On 1 and 2 May, Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki elements launched a violent
attack on Kikamba village in Shabunda territory, during which serious allegations of
mass rapes were reported. MONUSCO is conducting an investigation into the
allegations. Clashes between Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki and FARDC also caused
displacement of the population in those areas.
17. In Ituri district (Orientale), the security situation remained precarious. The
Forces de résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri (FRPI) continued activities in the areas of
Gety and Aveba, with an increase in reports of human rights abuses, including a
number of allegations of rape and gang rape. From 1 April to mid -May, FRPI
reportedly committed 50 separate human rights abuses against more than
200 victims, including 26 cases of rape, 19 murders and more than 20 instances of
looting and destruction of property. On 10 May, FRPI elements attacked two
villages, looting goods and allegedly raping 15 women. Also during that period,
FRPI were generally more aggressive towards FARDC and MONUSCO. On
20 March, suspected FRPI elements opened fire on a MONUSCO helicopter
carrying out reconnaissance near Gety. On 8 May, FRPI elements launched a n attack
on a camp of FARDC south-east of Gety, during which three FARDC soldiers were
killed.
18. On 17 May, four key FRPI commanders gathered approximately
300 combatants near Bukiringi to surrender. The Minister of Defence, Veterans and
Reintegration, along with a number of FARDC generals, travelled to Bunia to secure

15-10226

5/18

S/2015/486

the surrender of FRPI. Initially, FRPI agreed to surrender on 25 May in Aveba.
Negotiations failed, however, as it insisted on in situ integration into FARDC and an
amnesty, which were both rejected by the Government. The Government then gave
FRPI until 2 June to make a final decision and established a committee of 25 local
leaders and representatives to continue the negotiations and secure the voluntary
disarmament of FRPI. No progress had been made by the deadline, however. On
3 June, FARDC, in cooperation with MONUSCO, launched military operations
against FRPI in Aveba. MONUSCO ground troops and attack helicopters engaged
FRPI in and around Aveba in support of the FARDC operations. Unar med unmanned
aerial vehicles were deployed to track FRPI as it left Aveba and the intelligence
collected was shared with FARDC to inform the planning of ongoing operations. As
at 15 June, 34 FRPI elements had been killed and at least 46 confirmed injured
during the operations. No civilian casualties had been reported. FRPI has also
started to surrender as a result of the operations, with 5 FRPI elements with
weapons and 16 without weapons surrendering since the launch of the operations.
The operations are ongoing.
19. In Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé, there were reports of frequent looting, acts of
banditry and short-term abductions of civilians by elements of the Lord ’s Resistance
Army (LRA). LRA was active mainly in the Azande hunting domain in Garamba
National Park and on the Dungu-Duru-Nabiapai and Dungu-Faradje-Aba axes. LRA
elements carried out attacks on national security forces, killing three FARDC
soldiers. LRA elements also abducted at least 41 people, using them as porters to
move looted goods. About 36 abductees were later released. FARDC forces,
supported by MONUSCO and the United States Africa Command, continued to
conduct operations against LRA in the affected areas. MONUSCO also continued its
disarmament sensitization campaign to encourage LRA elements to surrender.
20. In northern Katanga, the security situation remained precarious. An increase in
the spillover of FDLR activities from South Kivu under the pressure of Operation
Sukola II was reported. In Tanganyika territory, there was an escalation in the
conflict between the Luba and the Twa communities. On 30 April, near Nyunzu
village, Luba self-defence groups called “Eléments katangais” set on fire a camp for
internally displaced persons hosting nearly 300 Twa and killed at least 62 civilians.
On 2 May, “Eléments katangais” targeted MONUSCO, setting on fire the bushes
surrounding a MONUSCO deployment following rumours that MONUSCO was
supporting the Twa community. Since January, 221 people from both communities
have been killed, 106 people have been wounded and 58 cases of rape have been
reported. In Mitwaba and Pweto territories there has been a reported decline in the
activities of Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga following a number of successful FARDC
operations that led to the fragmentation of the group and the loss of its central
command and control structure. However, the security situation remains negatively
affected by the continued presence of the armed group.

D.

Humanitarian situation
21. The humanitarian situation deteriorated in several area s of eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo as a result of significant increases in killings, sexual violence
and abductions, especially in Beni and Rutshuru territories. This resulted in limited
access to agricultural land for the local population and a rise in humanitarian needs.

6/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

In turn, increased insecurity hampered humanitarian access to the populations of
those areas and rendered protection efforts by humanitarian actors very difficult.
22. The total number of internally displaced persons in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is estimated at 2.8 million, and approximately 6.5 million people are
in a situation of acute food insecurity. The estimated number of new internally
displaced persons in the first quarter of 2015 was 337,000, almost two third s of
whom are in North Kivu, partially as a result of the launch of military operations by
FARDC against FDLR in late February. In addition, more than 11,500 people were
newly displaced in Manono and Nyunzu territories in Katanga province in late
March, following the escalation of the conflict between the Luba and the Twa
communities.
23. As at 31 May, the number of refugees in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had almost doubled from 122,000 to an estimated 237,967. In addition to
117,000 refugees from Rwanda, there was an influx of 10,563 refugees from
Burundi and an increase in the number of refugees from the Central African
Republic from 68,000 to 84,281.

E.

Economic developments
24. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has maintained relative
macroeconomic stability. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates the
expected growth rate of the economy in 2015 to be at 9.2 per cent. The annual
inflation rate increased slightly from 0.24 per cent to 1.36 per cent in the second
quarter of 2015. Concerns remain, however, about falling commodity prices and
delayed investments in the private sector ahead of the national elections in 2016.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to face many challenges to
achieving broad-based and more inclusive growth. Progress on structural reforms
aimed at strengthening the financial sector, improving the business climate through
enforcing the rule of law and strengthening natural resources management through
greater transparency and better governance remains critical.
25. As part of its initiatives to improve the regulatory framework of the extractive
industries, the Government submitted a draft mining law to the Parliament on
17 March. In addition to its efforts to improve the traceability of tin, wolfram ite,
coltan and gold extraction in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Government facilitated a meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region on 17 and 18 April in Kinshasa to discuss how to improve
coordination of activities to combat mineral fraud and smuggling within the region.
At the meeting, 17 specific recommendations to protect the official trade of minerals
in the region and foster regional integration were adopted.

F.

Regional developments
26. There was limited progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
of 12 December 2013. A technical mission of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to Kigali from 20 to 23 April resulted in the voluntary
repatriation of 13 of the 453 registered former elements of the Movement of
23 March (M23) in Rwanda. The handover of ex-M23 weaponry and military
equipment was deferred pending the identification of their origin by United Nations

15-10226

7/18

S/2015/486

experts on conventional arms. In order to expedite the repatriation of the remaining
ex-M23 combatants from Rwanda and Uganda, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region decided during an extraordinary summit on 18 May in Luanda
to establish a mechanism comprising the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda, the African Union, the International Conference, the Southern
African Development Community and the United Nations.
27. Following a number of technical meetings, the joint Democratic Republic of
the Congo-Rwanda border demarcation commission commenced construction of
22 border markings in disputed border areas in April, which may help to reduce
border skirmishes and defuse tensions between the two countries.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Strategic dialogue between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
28. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations undertook effective steps to enter into a regular strategic dialogue to
develop jointly a road map and exit strategy for MONUSCO.
29. Four plenary meetings, co-chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Raymond Tshibanda, and my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, were held in Kinshasa on 25 March and on 1, 8 and 15 April in the
context of the strategic dialogue. Upon the suggestion of the Government, four
working groups were established to discuss key issues of concern, including with
regard to the strategic review and the development of an exit strategy for
MONUSCO, the elections, human rights and communications.
30. From 21 to 25 April, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He met the President and
members of the Government to discuss ways to improve co operation between the
United Nations and the Government and to discuss the way forward with regard to
the strategic dialogue and to reach agreement on joint objectives and a road map for
an exit strategy for MONUSCO.
31. Building on the joint assessment process initiated in 2010, on 15 April
MONUSCO and the Government adopted terms of reference to assess the situation
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which considered aspects relating to
the security situation, the protection of civilians, the r estoration of State authority
and the activities of FARDC and MONUSCO. On 14 May, joint provincial teams
commenced evaluations in conflict-affected territories in Katanga, North Kivu,
Orientale and South Kivu. From 25 to 30 May, a team from Kinshasa visite d Bunia,
Goma and Kalemie and received briefings from all the provincial teams. The team
comprised 16 MONUSCO and government representatives, including from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior, FARDC, the Congolese
national police and intelligence services. Cooperation between MONUSCO and
national and provincial government representatives was excellent throughout the
assessment exercise. The team is currently finalizing the joint report for submission
to the plenary of the strategic dialogue.

8/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

32. The issue of the resumption of support to FARDC operations against FDLR
was raised in a number of meetings with the Government in the context of the
strategic dialogue. Discussions are ongoing with a view to resolving the differences
between the Government and the United Nations in that regard.
33. With regard to the next steps, the joint assessment of the security situation in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — once agreed upon by both the United
Nations and the Government — should provide a solid basis for further discussion
on other aspects relating to reducing the risk of instability, as outlined in
subparagraph 6 (b) of Security Council resolution 2211 (2015). It should also help
to determine targets that would trigger the grad ual and progressive reduction of the
MONUSCO Force.

B.

National processes and the good offices role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Elections
34. In keeping with its good offices mandate, MONUSCO intensified contacts
with a range of actors from across the political spectrum and civil society in the
context of the electoral process. The Mission continued to assist the national
independent electoral commission in enhancing dialogue with political parties
through the commission’s consultative framework committee. It sensitized women ’s
associations and political parties to increase the participation of women in the
upcoming elections. The Mission also provided limited technical assistan ce to the
commission in establishing systems for the registration of candidates and to identify
voters in the electoral districts. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) continued to provide technical assistance for the electoral process. The
“Projet d’assistance au cycle électoral” remains largely unfunded and
non-operational.
Security sector reform
35. The Mission made further efforts to enhance coordination of the assistance
provided by international partners through its regular strategic c oordination
mechanisms and informal sectorial contacts. It continued exchanges with a range of
Government interlocutors to ensure a common understanding of the challenges
ahead, while providing coherent support and technical advice.
36. In the absence of a comprehensive national security sector reform strategy and
road map, specific activities have been conducted in the areas of justice, defence
and police reform in accordance with relevant action plans. In particular,
MONUSCO continued to promote civil-military relations by supporting the
“Service d’éducation civique, patriotique et de l’action sociale”, a body of FARDC
dedicated to raising awareness within the armed forces of human rights, child
protection and gender and sexual violence.
37. The Mission sought to increase further the visibility and capacity of the
Inspection générale de la police, the internal control body of the Congolese national
police, to process complaints filed by victims and their relatives. Although
MONUSCO supported efforts to reform the management of human resources in the

15-10226

9/18

S/2015/486

national police and to develop a national training curriculum, financial constraints
and limited accountability hampered progress. In support of the national police, the
United Nations police trained 268 cadets in basic police duties, 328 in public order
management, the code of ethics and human rights principles and 15 in information
gathering and analysis. The United Nations police, in collaboration with the
technical group for election security, organized a training workshop on the
administrative rules and regulations of public order management for 10 deputy
provincial commissioners of the national police. A total of 96 joint United Nations
police-Congolese national police patrols were organized to monitor and mentor the
units under their command in North Kivu and South Kivu.
38. The Mission supported the organization of the “Etats généraux de la justice”, a
national conference intended to assess the state of the justice system. Some 300
experts and civil society representatives developed recommendations to improve the
functioning of the national justice system in accordance with international
standards. The Mission and UNDP, through the joint justice support programme,
provided technical assistance to the steering committee established by the Minister
of Justice and Human Rights to monitor the implementation of the recommendations
that should eventually inform the development of a justice and corrections reform
strategy.
Regional dimension
39. The Mission continued to work closely with the Office of my Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, including by facilitating preparations for a Great Lakes
private sector investment conference scheduled tentatively for early 2016. The
Mission also supported the organization of the inaugural grantee convening of the
women’s platform of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, held in
Goma from 13 to 15 May. The meeting was organized by the Office of my Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and brought together 60 women leaders
representing 35 grass-roots organizations from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, who deliberated on a common agenda to enhance
regional peace processes.
Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
40. There was progress towards the stabilization of eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. On 8 April, the steering committee, chaired by the Minister of
Planning, of the national stabilization and reconstruction programme for areas
emerging from armed conflict validated the provincial stabilization strategies and
action plans for North Kivu, Orientale and South Kivu. Under the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
pledged additional resources to catalyse increased donor engagement. At the request
of the Minister, MONUSCO supported the development of a number of legal
documents (draft decrees and internal rules of procedure) to improve the functioning
of State structures at the national and provincial levels in the stabilization process.
41. Partners of the national stabilization and reconstruction plan, supported by
MONUSCO, launched programmes to mobilize resources to address conflict drivers
in priority areas. In Mambasa in Ituri district (Orientale), a series of dialogue
sessions funded by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund took place, bringing

10/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

together representatives of territorial administrations, national security forces and
local communities to discuss issues of land, identity, mining and forestry.
42. The Mission supported the national police in re-establishing 35 police stations
in former FDLR- and ADF-held areas in Beni, Eringeti, Oicha and Rutshuru. Islands
of stability have been established in Eringeti, Kamango, Luofo, Mambasa, Masisi,
Rutshuru, Sange and Walikale. Approximately $4 million in quick impact project
funds have been committed to projects in the islands of stability, primarily in
support of national police, justice and corrections institutions and community
projects.

C.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
43. The Mission reinforced its presence in the area of Beni with a view to
enhancing its efforts to protect civilians and reduce the threat posed by ADF. In
support of FARDC, MONUSCO conducted aerial reconnaissance to gather
information about ADF installations and possible hideouts. MONUSCO supported
operations by FARDC against ADF in the area, including through providing fire
support, while continuing to conduct patrols with a particular focus on areas
identified as ADF movement corridors. In the period under review, FARDC, with
MONUSCO support, destroyed an ADF camp and neutralized at least one senior
leader. The Mission reinforced and intensified joint patrols by formed police units
and the national police in the area of Beni.
44. The Mission continued to support the establishment and operation of
56 community alert networks and 80 local protection committees in conflict affected areas in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The networks and the
committees helped to protect civilians from risks through enhanced cooperation
with local security services, local authorities, civil society and local communities.
The Mission responded, alone or in support of FARDC, the national police or local
authorities, to 118 protection alerts of the 188 received from loca l community alert
networks, effectively deterring the perceived threat or leading to the arrest of the
perpetrators. In 70 cases it proved impossible to respond owing to the inaccessibility
of the location, late receipt of the alert or imprecise informatio n.
45. In North Kivu, MONUSCO conducted operation “Safe Rutshuru”, increasing
its troop presence to deter attacks by armed elements and groups. The Mission
provided escorts to commercial transports in the areas of concern.
46. Discussions between MONUSCO and the Government are ongoing with a
view to resuming the Mission’s support to Operation Sukola II of FARDC against
FDLR in North Kivu and South Kivu.
47. In Ituri district (Orientale), MONUSCO supported the Government in
negotiations with FRPI. When the negotiations broke down, MONUSCO supported
FARDC in engaging the armed group militarily while continuing non -military
measures to encourage FRPI to surrender.

D.

Transformation of the Force
48. Further to the recommendation of the strategic review and as requested by the
Council in its resolution 2211 (2015), MONUSCO is developing measures to

15-10226

11/18

S/2015/486

maximize the flexibility of its Force to respond more effectively to evolving
challenges on the ground. This entails the creation of rapidly deployable battali ons,
as well as a set of measures aimed at modernizing the Force. Efforts are under way
to determine mobility requirements based on a needs assessment, including utility
helicopters to ensure rapid deployment and to assess intelligence capabilities.
MONUSCO is also in the process of reducing its troops in accordance with the
resolution. To date, some 850 military personnel (out of at least 2,000 to be
reduced) have already been repatriated. The reduction and transformation of the
Force will require enhanced coordination and cooperation with FARDC, in
particular in areas in which MONUSCO troops are being reduced, in order to avoid
a security vacuum.

E.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel within the context
of operations of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
49. The Mission concluded that, in the period under review, military operations
did not result in any discernible increase in threats to United Nations personnel.
Nevertheless, the Mission relocated non-essential staff from Beni and took relevant
risk mitigation measures to address changes in the local security situation in certain
areas, such as Beni. The Mission also reviewed its operations and procedures in the
light of the ADF attacks on peacekeepers on 5 May.

F.

Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
50. The Mission continued its efforts to monitor the arms embargo, including
through supporting the Group of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1533 (2004). Relevant information on flows of military personnel, arms
and related materiel across the eastern border of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was shared with the Group of Experts.

G.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
51. The third phase of the third national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plan was officially launched by the Minister of Defence in Kitona
(Bas-Congo) on 16 May and in Kamina (Katanga) on 21 May. To date, the
Government has released $1.5 million of the $10 million contribution it has
pledged, while reiterating its intention to honour the pledge in full. When new
ex-combatants surfaced in the context of operations against armed groups in Ituri,
North Kivu and South Kivu, the Government expressed its intention to release
additional funds to accommodate new surrenders. The Unité d ’exécution du
Programme national de désarmement, démobilisation et réintégration (UEPNDDR)
is currently providing food and medical support in FARDC transit camps and has
processed demobilization and disarmament certification. As at 12 June, UEPNDDR
had demobilized 1,329 ex-combatants in Kamina and 1,130 in Kitona. It also
conducted triage, including by separating children, foreign ex-combatants and
refugees, while referring cases relating to mental health to specialist services.

12/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

52. The Mission continued to support efforts to encourage the disarmament of
foreign and Congolese combatants in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. By
11 June, 212 former members of Congolese armed groups (46 male ex -combatants,
147 children associated with the armed groups and 19 dependants) and
113 members of foreign armed groups (51 male ex-combatants, 4 children
associated with the armed groups and 58 dependants) voluntarily entered the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation and resettlement
programme. Of the former members of Congolese and foreign armed gro ups,
97 were male ex-combatants, including 64 from FDLR, 151 were children
associated with armed groups and 77 were dependants. As at 11 June, 326 FDLR
former combatants and 1,078 of their dependants who had disarmed voluntarily
remained in assembly camps in Kanyabayonga (North Kivu) , Kisangani (Orientale)
and Walungu (South Kivu).

H.

Mine action
53. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations conducted activities to clear
unexploded ordnance throughout the area of operations of MONUSCO. The Mine
Action Service conducted clearance in 68 areas of concern in North Kivu and
Orientale, destroying 192 items of explosive remnants of war and 3,694 small arms
and ammunition. On 21 and 23 April, the Mine Action Service destroyed in situ two
newly laid anti-tank mines on the Goma-Rutshuru road.

I.

Promotion and protection of human rights and the fight
against impunity
54. The human rights situation remained a source of concern. In the eastern part of
the country, the situation continued to be marked by conflict and by violations
committed by armed groups and FARDC, often during operations. The situation in
the western provinces, particularly in Kinshasa, was affected more by the restriction
of political space and violations of fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of
expression, association and peaceful assembly.
55. Between March and May 2015, almost 60 per cent of the 810 human rights
violations registered by the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office were
perpetrated by different armed groups; approximately 40 per cent were committed
by State agents. Among the State agents, FARDC soldiers were re sponsible for
104 human rights violations, the highest number, while national police agents
allegedly committed 89 violations.
56. FRPI elements were responsible for 76 human rights violations, the highest
number of violations committed by a single armed group during the reporting
period. The high number of violations committed by FRPI was partly as a result of
the failed negotiations on the group’s surrender following the arrest of its leader,
Justin Matata Banaloki (alias Cobra Matata), in January 2015, as well as a certain
radicalization of the group.
57. In the context of the electoral process, MONUSCO noted the increased
restriction of fundamental freedoms and political rights, targeting mainly political
opponents, human rights defenders and representatives of the media. At least four

15-10226

13/18

S/2015/486

violations of the right to the liberty and security of the person against 45 victims,
one violation of the right to physical integrity against four victims and four
violations of the right to peaceful assembly were docume nted in Kinshasa and
Goma. On 15 March in Kinshasa, at least 30 people were arrested by State agents
during a workshop organized by Filimbi, a civil society platform, to encourage the
participation of young people in the democratic process in the Democrati c Republic
of the Congo. Most have been released, while others have been transferred to
Makala central prison in Kinshasa, charged with different offences. The Burkinabé
and Senegalese activists who took part in the workshop were expelled from the
country. The Mission also continued to follow up the case of other prominent human
rights defenders and political activists arrested during the demonstrations of January
2015, by advocating for them to be put under judicial oversight and for the respect
of due process.
58. Through its prosecution support cells, MONUSCO, with the support of UNDP,
assisted nine investigation missions and 10 mobile courts in Katanga, North Kivu,
Orientale and South Kivu. It continued to provide extensive technical support to the
military justice authorities in North Kivu in their ongoing investigations into the
crimes allegedly committed by ADF in the areas of Beni and Oicha in recent
months.
59. MONUSCO corrections staff co-located in the prisons continued to support the
administration in ensuring that penitentiary institutions were safe and secure and
that the rights of detainees were protected. In support of the professionalization of
the management of prisons, MONUSCO assisted in training 187 officers on incident
management, including 30 trainers and 18 women.

J.

Sexual violence
60. The Mission recorded 65 victims of sexual violence in conflict during the
period under review. Fifty victims were allegedly raped by elements of armed
groups, with FRPI responsible for sexual violence against 33 victims, most of them
gang raped in several incidents in Irumu territory (Orientale). The Mission received
reports of serious allegations of extensive sexual violence by members of self defence groups in the context of the conflict between the Twa and the Luba
communities in northern Katanga. Insecurity in the area has prevented MONUSCO
from verifying reports of sexual mutilation against men, and of the rape of mainly
Luba women by Twa elements.
61. The Mission continued to support efforts by the Government to combat sexual
violence, with the Government convening the initial meetings of the monitoring
committee of the FARDC action plan against sexual violence. Pursuant to the three month workplan, 10 senior FARDC commanders signed a personal commitment to
actively combat sexual violence in their units.

K.

Child protection
62. The Mission facilitated the separation of 431 children (14 girls and 417 boys)
from armed groups, including seven Rwandan nationals. The majority of children
had been recruited by FDLR (286), followed by Mayi-Mayi Nyatura (42) and FRPI
(13). They included 62 children formerly associated with armed groups detained by

14/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

FARDC and separated by MONUSCO. Persistent insecurity and the lack of
sustainable reintegration in areas in which children are reunited pose a high risk of
re-recruitment by armed groups. During the reporting period, 34 child casualties
(16 girls and 18 boys) of conflict-related violence were documented in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
63. In line with the joint action plan of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations on ending and preventing child
recruitment by armed groups, the Mission identified only one child after screening
7,843 FARDC troops.

IV. Observations
64. I welcome the efforts of the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to reach out to the political opposition and other national stakeholders. I urge
all the actors concerned to continue to explore political initiatives with a view to
building consensus on the unfolding electoral process. I call upon all parties to work
together to resolve their differences in a peaceful manner and to create the
conditions for a credible and inclusive electoral process. This will require the
creation of the political space needed for a peaceful and credible electoral process,
including through respect for the freedoms of assembly and of expression. It is now
essential for the parties and national institutions to ensure that any issues that could
undermine the credibility of the process are addressed so that elections can take
place in accordance with the Constitution. The challenges associated with the
completion of the technical preparations are not to be underestimated. I am
convinced that they can be overcome through the proactive engagement of
Congolese stakeholders and with the support of the international community. I
encourage the Government to put an adequate electoral budget in place as soon as
possible and to conduct a credible update of the electoral register to ensure the
successful and timely holding of elections. I also encourage the Government and my
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to
advocate, with the political parties, for an increase in the proportion of women as
voters and as candidates for elected offices.
65. I am encouraged by the concrete steps taken by the Government to enter into a
regular strategic dialogue with MONUSCO to improve cooperation and jointly
develop an exit strategy for the Mission, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2211 (2015). The resumption of the joint assessment process initiated in
2010 should lead to a common understanding of the main threats and challenges
facing conflict-affected provinces in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
should also provide a solid basis for subsequent discussions, including on political
aspects and specific indicators that would trigger a reduction of the MONUSCO
Force. I encourage the Government to pursue discussions with the United Nations in
a spirit of mutual trust and confidence. The dialogue should be viewed as an
opportunity to redefine the partnership between the United Nations and the
Government and improve cooperation, which would greatly facilitate the tr ansfer of
responsibilities from MONUSCO to the Government and the Mission ’s exit. I intend
to submit recommendations in this regard in my next report to the Security Council.
66. I am nevertheless concerned about the continuing violence in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the atrocities perpetrated by

15-10226

15/18

S/2015/486

various armed groups. I condemn in the strongest terms the senseless attacks
committed by ADF against defenceless civilians in the area of Beni, which also
inflicted heavy casualties on FARDC. I strongly condemn the killing, on 5 May, of
two United Nations peacekeepers from the United Republic of Tanzania and the
wounding of 13 others when a MONUSCO convoy came under fire from suspected
ADF elements. I offer my sincere condolences and sympathy to the bereaved
families and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania. The United
Nations remains committed to taking all necessary action to protect civilians and
neutralize armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in line with
Security Council resolution 2211 (2015). I commend the continued efforts of the
Government to conduct military operations against FDLR and I hope that
outstanding issues will soon be resolved and full security cooperation between
FARDC and MONUSCO can resume in this regard. Addressing the issue of FDLR
is a shared priority. Enhanced cooperation between FARDC and MONUSCO will
not only benefit the local population but also accelerate progress towards reducing
the threat from armed groups, which has been identified as one of the key criteria
guiding the gradual drawdown of the Mission. Operations by FARDC, supported by
MONUSCO, against FRPI, demonstrate the benefits of enhanced cooperation.
67. As I have highlighted in previous reports, there is no purely military solution
to the problem of armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Achieving durable peace and stability will require the root causes of conflict to be
addressed, including the extension of State authority, the finding of sustain able
solutions for former combatants and development. I am encouraged by the recent
launch of the third national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan and
call upon the Government to ensure its effective implementation. I encourage other
partners to support the creation of sustainable reintegration initiatives to prevent
former combatants from taking up weapons again.
68. I am encouraged by the fact that human rights violations, including sexual
abuse and violence attributable to the security forces, have received greater
attention from the Congolese authorities. While this underscores the genuine
attempts by the Government to combat impunity, more needs to be done. I commend
the signing of the “acte d’engagement” by senior FARDC officers to fight sexual
violence and the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission and the
adoption of its internal rules and regulations to safeguard its effectiveness and
independence, which are steps in the right direction. At the same time, I regret tha t
Congolese citizens continue to be subjected to arbitrary arrests by the security
agencies for merely trying to exercise their fundamental constitutional freedoms. I
urge the Government to ensure that all those arrested are subjected to judicial
oversight and are afforded due process and a fair trial. I also encourage the
Government to hold accountable those members of the security forces allegedly
responsible for serious human rights violations during the popular demonstrations of
January 2015 and to ensure that the security forces refrain from the disproportionate
use of force.
69. There will be no solution to the conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo unless its regional dimension is addressed. To achieve this, it is critical that
the signatories and guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region demonstrate greater
engagement in the implementation of their commitments. I call upon all
stakeholders concerned to support the efforts of my Special Envoy for the Great

16/18

15-10226

S/2015/486

Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, to revitalize the governance structures of the
Framework, notably the Regional Oversight Mechanism. Reinforcing judicial
cooperation is equally important to ensure that signatory countr ies do not harbour
individuals allegedly responsible for serious human rights violations. The
completion of the repatriation process of ex-M23 members and the implementation
of the Nairobi Declarations also remain essential to addressing some of the
underlying causes of the situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region. I thus encourage the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to take the necessary steps to complete the repatriation of ex -M23 elements
from Rwanda and Uganda.
70. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to my Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Martin Kobler, all MONUSCO staff and the
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, as well as other
international and regional organizations and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their active engagement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the service of peace.

15-10226

17/18

S/2015/486

18/18

15-10226
