asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6830

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6830th meeting
Tuesday, 11 September 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-fourth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2012/641)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-50363 (E)

*1250363*

S/PV.6830

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-fourth progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (S/2012/641)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin Landgren, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan Tillander, Chair of the
Liberian country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and representative of Sweden, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2012/641, which contains the twenty-fourth progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: The report of the Secretary-General
now before the Council (S/2012/641) continues to reflect
this year’s particular focus on the evolution of United
Nations engagement in Liberia. Since 2003, Liberia
has transformed itself from a failed State into one well
along the path to democracy and lasting peace. The
country has made remarkable progress in institutional
rebuilding, economic recovery and consolidation of its
democratic processes. The presidential and legislative
elections of 2011 demonstrated its capacity to manage
a politically and logistically complex event. The
subsequent peaceful formation of a new Government
signaled the country’s increased stability.
With Liberia on the verge of becoming a true
success story, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) must walk a delicate balance, applauding
successes and pulling back its support while continuing

2

to accompany Liberia in areas crucial to lasting peace.
The United Nations continues to provide security
support to Liberia on a significant scale. But, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report, security measures
alone will not create lasting stability in Liberia. The
reinforcement of the national security sector should go
hand in hand with national reconciliation and structural
changes aimed at addressing the underlying causes of
past conflict. Achieving that, however, will take both
political commitment and financial resources.
During its visit in May, the Council saw first
hand both Liberia’s promise as well as the remaining
challenges. The Government is firmly committed to
taking on the security responsibilities now performed
by the Mission. On the basis of a recent joint transition
workshop held by the Government and UNMIL, we
have updated our joint planning structures and are
reviewing the linkages between these structures, donor
coordination mechanisms and Liberia’s development
frameworks for greater coherence. We have designed
a graphic road map to help illustrate phase by phase
the demands on the Liberian security sector and to give
the Government the necessary lead time to adjust its
security posture.
Addressing capacity gaps in the security sector
will be important to a successful and well-managed
transition. As the technical assessment mission
concluded, national security agencies are not yet able to
maintain stability without the support of UNMIL. The
technical assessment mission also set out other areas
that continue to need attention.
How best to address capacity needs was a major
theme of our recent workshop, and Liberia’s international
partners — including Ambassador Tillander, the
Chair of the Liberia country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission — were heavily engaged.
With a growing annual budget — at $672 million for
2012-2013, up by nearly a quarter on last year — Liberia
is increasingly able to find national resources to help
finance the security sector. But the country has many
competing priorities. The recent public expenditure
review of the Liberian security sector, conducted by
UNMIL and the World Bank, concluded that it would
take another six or seven years until Liberia can cover
these costs independently. In the meantime, donor
support will be essential.
The Liberia National Police (LNP) has made
headway, recently doubling its physical capacity at the

12-50363

S/PV.6830

police academy and, in June, deploying to the Côte
d’Ivoire border with the Armed Forces of Liberia. But
given the relatively large burden the police will bear
as UNMIL transitions, considerable attention should be
given to increasing police professionalism and logistics
capacity. Also, increased resources will be needed for
recurring costs. After the transition workshop, the
Government was able to identify additional resources
for the police, reportedly as much as a 26-per cent
increase from last year. Of particular concern, however,
is a decreased allocation for the police training academy
at a time when the need is so great to scale up LNP
recruitment and training.
The Police Support Unit and the Emergency
Response Unit — specialized bodies responsible for
riot control and quick reaction — will become central
to national response to security incidents as UNMIL
draws down. The strength of the Police Support Unity
needs to grow to at least 1,000, of which it is currently
over 25 per cent short, mindful always of maintaining
quality and professionalism.
Given the porosity of Liberia’s borders and the
security and political challenges in the Mano River
Union, supporting the Government to form an effective
and professional immigration service is a high priority.
The United Nations Police will form a dedicated unit to
work with the Government on the strategic plan of the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization. Through
this, the Bureau should emerge with better-defined
functions and a rationalized structure. Vetting of
Bureau personnel is also central to these reforms.
Building the capacity of the security sector needs to
be properly framed. As important as numbers is police
professionalism. Liberia’s national security strategy,
and a drive to implement the security related legislation
signed into law last year, can help to achieve this. A new
police law, a civilian complaints board and legislation
on gun control are part of the scaffolding for a sound
security sector, joining last month’s establishment of a
national small arms commission.
Strengthened security capacity and regulation will
need to be matched with a stronger justice system if the
public is to have confidence in the State’s capacity to
protect and provide justice. The Justice and Security
Joint Programme, agreed among all rule of law actors in
December 2011, coherently captures national priorities,
and will guide the development of this sector over the
next three years. The programme includes five justice

12-50363

and security hubs, the first of which is soon to be
completed with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund.
These hubs decentralize justice and security services,
historically centred in Monrovia, bringing them closer
to rural populations.
Constitutional reform and national reconciliation
are recognized as central to peace consolidation in
Liberia. In August, the President appointed a fiveperson constitution review committee, whose members
represent various political, ethnic and religious
backgrounds. The scope of the committee’s task has
not yet been made public. Separately, a constitutional
reform initiative has been advanced by a group called
the Political Consultative Forum, composed of all
major political parties, including the ruling party, and
civil society groups. The Law Reform Commission
and the Governance Commission are also engaged,
and the Liberia Bar Association has recently made
recommendations in this area.
Views differ on whether Liberia should engage in
comprehensive constitutional reform or simply amend
selected provisions. Any revision must be endorsed
by referendum, which implies a high degree of public
awareness. A truly inclusive and consultative process
holds one of the keys to overcoming the structural
imbalances and injustices that continue to present risks
for the stability of the country.
As the Secretary-General’s special report of this
April (S/2012/230) underlined, a highly centralized
system of governance is rooted in the current
Constitution. Reform opens the door to greater
decentralization and to allowing all Liberians to enjoy
dependable access to services and greater political
inclusion. Such reforms are also manifestly a factor in
national reconciliation.
A draft reconciliation road map is currently under
review and due to be launched in October. Coordinated
by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the road map
covers some principal recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, including the “Palava
Hut” programme, where perpetrators can seek public
forgiveness. Other elements recommended by the
Commission, such as those on impunity, remain largely
unaddressed in the draft road map. As this process
moves forward, the United Nations would encourage
full, inclusive consultation and public discussion,
allowing all Liberians to feel part of a national healing
process. The United Nations would also like to see

3

S/PV.6830

an invigorated Independent National Commission on
Human Rights, and UNMIL is ready to offer support
to this end.
The Liberian Government has continued its efforts
to mitigate security threats at its border with Côte
d’Ivoire. Both Governments and the two Missions
met in June to discuss enhanced border security
and protection of civilians. Following this, Liberia
deployed Operation Restore Hope, in which the Armed
Forces of Liberia, the Emergency Response Unit and
the Bureau of Immigration are taking part. This is the
first major deployment of the Armed Forces of Liberia.
The operation has been conducted in border areas
with only limited localized support from UNMIL.
The Government has taken additional measures,
including the closure of the border, with exceptions on
humanitarian grounds.
The Mission and the Government have long
received reporting of alleged training and recruitment
of armed groups on Liberian soil, including in reports
of the Panel of Experts, some of these alleging the
involvement of Ivorians residing in refugee camps in
Liberia. A comprehensive national strategy to address
the issue of mercenaries and foreign combatants is
still needed. When I visited the PTP refugee camp in
Grand Gedeh county last month, refugee leaders and
local authorities all called for greater camp security.
Several measures that were previously agreed have
yet to be implemented, including an unarmed National
Police presence at the camps and adequate screening
of arriving asylum seekers by the Liberia Refugee
Repatriation and Resettlement Commission.
UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) have strengthened our inter-mission
cooperation on border issues. The missions remain
ready to work with both Governments on a shared border
strategy, as the Council has called for in resolution
2062 (2012), including not only security measures but
also longer-term elements of reconciliation, justice and
employment.
Since June, the missions have conducted mirrored
patrols, and have held five meetings under a revitalized
Operation Mayo, which includes civilian participation
in joint border meetings to build confidence and draw
on the strong community ties on both sides of the border.
UNMIL and UNOCI have secured the approval of their
host Governments to conduct cross-border air operations
and aerial reconnaissance missions, which may also

4

have a deterrent effect when employed in response to
known threats. We are also setting up hotlines between
sector commanders to share information as quickly as
possible at the field level
UNMIL is able to begin the transition because of
the progress that Liberia has made since 2003. The
Mission represents nearly a decade of major investment
by the international community. That investment has
paid handsome dividends, supporting Liberians with a
time and space free of war. That has made possible two
democratic elections and steps towards national reform
on a large scale. Liberia is becoming a nation at peace
with itself and with its past, a nation able to channel its
vast economic potential into the better lives its people
have waited for.
In the context of a carefully managed transition,
the Council’s own calls for a coherent approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are particularly
important. As UNMIL works with the Government and
partners to chart a critical path towards an exit strategy,
Liberia’s stability must remain the top priority.
I look forward to working closely with all Liberians
and with the Council in support of Liberia’s continued
peaceful advancement. I would like to thank all of
UNMIL’s Liberian partners for having welcomed me
so warmly.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tillander.
Mr. Tillander: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to contribute to the
Council’s deliberations today on Liberia. I am pleased
to be here together with Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Karin Landgren. I appreciate
all of the support that the Special Representative and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) have
given me in my work. I also appreciate the guidance
provided by you, Mr. President, for today’s briefing. I
shall focus my remarks on three issues — the political
agenda, UNMIL transition and the Liberia National
Police (LNP) — and in particular how the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) will engage and provide support on
those issues.
First, on moving forward the political agenda,
coherent and inclusive national reconciliation should
be at the centre of the Liberian peace process. That is a
core peacebuilding priority in the Statement of Mutual

12-50363

S/PV.6830

Commitments, which is the compact between the PBC
and the Government of Liberia. Part of that process
entails mending relations between the State and society,
between communities and between individuals. That
includes reformulating the Liberian historical narrative,
including giving recognition to past persecution,
discrimination and marginalization. Reconciliation
is also linked to processes of constitutional review,
decentralization and electoral reform. All of those are
essential parts of the broader peacebuilding process in
Liberia. Those are transformative changes; a critical
factor for success will be the inclusivity of the processes.
One of the main challenges so far to the reconciliation
process has been to ensure a comprehensive and
coordinated approach. Since last year, the PBC has urged
national actors to develop a road map on reconciliation.
That road map has now been developed. The validation
process has been initiated and, if inclusive, will generate
national ownership for the road map.
Later this month, the PBC will engage in
discussions with Internal Affairs Minister Nelson, who
is responsible for coordinating the reconciliation and
decentralization processes. It is my ambition to keep the
PBC configuration informed and engaged in a regular
dialogue. Maintaining political will is essential. In that
respect, the Statement of Mutual Commitments serves
as a useful accountability tool.
Financial resources, in addition to the Liberian
Government’s allocation of $5 million, are also needed.
We have a responsibility in that respect. The PBC
pushed for the road map; we now need to consider ways
to support its implementation, financially as well as
with the in-kind resources that might be required.
A vibrant civil society acts as an important source
for civic engagement, and will also be vital to national
ownership of reconciliation. Yet, in Liberia those actors
are constrained by capacity limitations. We need to
find ways to encourage their work and strengthen civil
society, including by building their core capacities.
The PBC will maintain focus on this issue and I will
continue to meet with representatives of civil society
during my visits.
The PBC will liaise closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure that
our efforts are fully coherent with those of the United
Nations. With the support of the United Nations country
team, UNMIL has a vital role to play in reconciliation.

12-50363

The PBC fully supports the suggestion that this should
be reflected in UNMIL’s mandate.
The second issue is PBC support to UNMIL and
the Liberian Government to prepare for the transition.
Strengthening rule of law and security sector reform
are key in that context. They are also priorities for the
PBC. While there has been progress, there are still
some significant capacity gaps with regard to justice
and security actors, in particular the Liberia National
Police. Oversight and accountability mechanisms also
need to be firmly established.
As part of the Statement of Mutual Commitments,
the Liberian Government is committed to increasing
the budget for justice and security. The PBC will
continue to watch that as part of our ongoing dialogue
on the Commitments. We will also benefit from the
public expenditure review carried out by the World
Bank and the United Nations. The review offers advice
on what costs the Government needs to assume and
how to gradually incorporate transition costs into
the national budget. Later this week, I will have an
opportunity to discuss the follow-up to the review with
the World Bank, as well as funding directed to critical
peacebuilding priorities within the international
envelope for development.
The review also shows a considerable funding gap
over the next several years. As the transition advances,
the international community must step up its efforts
to support a smooth transition. The message should
be that the United Nations, the international financial
institutions and bilateral partners will continue to
engage and support Liberia. The United Nations country
team, I am told, will be stepping up its efforts in the
coming United Nations Peacebuilding and Development
Assistance Framework cycle. UNICEF will be adding
extra resources to its country programme. I encourage
other United Nations agencies to do the same. As Chair,
I will work with configuration members to enhance our
efforts.
Key to resource mobilization is a coordinated
approach based on Government priorities. The Justice
and Security Board and its annual work plan offer
a comprehensive and coordinated basis, which is
also aligned with the work of the PBC, the Liberian
Peacebuilding Programme and the Statement of Mutual
Commitments. But efforts must be made to enhance the
functioning of the Trust Fund for Justice and Security.
Bilateral partners are presently working closely with

5

S/PV.6830

the United Nations Development Programme to that
end. A similar set-up is being discussed for support to
reconciliation activities, and it must work without flaws
or delays.
A key project already under way is the regional
justice and security hubs. The hubs should facilitate
the establishment of an effective and accountable
State presence throughout the country. That will also
contribute to closing gaps and avoiding any appearance
of a vacuum. However, delays in the construction of the
first hub generated valid questions about its viability.
The response can best be provided through action on the
ground, by completing the establishment of the hub and
showing its impact. As we begin to assess the impact on
the surrounding communities, if security is enhanced
and access to justice increased, the PBC will have a
persuasive presentation for resource mobilization for
the next hubs.
Several lessons have already been identified. The
United Nations system must be able to more effectively
coordinate its efforts between it and the Government.
Time frames must be adhered to. The design of the hubs
needs to be adjusted according to the circumstances of
each region. If the lessons are effectively applied, it
should be possible to complete the next four hubs within
tight time frames. The PBC will continue to monitor
the implementation of the hub and to draw attention to
shortcomings when necessary.
Finally, the third point has to do with PBC support
for capacity-building of the Liberia National Police. I
have already touched upon some aspects, but would
like to add the following.
After a request in May by the President of Liberia,
the PBC facilitated consultations on how to strengthen
and coordinate training support to Liberian National
Police. The outcome was an understanding that focus
should continue on Government ownership, building on
UNMIL accomplishments and its overarching role. But
it is also clear that, to ensure a smooth transition, we
must explore modalities for closer cooperation between
UNMIL, bilateral partners and the country team, with
the purpose of improving the quality and numbers of
the LNP.
The PBC will continue to encourage partners
to get involved, increase support and enhance
coordination. That should include increasing their role
in coordinating efforts and leading in specific areas.
The PBC will explore how it can contribute to creative

6

approaches to deploying highly skilled officers to
specific professional posts, which was an issue raised
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
at the briefing of the troop- and police-contributing
countries on 6 September.
The PBC is in the process of finalizing a resource
mobilization strategy and a corresponding work
plan. We will work closely with the Government and
UNMIL. The intention is to be a support to the Liberian
Government and its resource mobilization efforts.
A primary consideration will be how to build on the
investment of the PBF and its catalytic role. There is
much potential and good examples, such as Australian
support to PBF-funded youth empowerment and partner
support to the PBF-funded United Nations Habitat work
on land conflict resolution.
Later this month, we will meet with the Minister of
Finance, Mr. Konneh, and other key PBC counterparts,
who will brief the Commission on progress on
Government commitments. As previously indicated,
the Statement of Mutual Commitments is a valuable
accountability tool for both the Government and
members of the configuration.
We will continue to use it to its full potential, and
will keep the Council informed of the outcome of our
second review.
I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing the PBC to
share its views. We remain at the Council’s disposal for
any questions now, as well as in the future.
The President: I thank Mr. Tillander for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I am grateful for the
opportunity afforded me to participate in this briefing
as the Council prepares to consider the twenty-fourth
progress report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/641)
on the activities of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL).
As routine as such reports may seem, each one
presents an occasion for reflection and a renewal of
commitment, especially as they are usually linked to
decisions on the extension of mandates. I hope that
on this occasion consensus will be facilitated by the
Council’s earlier endorsement, in April 2012, of the plan
for a phased transition, leading to the reconfiguration
of UNMIL’s presence by June 2015.

12-50363

S/PV.6830

In that regard, I would like to express my
Government’s deep appreciation of the steadfast
support that the Council has provided to Liberia and
for the decision that it will hopefully take on the
continuation of our partnership with the United Nations
through UNMIL.
I would like to echo the sentiments of welcome
to the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Karin Landgren, which she has already
received from my President and other officials of the
Liberian Government in Monrovia. My colleagues at
the Permanent Mission of Liberia and I look forward
to working with her in her challenging, but hopefully
enriching, assignment.
I thank Ms. Landgren for her very informative and
insightful overview of the situation in Liberia, which
highlights the areas of progress and the challenges that
remain, with all of which we can fully associate. We
are confident that her vast professional experience will
enable her to fulfil her duties very well indeed.
I wish also to recognize the good stewardship of
Mr. Moustapha Soumaré, who steered the UNMIL
ship for the past six months and is deserving of
our commendation. In his presentation, the Chair
of the Liberia configuration, Mr. Tillander, also
demonstrated the value added of Liberia’s engagement
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Both
presentations demonstrate the complementarity and
mutually reinforcing effect of those two arms of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Needless to
say, the PBC is helping to build capacity, to promote
decentralization and to provide support for national
reconciliation. Bringing the two arms together in such
a briefing can only be immensely beneficial to the
Council’s work. Much has already been said. I do not
intend to repeat, but simply to emphasize a few points.
The first point is that security along the
Liberia─Côte d’Ivoire border is a major preoccupation
of my Government. That worrying situation requires
close attention and a high level of vigilance, since it
poses potential risks to national and regional security.
The deployment of civilian and military forces to
border areas for protracted periods is stretching already
scarce Government resources. The capacity to meet our
obligations to the refugees in the camps is strained.
That was mentioned by the Special Representative. In
a visit to the Economic Community of West African
States Commission in Abuja last Friday, the President

12-50363

of Liberia, Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
underscored the gravity of the situation and warned of
the possibility that it could overwhelm Liberia’s nascent
security services, with implications for both sides of the
border. In commending actions that UNMIL and the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire are taking in
support of the national forces to manage the situation,
we stress the imperative of continued cooperation and
collaboration between national and international forces
on both sides of the border.
Secondly, I want to reaffirm my Government’s
intention to honour the commitments that it has made,
whether in the Statement of Mutual Commitments with
the PBC or in other instruments and plans concluded
with UNMIL in the pursuit of indentified priorities.
The Government has subscribed to certain principles
of governance as a matter of national policy and has
aligned itself with countries of a similar persuasion in
the Group of Seven Plus. We seek to promote justice,
security, popular participation for our people and the
effective management and use of our national resources
for their benefit. The seemingly slow progress in
certain areas, which we acknowledge, does not reflect
a wavering of political will, but rather a limitation of
means, notably in the capacity and financial resources
available. They are ultimately the determinants of
allocations in a small budget that aims to address
immense needs. Let me affirm that the Government is
very anxious to accelerate progress to a level that meets
the expectations of our friends in the international
community and also responds to the aspirations of the
Liberian people.
The third point of emphasis relates to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNMIL of 15 August, which is
the basis for our discussion today. We appreciate the
effort to present a balanced account of developments,
which is usually the hallmark of such reports. However,
I have been instructed to express my Government’s
disappointment that a few assertions do not reach the
expected level of accuracy. For the purposes of the
closed consultations, I have taken the liberty to share
with members of the Council ─ I do not know if they
have received them ─ my Government’s comments on
the report, which were conveyed to Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General and Head of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations.
We believe that the relatively open and constructive
relationship that has been nurtured between my
Government and UNMIL over the years should allow

7

S/PV.6830

for a discussion of some of those draft documents, not
reserving any right to veto for the Government but
enabling a joint effort to vet and verify assertions that
would be put in the public domain. The reports help to
shape and can influence the views of the international
community about Liberia, including its potential
investment partners. Notwithstanding the United
Nations culture and practice, which may prohibit the
sharing of such draft documents a priori, it is prudent
that some arrangement be agreed to avoid that type
of intervention. In making public its assessments, the
United Nations is respectfully encouraged to observe the
principle of do no harm so that it does not inadvertently
deepen the fault lines in our society, many of which are
still triggers of conflict.
The United Nations engagement in Liberia,
in all of its aspects, continues to be critical to the
country’s stability and progress. The nature and form
of that engagement will inevitably change, but we are
receptive to a smooth and orderly transition in line with
conditions on the ground. That is why my Government
has endorsed the recommendations of the technical

assessment mission, as contained in the April report
(S/2012/230). We already see the United Nations country
team redesigning its programmes in the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2013-2017
and synchronizing activities with UNMIL’s drawdown
plan. On Monday, we participated in the presentation of
the draft country programme for Liberia of the United
Nations Development Programme, which covers the
same four-year timeframe.
All of what I have referred to are indicators of a
long-term partnership. Liberia appreciates the Security
Council’s invaluable contribution to the partnership
and to the maintenance of an environment conducive to
the implementation of activities aimed at improving the
well-being of the Liberian people. We are also grateful
to our bilateral partners, many of whom some of those
around the table represent, for the support. We look
forward to continued engagement.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

8

12-50363
