S/PRST/2007/41

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 October 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5768th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 October 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council stresses the urgent need for an inclusive and
sustainable political settlement in Darfur and strongly welcomes, in this
regard, the convening of peace talks on 27 October in Sirte, under the
leadership of United Nations Special Envoy Mr. Jan Eliasson and African
Union Special Envoy Dr. Salim Salim, who have the Council’s full support.
“The Security Council expresses its strong concern at the continuing
deterioration in the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur and urges all
parties to exercise restraint immediately, avoiding retaliation and escalation.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to attend and to engage fully
and constructively in the talks, and, as a first step, to urgently agree and
implement a cessation of hostilities to be overseen by the United Nations and
the African Union. The Council underlines its willingness to take action
against any party that seeks to undermine the peace process, including by
failing to respect such a cessation of hostilities or by impeding the talks,
peacekeeping or humanitarian aid. The Council also recognizes that due
process must take its course.
“The Security Council underlines that an inclusive political settlement
and the successful deployment of UNAMID are essential for re-establishing
peace and stability in Darfur. The Council expresses its deep concern at the
delays in deploying UNAMID. The Council calls, in this regard, for Member
States to urgently make available the aviation and ground transport units still
required for UNAMID and for all parties to facilitate and expedite UNAMID’s
effective deployment.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, in his regular
30-day reports to the Council on UNAMID, to also report on progress being
made on, and any obstacles to, the political process and the situation on the
ground.”

07-56312 (E) 241007

*0756312*
