A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/95
23 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.10)]
49/95.

Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation for
development through partnership

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/165 of 21 December 1993 on renewal of the
dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for development
through partnership,
Noting with interest the reports of the Secretary-General on an agenda
for development, as requested in its resolutions 47/181 of 22 December 1992
and 48/166 of 21 December 1993, 1/
Noting with interest also the role of the Secretary-General in
encouraging all countries to engage in a constructive dialogue for advancing
development and in facilitating their efforts in that regard,
Stressing the importance of a fruitful dialogue to ensure a favourable
political and economic environment for advancing international cooperation for
development,
1.
Welcomes with appreciation the note by the Secretary-General on
the renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international economic
cooperation for development through partnership; 2/

1/

A/48/689, A/48/935 and A/49/665.

2/

A/49/542.

95-76195

/...

A/RES/49/95
Page 2

2.
Reaffirms the need to strengthen constructive dialogue and
partnership in order to promote further international economic cooperation for
development;
3.
Also reaffirms that such a dialogue should be conducted in
response to the imperatives of mutual interests and benefits, genuine
interdependence, shared responsibility and the partnership for achieving
sustained economic growth and sustainable development as well as improving the
international economic environment that is conducive to such development, and
that the United Nations system should play a central role in facilitating such
a dialogue;
4.
Further reaffirms that the United Nations has a central role to
play in promoting international cooperation for development and in bringing
development issues to the attention of the international community, and
requests the Secretary-General, drawing upon statements made by Member States
on various economic and social issues within the context of the debates on
those issues held in the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
to propose for consideration various issues or themes that represent mutual
interests, which would involve benefit to all countries and which are also
relevant to the elaboration of an agenda for development;
5.
Invites the working group on the agenda for development to give
consideration to the proposal of the Secretary-General that advantage be taken
of the presence of high-level representatives during the early part of the
sessions of the General Assembly to conduct a dialogue and to convene special
sessions of the Assembly on major themes relevant to the current and emerging
economic and social issues in the global agenda, including those identified
under the agenda for development;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
fiftieth session;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session an item entitled "Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation for development through partnership".
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
