A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/44
26 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 140
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/50/637)]
50/44.

United Nations Decade of International Law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/23 of 17 November 1989, by which it declared
the period 1990-1999 the United Nations Decade of International Law,
Recalling also that the main purposes of the Decade, according to
resolution 44/23, should be, inter alia:
To promote acceptance of and respect for the principles of
(a)
international law;
(b)
To promote means and methods for the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States, including resort to and full respect for the
International Court of Justice;
(c)
To encourage the progressive development of international law and
its codification;
(d)
To encourage the teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law,
Recalling further its resolution 49/50 of 9 December 1994, to which was
annexed the programme for the activities for the third term (1995-1996) of the
Decade,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report 1/
submitted pursuant to resolution 49/50,

1/
96-76201

A/50/368 and Add.1-3.
/...

A/RES/50/44
Page 2

Having considered the above-mentioned report,
Recalling that at the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly the
Sixth Committee established the Working Group on the United Nations Decade of
International Law with a view to preparing generally acceptable
recommendations on the programme of activities for the Decade,
Noting that at the forty-sixth, forty-seventh, forty-eighth, forty-ninth
and fiftieth sessions of the General Assembly the Sixth Committee reconvened
the Working Group to continue its work in accordance with resolutions 45/40 of
28 November 1990, 46/53 of 9 December 1991, 47/32 of 25 November 1992, 48/30
of 9 December 1993 and 49/50,
Having considered the oral report of the Chairman of the Working Group
submitted to the Sixth Committee, 2/
1.
Expresses its appreciation for the work done on the United Nations
Decade of International Law at the current session, and requests the Working
Group of the Sixth Committee to continue its work at the fifty-first session
in accordance with its mandate and methods of work;
2.
Also expresses its appreciation to States and international
organizations and institutions that have undertaken activities in
implementation of the programme for the activities for the third term
(1995-1996) of the Decade, including sponsoring conferences on various
subjects of international law;
3.
Further expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
the successful organization of the United Nations Congress on Public
International Law, held from 13 to 17 March 1995, noting with satisfaction
that the Congress emphasized the importance of all aspects of international
law and focused on the four main purposes of the Decade, as well as on new
challenges and expectations for the twenty-first century, and requests the
Secretary-General, within existing resources, to make the proceedings widely
available;
4.
Strongly welcomes the recent advances made by the Treaty Section
of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in its programme of
computerization of the Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Treaty Series and looks forward to the early
effective availability of the former on the Internet and the latter on-line to
Member States and other users;
5.
Invites all States and international organizations and
institutions referred to in the programme to provide, update or supplement
information on activities they have undertaken in implementation of it, as
appropriate, to the Secretary-General, as well as to submit their views on
possible activities for the next term of the Decade;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit, on the basis of such
information as well as of new information on the activities of the United
Nations relevant to the progressive development of international law and its

2/

See A/C.6/50/SR.45.
/...

A/RES/50/44
Page 3

codification, a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session on
the implementation of the programme;
7.
Encourages States to disseminate at the national level, as
appropriate, information contained in the report of the Secretary-General;
8.
Appeals to States, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations working in the field of international law and
to the private sector to make financial contributions or contributions in kind
for the purpose of facilitating the implementation of the programme;
9.
Encourages the Office of Legal Affairs to continue in its efforts
to bring up to date the publication of the United Nations Treaty Series and
the United Nations Juridical Yearbook;
10.
Once again requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of States and international organizations and institutions working
in the field of international law the programme annexed to resolution 49/50;
11.
Invites the International Committee of the Red Cross to continue
to report on activities undertaken by the Committee and other relevant bodies
with regard to the protection of the environment in times of armed conflict,
so that the information received may be included in the report to be prepared
pursuant to paragraph 6 above;
12.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "United Nations Decade of International Law".
87th plenary meeting
11 December 1995
