Reeolutiom adopted 011 the reporta of the Second Comm.ittee

Having considered the report of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its third session33 and the relevant section
~f the report of the Economic and Social Council, 34
l. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in Habitat: United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements;
(b) Representatives of organizations which have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
intematíonal conferences convened under its auspices,
in the capacity of observers, in accordance with Assembly resolutíon 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
(e) Representatives of the national Iiberation movements recognized in its area by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX)
of 10 December 1974;
(d) The specialized agencies and the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs of
the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(e) lnterested regional intergovemmental organizations to be represented by observers;
(f) Concemed non-govemmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to invite other
directly concemed intergovemmental organizations and
non-govemmental organizations of genuinely intemational character that may express the wish by 29 February 1976 to be represented by observers;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
necessary arrangements are made for the effective participation in the Conference of the representatives referred to in paragraph 1, subparagraphs ( b) and (e),
above, including the requisite financia! provisions for
travel expenses, per diem allowances and audio-visual
presentations;
4. Notes with appreciation the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on preparations far the Conference;311
5. Endorses the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee for Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements that 29 February 1976
should be a day for the concentration of publicity on
human settlements issues and the Conference ;36
6. Further notes that the second session of the
Preparatory Com.mittee will be held at United Nations
Headquarters from 12 to 23 January 1976;
7. Approves the provisional agenda of the Conference, as proposed in the report of the Secretary-General ;37
8. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees;
9. Endorses the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee at its resumed first session for a proposed structure of the Conference which would in~lude
33 Jbid., Supplement No.
34 lbid., Supplement No.

311 A/10234.

36 lbid., para. 37.
37 A/10234, annex L

25 (A/10025).
J (A/ 10003 ), chap. IV, sect. F.

55

plenary meetings and three main committees meeting
simultaneously, 38 and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the necessary interpretation and other services;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
results of the Conference, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements far the preparations that will
have to be undertaken after the Conference to facilitate consideration of the recommendations of the Conference by. the General Assembly at its thirty-4irst
session.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3439 (XXX).

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 Oecember 1973
and 3313 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intemational Economic Order, its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, and its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation,
f!aving considered the report of the Council of the
Umted Nations University on its fourth and fifth sessions39 and the report of the Secretary-General on
the University, 40
Noting decision 5.2.2 of 9 October 1975, adopted
by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
ninety-eighth session, in which the Board reaffirmed the
need for support of the United Nations University,
Taking note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
the budget of the United Nations University,41
Expressing its satisfaction at the commencement of
the full operations of the University Centre in Tokyo
with the assumption of office by the Rector of the
United Nations University,
Noting that the Council of the United Nations University has identified three broad areas far priority attention, as mentioned in paragraph 19 of the report of
the Council of the University, 39
,,
Reaffirming that, as an intemational community
of scholars, the United Nations University should
play an important role in furthering the purpos~s and
principies of the Charter of the United .Nations by
devoting its work to research into the pressing global
problems that are the concem of the United Nations
and of the organizations of the United Nations system,
l. Takes note of the report of the Councíl of the
United Nations University on its fourth and fifth sessions and the report of the Secretary-General;
ªªA/10234, para. 11.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/10031).
40 A/10237.
41 A/ AC.169/L.4.
39 Official

56

General A.ssembly-Thirtieth Session

2. Expresses the hope that the United Nations University will, under tbe joint sponsorship of tbe United
Nations and tbe United Nations Educational, Scientilfic
and Cultural Organization, continue to grow as an important and autonomous organ of the General Assembly cbarged witb tbe responsibility for scbolarly inquiry, on a truly global basis, into urgent problems
facing mankind as a wbole;
3. Encourages the United Nations University to pursue its work within the tbree broad areas of priority
identified in paragrapb 19 of the report of tbe Council
of the University so as to take due account, inter alia,
of tbe issues mentioned by the pertinent resolutions of
tbe General Assembly;
4. Urges tbe United Nations Un_iversity to embark
on its full activities as soon as possible and establisb
appropriate links witb interested and qualified institutions all over the world, particularly tbose of developing countries, so as to respond to tbe mounting expectations of the world university, scientific and otber
intellectual communities;
5. Stresses tbe need for full co-operation and coordination, witbin tbe framework establisbyq by tbe
Charter of tbe United Nations for co-ordinat1ng policíes and activities in tbe economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields, between the United Nations University and tbe appropriate agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, in tbe elaboration of tbe programmes of the University witb a view to avoiding
duplication of effort and permitting utilization of the
available expertise in the most effective and economical
manner;
6. Appeals to all Member States to give financia! and
otber support to the United Nations University in tbe
form of grants to its Endowment Fund and, wbere possible, for specific programmes, and to co-operate fully
towards tbe realization of tbe University's global network of institutions;
7. Requests tbe Secretary-General, in co-operation
• with tbe Rector of tbe United Nations University, tbe
Council of tbe University and tbe Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, furtber to intensify his efforts to raise more
funds for the University from Governments and nongovernmental sburces, including foundations, universities and individuals, in accordance witb tbe Cbarter of
tbe University, and to submit a report to tbe General
Assembly at its tbirty-first session on tbe results of bis
efforts, together with tbe annual report of tbe Council
of tbe University.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3440 (XXX). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, 3152 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973
and 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
Recalling also section 11, paragrapb 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1972 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Recognizing tbat natural disasters constitute a development problem of great magnitude requiring maximum
use of available resources for the prevention and mitigation of such calamities,

Aware that the Office of tbe United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, in addition to being strengthened
as provided for in General Assembly resolution 3243
(XXIX), sbould be given the requisite means to take
more effective and continuing action against disasters,
including emergency relief, pre-disaster planning and
promotion of disaster prevention activities,
Taking note with satisfaction of the reports of the
Secretary-General concerning the activities of the Office
of tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator42
and tbe statement made before the Second Committee
by tbe Co-ordinator on tbe activities of bis Office, 43
as well as tbe related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44
I. Decides to expand tbe trust fund established under its resolution 3243 (XXIX) to strengthen the
capability of the Office of tbe United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, so as to fulfil the following additional purposes:
(a) To provide instantly emergency assistance for
countries stricken by natural disasters or otber disaster
situations;
.
( b) To provide, as an 1nterim measure and pending
review at a future date of alternative sources of financing, including the United Nations Development Programme, tecbnical assistance to Governments far tbe
elaboration of national plans for natural disaster prevention and preparedness;
2. Requests tbe Secretary-General to establisb an
honorary committee, composed of distinguished persons particularly interested in and concerned witb disaster relief, to assist tbe Secretary-General in mobilizing financial resources for disaster-related activities and
to advise and counsel bim in tbis regard;
3. lnvites all States to make voluntary contributions
to tbe expanded trust fund in order to permit implementation of effective, significant and continuing action by
tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to help
disaster-stricken and disaster-prone countries;
4. Further invites all States to encourage the setting up of national fund-raising committees to promote
voluntary contributions for disaster-related activities,
bearing in mind tbe co-ordinating role of tbe Office of
tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator;
5. Requests tbe United Nations organs and other
bodies concerned to co-operate with tbe Office of tbe
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in tbe
formulation of an intemational strategy for disaster prevention and, in due time, to assist the Office in the dissemination of tbe results achieved;
6. Requests the. Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session and
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3441 (XXX),

Assistance to the drought-stricken
areas of Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the persistence of drought
in many parts of Ethiopia,
42 A/ 10079 and Corr .1 and Add. l.
43 Of!icial Records of the General Assembly

Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1691st meeting, parns'. 2-6.
44 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 8A (A/10008/
Add.1-28), document A/10008/Add.5.
