S/PV.8434

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8434th meeting

Thursday, 20 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45285 (E)
*1845285*

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of your
important role this month. Please allow me to say a few
words. My statement will be a bit long because, as you
know, this will be the last statement I shall make under
my current mandate.
(spoke in English)
I thank you for this opportunity to deliver my
monthly briefing for the final time under this mandate. I
am circulating the full written statement to the Council.
I pray the Council will forgive me for the length of this
statement. It is longer than usual, but there is a reason
for that.
I have served as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria for four years and four months — almost
exactly the length of the First World War. The Syrian
people have been enduring a conflict for seven and a
half years — longer than the Second World War. This
conflict has been and remains a tragedy for the Syrian
people. It has been a dirty, brutal and horrific war. It has
seen all the faultiness within Syria, the region and the
world prevail over the will of the Syrian people, Syrian
unity, regional stability and international cooperation.
No effort — not mine nor that of the Council or of
anyone else — has been able to completely stop the
logic of war from prevailing. However, we hope that we
are getting close to that point.
2/27

20/12/2018

In spite of several ceasefires and some moments
of real hope, the battlefield has all too often prevailed
over peace talks. There have been constant shifts. Now
is the time to look even more closely at the ultimate
question: Will peace be won? We believe that it should
and it can. Will it be sustainable? We believe that it can
and it should be. That is why a real political process is
required. The Security Council outlined the elements
for the political process in resolution 2254 (2015).
The Council exclusively mandated the United Nations
to convene the parties, facilitate the political process
and finalize participation, with full respect for Syria’s
sovereignty and the ability of the Syrian people to
choose their own representatives, with the purpose of
enabling the Syrian people to determine independently
and democratically their own future — all while
stressing the vital, parallel importance of a nationwide
ceasefire.
With this mandate, I believe that we have made
some difference. To be frank, it is not enough, but we
have made some difference — together. We have saved
lives with some ceasefires and de-escalations; albeit
limited in scope and in time, they did save lives. We
stimulated humanitarian access to places that were
not getting it, although nowhere near what civilians
desperately needed and asked for.
We have convened the Government and the
opposition and assisted in the process of uniting the
opposition, although we must admit that we have
not yet had the parties really recognize each other as
interlocutors with whom they must do business and
actually negotiate, let alone reach agreements. We have
elaborated with the parties key principles for a common
future and settlement, but we have not yet turned these
into real mechanisms for implementation. We have
identified a clear agenda accepted by the parties that
would facilitate negotiation, but we have not yet been
able to tap into its potential.
We have with determination promoted the
involvement of Syrian women in the search for a
peaceful settlement to the crisis. They know what their
country is facing; they constitute more than half of the
population, even though their participation is constantly
challenged. We have with equal determination promoted
the meaningful inclusion and substantive participation
of civil society; but this, too, is constantly challenged.
We have nearly completed the work of putting in
place a constitutional committee to draft a constitutional
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

reform, as a contribution to the political process, but
there is an extra mile to go. We know what is needed
for a safe, calm, neutral environment in Syria and for
United Nations-supervised elections of the highest
international standards pursuant to a new, reformed
constitution, but we have not been able to begin the full
work required to make that a reality.
I deeply regret what has not been achieved, and
I am sorry that it has not been possible to do more. I
think we in the Security Council should share in that
regret. I know we do. However, we have identified and
put in place some of the crucial foundation on which
the future process can build. My successor has all
the skills and ability to work out what combination of
continuity and change is required. He was my successor
in Lebanon. He did better than I did. He is a friend
and someone we all respect. He has been tested and is
someone that many Council members know. For that
reason, I am very confident about what I am saying.
However, let us make no mistake, and here please
allow me to pay deep respect to Kofi Annan and
Lakhdar Brahimi. As with my own predecessors and
me, the success of my successor will depend on the
Council’s unity and determination to empower and
support the United Nations and to pressure all parties to
begin real dialogue, negotiate and compromise with a
view to addressing the grievances of the Syrian people
and implementing resolution 2254 (2015).
Following the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015),
we did see serious attempts to put in place a ceasefire
and to cooperate in countering terrorism, which is and
will continue to be the priority of all of us because it has
been threatening everyone in this Chamber and beyond.
We also saw serious attempts to support the Geneva
talks on a political transition via the International Syria
Support Group. However, that promise has not yet
been fulfilled. The unity here is not yet strong enough,
and the forces that have been trying to complicate
peacemaking have at times proven to be stronger.
By the start of 2017, in Astana Iran, Russia and
Turkey committed to cooperating on de-escalation and
confidence-building. Jordan, the United States and the
Russian Federation began to work on de-escalation in
the south-west later in the year. Although the results
were mixed, but lives were saved. Sadly however, three
of the four de-escalation arrangements that did stand
came to an end. There were also lives lost. One of those
areas — Idlib, where there are more than 3 million

S/PV. 8434

civilians — did hold and is still holding and we all
support that arrangement.
In the meantime, despite the establishment of
a working group in December — which, we must
recognize, is always better than nothing — results on
detainees, abductees and missing persons fell short of
hopes. It did, however, produce initial concrete, albeit
modest movement recently. From the point of view of
the Syrian people, however, it is unacceptable that tens
of thousands languish in detention, remain unaccounted
for amid fear, torture or death, or being unaccounted
for.
We have never had a so-called nationwide ceasefire
for any length of time or the real confidence-building
that resolution 2254 (2015) envisaged, alongside the
Geneva political talks. However, we did often get close.
Despite that, the United Nations-facilitated Geneva talks
identified a clear agenda of four baskets of issues based
on resolution 2254 (2015). Members are very familiar
with them, but we should recall them because we do
not want to lose what has been achieved. Those baskets
produced 12 Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles,
developed with the extensive input of the Government
and the opposition and through consultation with a
broad cross-section of civil society and Syrian women.
The 12 Principles are a foundation on which my
successor can work. They provide a vision for the
future of Syria that can be shared by all, as well as
carefully crafted formulas on key issues that can
be the basis for future work. Those issues include
sovereignty and unity; governance and democracy; the
separation of powers and human rights; religion and
the State; decentralization; measures against terrorism;
respect for all components of Syrian society; the full
participation of women; the right of refugees to return
to their homes and land and so on.
Logically, a Syrian-owned and Syria-led political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, must ensure
the genuine realization in practice, not only in words,
of the Principles through agreements, mechanisms
and concrete steps, guided by resolution 2254 (2015).
As was recognized at the presidential level between
the United States and the Russian Federation in Da
Nang in November 2017, constitutional reform and
United Nations-supervised elections in a safe and
neutral environment open the way for the concrete
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

18-452853/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

20/12/2018

As I indicated a year and a day ago when I briefed the
Security Council on 19 December 2017 (see S/PV.8142),
the United Nations has identified, through baskets 2
and 3 of the Geneva process, 11 parameters — these
are set out in the written briefing that I will circulate
to members — for a constitution-making process and 6
insights on United Nation-supervised elections. In my
assessment, those are broad commonalties that could
guide the parties and that would, in any case, guide the
United Nations and my successor as a facilitator.

Russia and the United Nations clearly understood
that the Special Envoy was to facilitate that process and
enjoyed the prerogative of finalization in the formation
of the constitutional committee. The Special Envoy
would be able to identify members of that committee
from a Sochi pool of candidates, as well as to draw
on other people from outside that pool, if required, to
ensure a credible and balanced committee. The United
Nations facilitation of that process was the clear basis
for moving forward.

By the end of 2017, Russia, Turkey and Iran were
preparing to convene a gathering of Syrians in Sochi.
I attended the Sochi meeting on the guidance of the
Secretary-General in the light of the understanding
reached by the Secretary-General and myself in Vienna
with diplomats of the Russian Federation that the Sochi
meeting would make a contribution by enabling the
United Nations to establish under its auspices in Geneva
a key element in the architecture of the broader process
that the realization of resolution 2254 (2015) requires.

Since the Sochi meeting, over the course of
almost a year, I have been undertaking a marathon of
consultations with Syrian and international stakeholders,
in particular the conveners of the Sochi meeting, to
enable the establishment of a Syrian-owned, Syrianled, United Nations-facilitated, balanced, inclusive and
credible constitutional committee in Geneva. I will not
recount all the steps of that diplomacy. However, let me
reiterate the key points so that we know where we stand
before I pass the issue on to my successor.

The Sochi final statement, which the Russian
Federation circulated to the Council in the Chamber
as an official document, affirmed the 12 Principles
as the basis for the political settlement. It called for
the formation of a constitutional committee with
the purpose of drafting constitutional reform as a
contribution to the political settlement under the
United Nations auspices, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). I underline the word “contribution”. The
constitutional committee can thus be a key building
block in a real political process — an important entry
point so to say — but certainly not the only one. Syrians
know that, and Council members and I know that.

The Government and the opposition have conveyed
50 names each and agreed not to question the 50 names
of the other side. It was accepted that there should be
50 names on a middle third list, meeting the criteria
of the Sochi final statement. It was accepted that that
would therefore form a constitutional committee of
150 members. It was accepted that a drafting body of
a maximum of 45 people would be identified, with 15
from each of the three groups. It was accepted that
conducive chairing and decision-making arrangements
needed to be clearly identified. It was affirmed that
the constitutional committee would be convened under
United Nations auspices in Geneva.

In Sochi it was agreed that such a committee
would at the very least comprise Government and
opposition representatives in the intra-Syrian talks,
Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women; that care would be taken to ensure
adequate representation of Syria’s ethnic and religious
components; and that “final agreement” is to be
reached in the United Nations-led Geneva process on
the mandate and terms of reference, powers, rules of
procedure and selection criteria for the composition
of the constitutional committee. To that end, the
Sochi final statement appealed “to the United Nations
Secretary-General to assign the Special Envoy for Syria
for the assistance of the constitutional committee work
in Geneva”.

Five months ago, the United Nations put forward
a consolidated proposed middle third list, based on
credibility, balance and inclusivity, including aiming
at an overall minimum of 30 per cent women on the
constitutional committee. The opposition did not
entirely like that list but agreed not to question it in the
spirit of moving forward. The Government had strong
objections to the list and indicated that it would work
with the conveners of the Sochi meeting on a different
list and that the United Nations should wait for that
input.

4/27

On 27 October in Istanbul, the leaders of
France, Germany, Russia and Turkey agreed that
the end of December should be a target, considering
the circumstances, for the establishment of the
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

constitutional committee. The Secretary-General
tasked me, before moving on, to verify whether it was
possible to establish a credible, balanced, inclusive,
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee to draft a constitutional
reform for popular approval and to fundamentally
advance that objective.
To overcome the Government’s concerns, while
not losing the engagement of the opposition and
maintaining the quality and legitimacy of the overall
package, I indicated that the United Nations would be
receptive to modest, credible and balanced proposals,
while bearing in mind its mandate and responsibilities
in the context of the need to finalize the package. We
understand that it is a great responsibility for the United
Nations because it is to exercise its mandate and it is
expected not to accept any kind of diktat with regard
to convening the constitutional committee or finalizing
the package.
In recent weeks, diplomacy beyond the United
Nations Secretariat has intensified, leading to a meeting
that I hosted in Geneva on Tuesday with the Foreign
Ministers of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Turkey. The SecretaryGeneral was closely involved throughout. The three
Foreign Ministers provided the United Nations with
significant joint input regarding the constitutional
committee. That significant joint input comprised 50
names, drawing partly on my own suggestions, as their
proposal for the middle third list for the constitutional
committee.
Having examined the names, the Secretariat
assessed that it would not yet feel fully comfortable in
giving the United Nations stamp of legitimacy to all 50
names as meeting the necessary criteria of credibility
and balance; hence, at our suggestion, the need to go the
extra mile. We have seen the loss of some experienced
experts of excellent credentials, who would also have
been natural bridge-builders. We know that no list will
ever be perfect, but in our assessment the list needed a
further review and some extra miles to be put in.
There is also a need to identify with greater
precision the remainder of the package with the parties
on board so that the constitutional committee — when it
meets — can effectively function, delivering outcomes
in line with its own mandate as a genuine instrument
within a larger political process towards sustainable
peace. In that respect, my consultations leave me

S/PV. 8434

confident that it should be possible to agree on a 75-per
cent voting threshold and balanced co-chairmanship
arrangements. I should like to add, if I may, that
regardless of who the co-chairs are, if one is from the
Government then the other should be a member of the
opposition, and one of them should be a woman, given
that women represent some 51 to 55 per cent of the
population.
My consultations also leave me confident that it is
understood that the constitutional committee will draft
a constitutional reform and that the United Nations will
have the crucial role of accompanying and facilitating
this Syrian-owned process. It is also crucial to identify
how the smaller drafting body would be selected and
begin to work. The parties therefore need to buy into
those key details. Let us be frank. I know that we always
tend to look at the glass as either half full or half empty,
but there has been real progress made. We nearly have a
list. The rules of procedure have become a little clearer,
but we need to go that extra mile.
If a constitutional committee is established, it will
of course be done with the blessing of the Security
Council. That would have to happen in any case. It will
be vital for the Council to support regular reviews of the
progress of the committee’s work and any adjustments
required along the road in order to help a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led constitutional committee, in accordance
with the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The United Nations alone has the legitimacy and
mandate to bless — at least at the initial stage — the
constitutional committee, given the circumstances in
Syria. That is the role that the Security Council can play.
That must be accompanied by parallel efforts to ensure
a full ceasefire, see detainees and abductees released at
scale, build confidence, create a safe, calm and neutral
environment with reforms of governance, and lay the
ground for United Nations-supervised elections, as per
resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, and contrary to the spirit of building
mutual confidence, we have been very concerned at
times by the recent and credible reports of some type of
intimidation and coercion of persons reportedly on the
list for the constitutional committee and their family
members inside Syria. Those reports have become
more frequent in recent days and, frankly, we consider
that very worrisome. This is therefore a fundamental
reminder of the need for concrete steps towards what
we call a safe, calm and neutral environment. That

18-452855/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

is also one of the things that refugees and internally
displaced persons have been telling us in no uncertain
terms. They want a safe and neutral environment.
People will consider returning when they feel safe;
if their fundamental rights are protected; if they can
reunite with their families in the areas they came from;
if their property and other legal rights are preserved and
institutions of the State protect such rights; and if basic
social services are delivered without political prejudice
or bias. The list of legitimate questions does not end
here. All of those and other questions are key to the
establishment of a calm, safe and neutral environment.
If we are able to start a constitutional committee, it
will be a new test of political will. Will the Government
engage seriously and show a willingness to address
real grievances — grievances that have been present
since the very origin of this horrible conflict? Will the
opposition engage seriously and realistically, realizing
that the process of change in Syria will not be an easy
one, but that it also needs it to be pragmatic? I urge
them both to do so. There is no other way out of the
Syrian conflict.
Let me commend the voices of the Syrians beyond
the Government and the opposition who are working
for peace against all odds. Many of them participate in
the Civil Society Support Room, which we created in
partnership with Syrians who committed to the value
of peace. Indeed, many are meeting with my team
this week in regional capitals. I must therefore urge
members of the Council, the international community
and Syrian parties more broadly to listen to those voices,
even when I am no longer there. They are important.
They should be protected and involved meaningfully
on the long and challenging road ahead. I salute those
Syrian civilians and thank them for their efforts and
willingness to engage with us and with the Council.
Let me also once again stress the crucial role of
women in the Syrian political process. This is not lip
service. I have seen them; they have had enormous
influence. They were given a chance and can be given
more chances to do so. I have done everything I could
to promote this, both with the delegations and within
civil society. I have also been assisted by the Women’s
Advisory Board, the membership of which has recently
rotated and been renewed. The Women’s Advisory
Board is a model for what is possible when Syrians from
different backgrounds come together to accompany the
6/27

20/12/2018

mediation process. I can see that that has now also been
replicated in the Yemen file.
Women in Syria have continued to remind me
of what is possible and to plea for a process that is
fully inclusive of all of Syrian society, with the full
participation of women and everyone else. I have fought
and will continue to fight to ensure at least 30 per
cent representation of women in the constitutional
committee. I hope to see that realized, which is why I
have also put emphasis on the co-chairmanship.
This is the Security Council, so let me stress one
point above all. The United Nations as a facilitator and
mediator can create every sort of mediation process
and every sort of dialogue — whether secret talks,
backchannels, proximity talks, technical talks, working
groups, direct talks, multi-party talks, constitutional
committees, national dialogue and so on. I have sought
to bridge international divides with ideas, messages,
channels and meetings and by framing a way forward
that all could sign on to in order to consistently support
our mandate. I have also sought to speak publicly and
clearly about the shocking violence and abuses against
civilians, the need for humanitarian access and the
need to counter terrorism, as well as the fundamental
importance of respecting international humanitarian
law. But that is no substitute for the genuine efforts
of influential countries to talk to each other and work
constructively within the Council and beyond in
support of a United Nations process that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned.
It is the Council — and the Council alone — that
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It has mandated the United Nations
to facilitate the intra-Syrian political process for the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That is the
only way to enable Syrians to determine their own
future. And we need a renewed sense of common
purpose and concerted action in the Council if 2019 is
to be the real turning point for Syria.
In closing, I would like to thank our SecretaryGeneral, António Guterres, for his trust, advice and
encouragement, as well as my own team, which, over
the past four and a half years, has worked tirelessly
to keep the talks process alive and moving forward,
albeit sometimes incrementally, but never giving up. I
owe them an enormous gratitude. I am convinced that
the tenacity and ingenuity of United Nations staff can
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

make a fundamental difference for Syria, and I wish my
successor every success in his vital work.
It has been a real privilege and an honour to work
with each and every member of the Council. In spite
of the Council’s own divisions, it has always had one
line, which I have constantly felt. It has consistently
supported our complex mission and me, and I want to
thank it very warmly for that. And since that this is my
last briefing to the Council in this capacity, let me to
go beyond protocol, since members and I have actually
developed individual friendships, and I have felt that.
So beyond just a formal greeting — since we were
together and they have accompanied me during this
journey, which has not been an easy one — I should like
to warmly shake the hand of each one of my friends.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I should like to tell him how pleased and proud
we are of the work that he has been able to achieve in
Syria. The warm round of applause he has just received
underlines the great interest we take in his work and
our deep satisfaction with it. That round of applause
is worth all of the speeches of thanks in the world. I
ask him to accept that gratitude and that applause as
a symbol of and testament to our sincere and warm
gratitude.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing. On behalf
of the United States, I express our sincere gratitude to
him for his four and a half years of service as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. We greatly
appreciate the tireless effort that he has put into that
work and his efforts to bring peace and stability to
Syria. We wish him all the best. The United States also
looks forward to maintaining a close and constructive
relationship with his successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, as
he assumes his role as Special Envoy.
The United States remains committed to the
permanent destruction of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other terrorist groups in Syria and around the
world. As we have said, we will use all instruments of
our national power to press for a withdrawal of Iranianbacked forces and, most importantly for today’s
meeting, the United States will continue to advance a
peaceful, diplomatic solution to the Syrian crisis in a

S/PV. 8434

way that honours the will of the Syrian people and is
consistent with resolution 2254 (2015). We will continue
to work together with our allies to fight terrorism. The
United States will also work with like-minded States,
the United Nations and the Syrian opposition to seek
a diplomatic end to this conflict. There is only one
internationally agreed road map for achieving those
goals. It is a political solution to the Syrian conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). And the first step
towards the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) is
the creation of a new Syrian constitution.
In January, the Russian Federation, in close
consultation with the United Nations, published the
Sochi declaration. The declaration called for the
creation of a constitutional committee in Geneva,
led by the Special Envoy, as a contribution to
reinvigorating United Nations efforts to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which had stalled from a lack
of genuine participation by the Al-Assad regime. The
Sochi declaration made it clear that the constitutional
committee’s 150-person membership would have equal
representation among the regime, the Syrian opposition
and independents, and that its scope of work, schedule
and voting procedures would be determined by the
Special Envoy. In no way was the Syrian regime to
be given a veto over the membership or procedures of
the committee. Russia agreed that the United Nations
would have the authority to manage the committee in
order to receive the imprimatur of legitimacy from
and attention of the Council as a credible Russian
contribution to peace in Syria.
For 11 months, Russia’s so-called Sochi initiative
has produced nothing but a stalemate. We are now just
11 days away from the end of the year and are rapidly
approaching the Syrian regime’s and Russia’s last
chance to follow through on that commitment. In recent
months, the United States, members of the Council
and the small group on Syria have worked tirelessly to
support Special Envoy De Mistura’s efforts to launch
a credible and balanced constitutional committee.
The Astana group has failed thus far to convince the
Al-Assad regime to accept the United Nations balanced
list of members for the constitutional committee, which
would have allowed the committee to move forward.
A committee that is not balanced or representative of
the Syrian people, including the opposition, cannot be
considered legitimate.
Progress towards a political solution to the conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), is urgent, given

18-452857/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

the situation in Idlib. Idlib’s 3 million civilians have
been able to live in relative peace, thanks to Russian
and Turkish efforts to de-escalate the violence and
keep pressure on the regime to not launch an offensive.
However, there are increasing indications of a potential
military escalation in Idlib, despite the fragile ceasefire
held together by the Turkish-Russian creation of a
demilitarized zone. Any military escalation in Idlib
would be reckless and catastrophic for millions of
people and for the stability of Syria’s neighbours.
We are at a crossroads that will define the end of
the Syrian conflict. If Russia and the regime do not help
form a legitimate, credible and balanced constitutional
committee before the end of the year, we should all
place that failure squarely at their feet. The United
States is ready, with our allies and partners in the
small group, to focus on supporting United Nationsled efforts to reinvigorate a political process. We also
would work to further isolate the regime diplomatically
and economically. Let me be clear — there will be no
reconstruction money. There will be no legitimacy for
the regime. There will be no facilitation for returns of
refugees. That will not be discussed or even considered
until we get the political process moving. The United
States remains firmly committed to the blueprint for
a political solution to the Syrian conflict, agreed by
resolution 2254 (2015), in order to achieve peace and
stability in Syria. We look forward to working with the
United Nations and with the incoming Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen to create a permanent and peaceful end
to the conflict.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan De Mistura, for his particularly
important briefing. More broadly, on behalf of France
I would like to offer him our deep gratitude for his
exemplary engagement and intensive and tireless
efforts over the past four years to resolve one of the
gravest crises of our times. His efforts will leave an
indelible mark on the United Nations work on the
Syrian conflict.
I would like to start by addressing the situation in
north-eastern Syria, which requires our full attention
today. The fight against terrorism is indeed a priority
for France, in order to thoroughly eliminate Da’esh and
counter any resurgence of terrorism in the region. Our
assessment is that Da’esh continues to be a threat in the
Levant and that that terrorist organization can continue
to rely on smaller areas, particularly in Syria.
8/27

20/12/2018

In that context, growing tensions on the ground
could provide opportunities for terrorist groups. There
is a very real risk of a new descent into violence and
a resumption of large-scale atrocities. The north-east
should not have to become yet another Syrian region
on the long list of those that have had to deal with a
humanitarian disaster. In the north-east — as in
Idlib, where the situation is deteriorating — renewed
hostilities would have dramatic consequences. With
regard to Idlib, it is essential to sustainably maintain
the cessation of hostilities, in line with the conclusions
of the Istanbul summit. We therefore call upon Russia
and Turkey to redouble their efforts and do everything
possible to preserve the calm on the ground, as they
committed themselves to doing.
We, alongside the partner States of the international
coalition, are also in close contact with Washington
regarding the timetable and conditions for the
implementation of the decision to withdraw United
States forces engaged against Da’esh in Syria, as was
announced by the President of the United States. In
the coming weeks, France will take care to ensure
the security of all United States partners, including
the Syrian Democratic Forces. It is important that the
United States take into account the protection of the
populations of north-east Syria and the stability of that
area in order to avoid any new humanitarian tragedy
or resurgence of terrorism. It is thanks to the action of
the international coalition since 2014, and of the local
forces — Iraqi on the one hand, Kurdish and Syrian
Arabs on the other — that Da’esh has been weakened
and has essentially lost its territorial gains. However,
the fight is not over.
I would also like to return to the intense efforts
deployed in recent weeks within the political sphere
of the Syrian conflict. The past few weeks have seen
exceptional diplomatic mobilization for the formation
of a balanced and inclusive constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations. All of us
around this table have called for the first meeting of the
constitutional committee. The members of the small
group also requested the same on the sidelines of the
General Assembly, and Russia made a commitment to
achieve that. On 27 October in Istanbul, the Heads of
State and Government of France, Germany, Russia and
Turkey set a clear and realistic goal: to hold a meeting
of the committee before the end of year.
While we have achieved a united vision — which
is a rare occurrence with regard to the Syrian file — to
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

move forward on the constitutional aspect of the political
process, the latest discussions in Geneva have,
unfortunately, not enabled us to reach a favourable
outcome. Staffan de Mistura has worked tirelessly
throughout this process, devoting every effort to
establishing a balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee, which is the first essential contribution to
a legitimate and viable political process to settle the
Syrian crisis.
The situation in which we find ourselves today is,
without a doubt, due to the Syrian regime, which has
never sought to show the slightest sign of commitment.
We regret that Russia and Iran could not — or would
not — convince the regime that it was in its interest,
as well as that of the Syrian people. The Astana
guarantors have, in recent days, proposed a poorly
coordinated and unbalanced list of people whom they
know to be unacceptable and jeopardize the credibility
of the future committee. Throughout this process, these
countries have been under the impression that it was up
to them to determine the composition of the committee
and that the United Nations would accept it without
further discussion. What was presented in Geneva is
clearly unacceptable and clearly considered as such.
If there is any hope of creating a credible
constitutional committee, it is up to the regime and
its supporters to prove this by the end of the year.
We do not intend to close any doors on this matter.
A credible committee requires cohesion among a
number of parameters: a balanced and mutually agreed
membership must be accepted by both parties in
equal measure, not simply by the regime; it must not
undermine the political process from the outset; there
must be equally balanced rules of procedure, proposed
by the United Nations; and the membership must be
fully committed to the Geneva process, led by the
United Nations.
While the United Nations has spent months
redoubling its efforts in attempts to arrive at such an
agreement, the refusal we have been met with will lead
us — if this is confirmed — to explore all modalities
of implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) upon the
arrival of Geir Pedersen in January. That remains our
only road map for a political settlement of the Syrian
crisis. The constitutional dimension is but one aspect;
any lasting political solution in Syria would require the
introduction of several others, although it is clear that
there has been little progress with regard to those other
components.

S/PV. 8434

To achieve this, we must reaffirm the centrality
of United Nations mediation. Resolution 2254 (2015),
unanimously adopted by the Council, must remain the
framework for all our efforts. More than ever, that is
the only common goal that should guide us. The only
possible way out of the conflict is through a credible
constitutional process and free and impartial elections,
under the supervision of the United Nations, and
ensuring the participation of all Syrians, whether inside
or outside Syria’s borders.
Resolution 2254 (2015) provides for the adoption
of confidence-building measures, prioritizing the fate
of detainees; protection against political persecution
and arbitrary arrests; and guaranteeing the property
rights of displaced persons. Those confidence-building
measures will serve as the concrete actions needed to
establish a safe and neutral environment where each
and every Syrian citizen has a place. They are also
necessary to establish the political conditions for the
voluntary and safe return of refugees and displaced
persons. Syria must rebuild itself politically to regain
stability. It will also have to rebuild itself as a society;
hence why the fight against impunity is unavoidable.
The full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) will
also mean achieving a lasting ceasefire and ensuring
the protection of the people through free and unimpeded
access to humanitarian aid throughout Syria.
The Syrian tragedy, due to its terrible human
dimension — but also because it reveals and revels
in our collective impotence — will remain one of the
markers of our generation. It is in that spirit that, in
this Chamber and with the French anthropologist
Laetitia Atlani-Duault, I call upon us all to ensure
that this tragedy does not become the downfall of the
United Nations. Today Syria stands at a crossroads,
while the risks in Idlib and elsewhere remain immense.
Our conviction is that today, perhaps for the first time
in the past seven years, we have a narrow window
of opportunity to foster real political momentum to
settle the Syrian conflict. However, this window of
opportunity is likely to disappear, given developments
in the situation in recent days.
It is therefore more crucial and more urgent than
ever for all of us to shoulder our responsibilities. The
Astana guarantors in particular must demonstrate
that they can live up to the commitments they have
undertaken and ensure their full implementation. For
its part, France intends to remain fully committed to
contribute to a solution to the Syrian conflict. We hope

18-452859/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

that this will be the same for everyone, because in the
absence of such a solution, now is not the time to allow
engagement with Syria to dwindle.
Like Mr. De Mistura, whose exemplary
commitment will continue to inspire us, we must remain
fully mobilized to achieve a political outcome to the
Syrian conflict. The Syrian crisis still poses a serious
threat to regional stability and our collective security,
and therefore, only a political outcome can enable the
country to regain lasting stability. France will not give
up and will not disregard, over the course of the coming
weeks, any of the possible paths to peace.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, we thank him
for his leadership, dedication, tenacity and commitment
during his tenure as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria. He has our fullest admiration. Under
the most difficult circumstances, he has retained his
empathy, compassion and humanity. We are specifically
grateful to him for not compromising on amplifying the
voices of civil society, and Syrian women in particular,
to which we attach great value.
I will focus on three points today: first, the
constitutional committee; secondly, the fate of detainees
and missing persons; and thirdly, accountability.
With regard to my first point concerning the
constitutional committee, we fully support the efforts
of the United Nations to convene the constitutional
committee. We acknowledge the efforts of the Astana
guarantors to find a way forward on the United Nations
middle third list of representatives on the committee. Let
me underline that a credible political process demands a
constitutional committee that is credible, balanced and
inclusive of all Syrians. The constitutional committee
needs to be acceptable to all parties, including the
Syrian opposition. A committee that does not meet
those conditions would lack the necessary international
legitimacy. We call on the United Nations to continue
to monitor and ensure equal representation in the
constitutional committee. We repeat the importance of
a minimum of 30 per cent female representation in the
constitutional committee and its subcommittees.
We also call on the United Nations to take a leading
role in the establishment of the working methods and
the procedures of the committee, including provisions
on a balanced chairing agreement. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations has not closed the door
10/27

20/12/2018

on the constitutional committee and will go the extra
mile. We are looking forward to the incoming Special
Envoy’s views on the viability of the necessary package
for a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee. If it can be achieved, we would surely
welcome a first meeting in Geneva. If the stamp of
legitimacy cannot be given, we will support the incoming
Special Envoy in his efforts to find an alternative way
forward under resolution 2254 (2015). The Kingdom
of the Netherlands reiterates that the establishment of
the constitutional committee is not an end in itself, but
part of a broader political process based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Secondly, with regard to detainees, missing
persons and torture, we express grave concern about
the lack of progress on the detainees file. Hundreds of
thousands of civilians have been arrested, imprisoned
and/or disappeared without due process at the hands
of the Al-Assad regime. We are gravely concerned by
the appalling situation in prisons, as was described in
the most recent report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
which referred to torture and sexual violence.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the International Committee of the Red Cross
should have access to the prisons. We are horrified by
the death notices of prisoners that the regime sends out
to family members, and we are staunch advocates for
support and access to information about prisoners for
family members. We call on the parties involved to
invest in confidence-building measures on the detainee
issue. The Syrian regime should start a process of
releasing all political prisoners. We are looking forward
to the prioritization, by the incoming Special Envoy, of
the detainee and missing persons issue as an integral
part of the political process.
That brings me to my third point on accountability.
Once more, we underline that lasting stability in Syria
cannot be achieved without accountability for those
responsible for war crimes. We repeat our support
for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism in Syria, and we emphasize that we will
continue to actively promote accountability.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its calls
for the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court. We regret that the Council has been
blocked from doing so by the use of the veto. Let me
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

also underline that structural changes are needed in the
political situation and in the governance of Syria. The
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees need to be met. That is currently not the case.
The protection of housing, land and property rights need
to be guaranteed. That would make reconciliation and
return easier. We need a credible and inclusive political
transition firmly under way before the European Union
can even begin to consider reconstruction aid for Syria.
I would like to emphasize the words of my Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Stef Blok, who said: “It is unthinkable
for the Kingdom of the Netherlands to finance a regime
that is responsible for war crimes.”
In conclusion, the Syrian conflict forms one of
the darkest and most violent episodes of our times.
Unfortunately, it is far from over. There are those who
believe in a military solution, but there is none. Military
victories will not lead to stability and will not lead to
safety. In that respect, I reiterate our call on all parties
to intensify their efforts to uphold the ceasefire in Idlib
and find a negotiated and sustainable political solution.
In the end, only an inclusive political process can solve
the Syrian conflict. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to contribute towards that goal.
Let me also take this opportunity to salute all of the
countries that have contributed to the Global Coalition
to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
The Coalition has achieved great progress, but much
remains to be done. Let me associate myself with the
points made in that regard by our French colleague
just now. Also, in this specific context, we stress that
extremism will not be defeated without a political
solution for Syria.
Let me finish by welcoming my good friend, Geir
Pedersen, as the new incoming Special Envoy and by
expressing support for his upcoming work on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015). We call on the new Envoy and
both current and incoming Security Council members
to commit themselves to the fight against impunity.
The Syrian people deserve justice.
To use the words of Staffan de Mistura from this
weekend at the Doha Forum: justice is
“like a candle and the light should never disappear...
we need that light... because one day, sooner rather
than later, that candle will be giving a feeling of
hope to those who lost so many people due to this
horror”.

S/PV. 8434

I thank our dear friend Staffan for keeping that
candlelight of hope and justice alive.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.
This is his last briefing. It is also our last statement on
the Syrian issue as a Council member. I would like to
express our deep appreciation to the Special Envoy for
his dedicated and highly professional diplomatic efforts
to facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
For more than four years, he has devoted his full
energy and his decades of experience and knowledge to
facilitating a peaceful end to the crisis. We are deeply
grateful for his determined efforts and for his continued
sense of optimism while dealing with what has been
one of the most difficult of diplomatic assignments.
His work will, we believe, make an excellent starting
point for his successor. Indeed, the honest assessment
and reflection so eloquently presented today will
be extremely useful for advancing the intra-Syrian
political talks under the auspices of the United Nations.
When Mr. De Mistura told the Council of his
decision to move on (see S/PV.8373), he also promised
to do all he could up until the last day of his mandate to
convene a constitutional committee — a stepping stone
towards the revitalization of the political process. That
is precisely what he has been doing, engaging with the
Syrian parties, the Astana guarantors, the members of
the small group and other stakeholders. He has been
advancing the possibility of creating a credible and
inclusive constitutional committee. However, as he
recently pointed out, there is an extra mile to go in that
marathon effort. We stress the importance of convening
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned constitutional
committee, essential for reviving a comprehensive
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).
There are changes on the ground, and the relative
calm in Syria is encouraging. Nevertheless, it is clear that
there are also areas with very serious challenges relating
to ongoing hostilities. Millions remain in desperate
need of humanitarian aid; millions more are refugees
and internally displaced. The full implementation of
the demilitarization agreement on Idlib is critical if we
are to avoid any possible humanitarian catastrophe.
We have repeatedly stressed during our time on the
Council that the Syrian crisis can be effectively and
sustainably addressed only through a comprehensive
political dialogue facilitated by the United Nations.

18-4528511/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

That remains the case. There is no military solution.
The Syrian parties must engage constructively and in
good faith with the newly appointed Special Envoy,
Mr. Pedersen. We wish him every success in discharging
his responsibilities.
Equally important, other Member States with
influence over local actors must also support the
search for durable peace in Syria. Regrettably, forging
agreement on Syrian issues has been very difficult.
I do not have to remind members that the Security
Council is the body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its unity, particularly
agreement among the permanent members, is central
and critical to making progress in Syria. For the sake of
the Syrian people, who have endured so much over the
last eight years, we hope that all actors will finally work
together to find a common path to end that continuing
tragedy. Such action is very long overdue.
Mr Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive and detailed briefing and for his
relentless efforts over the past four years to achieve
peace in Syria.
Three years ago in this Chamber, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015),
which set a road map for reaching a just political
settlement in Syria and restoring stability to that dear
Arab country, which has a great history. However, three
years have passed and we have, unfortunately, not been
able to implement that resolution on the ground.
In January, an agreement was reached in Sochi
to establish a constitutional committee. We have long
awaited the start of its functioning. Efforts made thus
far to allow the committee to begin its work before
the end of the year have been unsuccessful. We renew
our call for a balanced, credible, comprehensive and
inclusive committee in which all Syrian components
are represented. We believe that that would play a vital
role in moving the Syrian political process forward. The
constitutional committee is the first step in a political
transition that includes several steps, such as drafting
the constitution and holding free and fair elections,
pursuant to the constitution, under the supervision of
the United Nations and in line with highest international
standards of transparency and accountability. The
elections should also give voice to all Syrians, including
those living abroad, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).
12/27

20/12/2018

We have listened to the Special Envoy and closely
followed the discussions of the Astana guarantors with
him in Geneva on 18 December to move forward with
the establishment of the constitutional committee.
In that regard, we stress that the United Nations has
a central role to play in facilitating a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process.
The political process in Syria is at a critical juncture
and requires decisive decisions. I am not exaggerating
when I say that the credibility of the Security Council
and the United Nations is at stake at this sensitive
period in the Syrian crisis. We reaffirm that there can
be no military solution to the crisis in Syrian. There is
a need to support all efforts to build trust among the
relevant parties, most notably through the release of all
prisoners and detainees, support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to investigate
all war crimes and crimes against humanity, and the
holding of all perpetrators accountable.
As long as Idlib province is relatively stable, thanks
to the Turkish-Russian agreement, there is a glimmer
of hope for achieving a breakthrough and make an
important step towards the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
The international community and the Security
Council have repeatedly failed the Syrian people. We
must not fail them again. We ought to implement the
relevant Council resolutions so as to enable the Syrian
people to achieve their legitimate aspirations through a
political settlement agreed by all Syrian protagonists.
That would enable the Syrian people to achieve their
legitimate aspirations, while preserving the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria.
In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks and deep
appreciation to Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura for
his relentless efforts over the past four years. We
look forward to working with the new Special Envoy,
Ambassador Geir Pedersen. The State of Kuwait will
fully support him and encourage his efforts to ensure
the success of his mandate.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.
As he ends his highly meritorious service, I would
like to express to him and his team our most sincere
gratitude on behalf of Kazakhstan for their efforts
and commitment to achieving enduring peace in
Syria. We greatly appreciate the Special Envoy’s
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

outstanding engagement, as demonstrated in the
intensive consultations to convene a credible and
balanced United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and
-led constitutional committee. Mr. de Mistura’s work
has been monumental. He has left his mark and legacy,
and we all greatly appreciate his efforts. He has built
a strong foundation for his successor to build upon.
We wish the new Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, every
success on his important assignment.
At present, the contours of a peaceful life in Syria
are becoming increasingly clear. We therefore consider
it to be very important to continue to work on the
establishment of a constitutional committee. It is not an
easy task, but we must patiently and consistently keep
at it, because there is no alternative. The committee
would enable the drafting of a new basic law for Syria.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by
Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy for Syria, who this
week hosted high-level representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Turkey in Geneva to discuss the possibility
of establishing a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee. It is essential that all parties
involved provide maximum support for the earliest
formation of a Syrian constitutional committee. Those
consultations have made a significant contribution to the
political settlement in Syria as a follow up to the Sochi
final statement of 30 January, which is in line with the
Geneva process to implement Council resolution 2254
(2015). Astana believes that we can ensure the necessary
package of arrangements for a credible, balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee. That would also
include a balanced arrangement for chairing, drafting
and ensuring electoral viability.
We are pleased that the Secretary-General
appreciates the value of the Astana process and its
invaluable work, especially among the guarantors
themselves and with the representatives of the
Syrian opposition. The Secretary-General has
also acknowledged the importance of other highlevel meetings, including the Da Nang statement of
11 November 2017 and the Istanbul Declaration of
27 October 2018.
We believe that the only way to create peace in
Syria is to establish a comprehensive political process
under the leadership of the Syrians themselves, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also
believe that the Astana process has yielded positive

S/PV. 8434

results aimed at strengthening the ceasefire and the
monitoring mechanism and has laid the foundation for
further political settlement in the framework of the
Geneva talks.
Kazakhstan commends the successful fight against
international terrorism and the destruction of the
combat potential of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other organizations in Syria. The chances
for a peaceful resolution of the crisis that has engulfed
Syria increase with the victory over terrorism. We all
agree that despite the stabilization and reduction of
escalation, the current situation in Syria requires the
increased attention and consolidated efforts of the
entire international community.
To conclude, even as we step down as a member
of the Council, Kazakhstan remains committed to a
peaceful resolution of the Syrian crisis and is hopeful
that the negotiation process in Geneva will succeed in
restoring peace and stability in Syria. We will continue
to do our best through the Astana process. We are
confident that the settlement of the Syrian conflict
has no military solution. We echo the United Nations
concerns that a full-scale escalation of hostilities in the
area must be averted at all costs. We are ready to work
with new Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to that end.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to start by
expressing Sweden’s immense appreciation to Special
Envoy Staffan De Mistura for his tireless efforts for
the people of Syria. I want to thank Mr. De Mistura
for his perseverance, creativity and energy, and may I
add, civility and dignity in circumstances where those
values have been in short supply.
We, of course, welcome incoming Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen, and we assure him that he will have
Sweden’s full support. It is important to maintain focus,
momentum and, I believe, the unity of the Council in
backing him in his difficult task.
After almost eight years of conflict, we fully
understand those who claim that the international
community has failed the Syrian people. The
international community has a responsibility now to
remain actively engaged on Syria. That is the only way
to ensure that the grievances of the Syrian people that
led to that tragedy can be addressed and that all of the
people of Syria can come to feel trust in the future.
Since the beginning of our tenure on the Security
Council, we have tried to leave no stone unturned in

18-4528513/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

seeking progress towards bringing the conflict in Syria
to an end and ensuring that the humanitarian needs
are covered. Today, I will focus on the importance of
immediate military de-escalation, the urgent need for
progress towards a sustainable political solution, and
the necessary conditions for lasting peace.
First, on the importance of de-escalation, we call
on all parties to the conflict to de-escalate and show
restraint, as well as to fully respect their obligations
under international law. We welcome the Astana
guarantors’ renewed commitment to uphold the
ceasefire in Idlib, and we reiterate our expectations of
the guarantors in that regard. We are encouraged that
the agreement to cease hostilities continues to hold,
although there have been worrying signs of violence
recently.
We are therefore deeply concerned by continued
military operations by Syrian Government forces
and allies, particularly in Idlib, where there are
reports of civilian casualties. We are also concerned
by Turkish statements regarding a possible military
operation in north-eastern Syria. Turkey is a critically
important actor in that crisis and a key partner of
the European Union. As stated by European Union
High Representative Mogherini, we expect Turkey
to refrain from any unilateral action that would risk
further instability in Syria. A safe, calm and neutral
environment on the ground is necessary for progress
towards a political solution.
Secondly, a sustainable political solution to the
Syrian conflict that is acceptable to the international
community can happen only through a United Nationsled political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Women’s full and effective participation in that process
is critical, and I want to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
for dedicating all his efforts to that agenda.
We appreciate the update on the constitutional
committee. It is deeply disappointing that, one year after
Sochi, that committee has still not been established. As
just stated by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, there is still an
extra mile to walk to ensure a credible, balanced and
inclusive committee. We fully trust the United Nations
judgement in ensuring that the committee’s composition
and its rules of procedure meet the requirements needed
for international legitimacy. There is not much time
left. Every effort must now be made to establish the
committee in a way that satisfies the United Nations
14/27

20/12/2018

criteria. The committee must then be swiftly convened
in Geneva under United Nations auspices.
The failure to establish that committee would,
however, rest fully with the Government of Syria, owing
to its lack of constructive engagement and willingness to
compromise to date. We urge the Government of Syria
and those with good relations with Damascus to ensure
full collaboration. Constitutional reform represents a
stepping stone towards elections, which must be free
and fair, with all Syrians eligible to participate. In that
connection, the 12 principles referred to and repeated
by Staffan De Mistura today are fundamental to efforts
to move the entire process forward.
Thirdly, on the conditions for sustainable peace,
the conflict has led to a disaster far beyond Syria’s
borders. Six million people have been displaced within
the country, and five million have fled to neighbouring
countries. The conditions for the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees are not yet in place,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Let us be clear. The
primary reason why refugees and internally displaced
persons are not returning is not primarily the lack of
schools, hospitals and roads. It is first and foremost
because they fear for their safety. They fear retribution,
persecution and detention. They would now also face
discriminatory legislation undermining their housing,
land and property rights.
They all know family and friends who have been
arrested, imprisoned and tortured. There are no excuses
for the Syrian authorities to hold those unlawfully held
in prison. The authorities should release those detainees
and uncover the fate of all of those Syrians who have
disappeared. In order to create the conditions for the
return of refugees, a political solution and respect by
the Syrian authorities for international law, including
international refugee law and international human
rights law, is therefore fundamental.
As part of building sustainable peace, we recognize
that the reconstruction of Syria will eventually be
needed. Sweden, like the rest of the European Union,
will be ready to assist only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly under
way — as that is deemed necessary in order to reach
sustainable peace.
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, accountability is also necessary for
sustainable peace. The conflict in Syria has been
characterized by a flagrant disregard for international
law and by disrespect for human life. The Special
Envoy recently stated that he has never, in his long
United Nations career, seen a conflict with the use of
such indiscriminate brutality as in Syria.
Upholding the international rules-based order is
fundamental to efforts to end conflicts and prevent new
conflicts from unfolding. Sustainable peace can happen
only if the perpetrators of the horrible crimes witnessed
in Syria are brought to justice. The international
community must not allow impunity. We encourage
increased funding and support for the mechanisms
established to ensure that evidence is preserved for
future criminal proceedings, and we believe that
the Council should refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
It is only through a United Nations-led process,
trusted by all Syrians and supported by the international
community, that we can achieve a political solution in
Syria — one that addresses the fundamental grievances
of the Syrian people, guarantees their rights and
aspirations, and creates the conditions for peace and
stability for them. The Security Council must therefore
wholeheartedly support the United Nations-led political
process and remain actively engaged.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me join all other
delegations in commending Staffan de Mistura for his
outstanding work, his great personal commitment and
all his tireless efforts aimed at bringing peace to Syria
and in particular to the Syrian people, because, as he
has rightly stressed, this is a great tragedy not only for
the people of Syria but also for humankind as a whole.
Regrettably, at a time when the Syrian conflict
has entered its eighth year, continual and widespread
violence is still rampant, including serious and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international human rights law.
Now, at the end of 2018, we are at a critical juncture.
We strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire agreement
introduced some positive dynamics. However, questions
persist as to, first, the sustainability of the arrangement
in future, secondly, the degree of compliance by the
parties to the conflict in Syria, as well as, thirdly,
the ongoing difficult situation of internally displaced
persons and other civilians present in Idlib and its
surroundings. As we heard recently from Under-

S/PV. 8434

Secretary-General Lowcock, the situation is especially
worrying in the north-western part of the country.
Taking into consideration the recent events in Idlib
province, we emphasize once again the need to prevent
military hostilities and their attendant disastrous
humanitarian consequences.
We are also concerned by the situation in northeastern Syria, which continues to be tense, including
between Turkey and the People’s Protection Units,
part of the United States-allied Syrian Democratic
Forces. We therefore expect all parties to refrain from
any unilateral actions likely to undermine the efforts
of the Global Coalition against Daesh or risk further
instability in Syria.
Owing to the current situation in Syria, crossborder deliveries of humanitarian aid continue to
provide an indispensable lifeline for hundreds of
thousands of people across Syria. That is why Poland
welcomed the recently renewed authorization for crossborder humanitarian access.
It must be emphasized that the political process
has continued to fail to gain traction. This includes the
establishment of a constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process under United
Nations supervision. Let me underline something that
has already been mentioned by many around this table:
the fact there is no military solution to the conflict
that could bring sustainable peace to the Syrians. We
should aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, and here we could not agree more
with Staffan’s statement that sustainable peace requires
a real political process. This applies also to addressing
the root causes of the conflict, because we are talking
about sustainable peace for the Syrian people.
A cessation of hostilities may give a chance for
the peace talks to succeed under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva to gain momentum, so that
a political solution might finally be reached. We also
call on the Astana guarantors to follow through on
their commitment and protect civilians as a matter of
priority.
Let me also underline the fact that any political
solution must be brokered in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). The United Nations, and particularly its Special
Envoy for Syria, has a special role in this process. That
is why we express our full support for all efforts made
by the Envoy to establish a constitutional committee as

18-4528515/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

soon as possible and wish to congratulate him on the
progress already achieved. We ask all actors involved,
in particular the Astana guarantors, to provide support
for this process.
The constitutional committee should be established
now, as a priority, and further steps should swiftly follow
to enable a negotiated political transition process. This
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict. A special role has to be played
by the Syrian authorities, which should participate
in the negotiations in good faith and without any
preconditions.
In conclusion, let me once again thank Staffan for
his service, not only to the United Nations but also to
the Syrian people and to humankind as a whole, and let
me assure his successor, Mr. Pedersen, of our full and
continued support for his work.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have with us once again
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. The briefing he has just delivered makes clear
that he has spared no effort to achieve the formation
of the constitutional committee after four years of
strong commitment to the peace negotiations in Syria.
I convey to him the gratitude of the Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for his four years
of important and intensive work in the quest for a
peaceful solution to a very complicated conflict. My
delegation would underline the importance of ensuring
that at the conclusion of his mandate, there will be no
interruption in this important task as it is handed over
to his successor, Mr. Pedersen.
As the end of the year draws near, expectations
about the convening of the first meeting of the
constitutional committee are higher than ever. Although
at the eleventh international meeting on Syria it was
not possible to make significant progress towards a
broad consensus on the formation of the committee,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea took note of the fact
that at the meeting held on 18 December, the Astana
guarantors agreed to make the efforts necessary for the
first meeting of the committee to be held in Geneva in
early 2019.
Although the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
stresses the contribution of the Astana guarantors in the
framework of this decisive and delicate process, with
a view to creating the conditions necessary to prevent
violence in Syria, resolve humanitarian problems and
16/27

20/12/2018

contribute to the repatriation of Syrian refugees and the
implementation of the political process on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015), we nonetheless recognize that
the current stalemate is not benefiting in any way the
millions of Syrians who have been suffering from the
conflict since 2011.
My delegation is aware that the main reason why the
process has become so sensitive is because the problem
of each segment of the future committee wishing to
promote its own interests. It is not inappropriate to say
so, as it is an open secret that each party wants its own
Government and its own opposition, and yet they want
the representatives of civil society to be acceptable to
all. It is therefore very difficult to reach an agreement
as to who is going to be a part of that section of the
Syrian constitutional committee.
We hope that the third list of representatives of
civil society, agreed upon by the Astana guarantors
and presented to the Special Envoy at the 18 December
meeting, will not detract from the shared objective
of establishing a constitutional committee that is
balanced, inclusive and trustworthy, in accordance
with the decisions of the Congress of the Syrian
National Dialogue held in Sochi and resolution 2254
(2015). In that vein, we call on the Special Envoy to
continue consultations with the Syrian Government and
the co-guarantors in order to come up with a list that
enjoys the greatest possible consensus of all parties.
The United Nations must continue to play the role of
facilitator, with full respect for the sovereignty, unity
and independence of the Syrian people. Furthermore,
my country’s Government believes that cooperation
among the main allies of the national parties to the
conflict is key to the successful development of Syria.
It is clear that this conflict has no military solution, as
the passage of time has demonstrated.
My Government also wishes to stress the importance
of the contact mechanism of the United States with
the Russian Federation on Syria. We are certain that
both countries have an effective set of tools not only to
exchange views about the situation in Syria, but also, and
most important, to revitalize the political process with
the same aim: to take decisive steps forward towards a
political solution to the conflict, in accordance with the
objectives of resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, Equatorial Guinea hopes that there
will be no further delays in the formation of the
constitutional committee and that the stalemate in the
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

negotiations will not lead to the failure of the Astana
process. We encourage the incoming Special Envoy to
continue exploring all opportunities to overcome the
roadblocks to the formation of the committee so that
the first meeting can be held early next year, as we have
repeatedly stated in the Security Council.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. De Mistura for his important briefing. We wish
to highlight once again the sense of responsibility and
professionalism that has characterized his complex work
and made possible progress in laying the groundwork
for ending the devastating Syrian conflict. We thank
him for his tireless efforts and his genuine commitment
to peace and justice.
We particularly look forward to the latest
developments in connection with the formation of the
constitutional committee, which we attribute largely to
Mr. De Mistura’s perseverance and diplomatic skill as
well as to the commitment shown by the Astana platform
countries. Those developments provide the new Special
Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, with a path on which to advance,
together with the main governmental actors involved,
in order to guarantee the establishment, in the coming
weeks, of a committee that the Syrian population and
the international community can recognize as credible,
balanced and legitimate.
We believe that in order to achieve that complex
objective, it is of the utmost importance for the
committee to be representative and include all sectors
of Syrian society, in particular Syrian women, and to be
equipped with transparent and democratic mechanisms
for its functioning and decision-making. We hope that
those conditions will be met and that the work of the
committee will result in a new constitution leading to
free elections, supervised by the United Nations, within
the framework of the broader political settlement
process as set out in resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), and with
full respect for the unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
We also consider it essential that those efforts
be supported by confidence-building measures and
national reconciliation. In particular, we encourage
and expect further and more substantive progress in
the identification of missing persons, the surrender
of remains, and the release of detainees and missing
persons. We must also recall the need to ensure access

S/PV. 8434

to justice and accountability for atrocity crimes
committed during the protracted conflict.
I wish to conclude by stressing the importance of the
Security Council remaining attentive to developments
on the ground, with a view to ensuring that the ceasefire
in Idlib, established in September by the Russian
Federation and Turkey, is maintained. The success of
any effort to achieve sustainable peace in Syria, such
as the constitutional committee, will depend to a large
extent on preventing Idlib from becoming the scene of
a new humanitarian tragedy.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Like others, I
pay tribute to our good friend and colleague Staffan.
It was a sad day when we learned that he would step
down. He has given the most enormous service to the
United Nations. I personally have worked with him on
Afghanistan and other issues, and his track record in
that country, in Iraq and in Lebanon speaks for itself.
He has tried harder than anyone to bring a resolution to
this truly terrible conflict in Syria.
As he himself said, he has worked on it longer than
the First World War lasted, exceeding the tenure of his
predecessors, Mr. Brahimi and Kofi Annan. I think
as the tribute to him showed, there is not a person in
the United Nations who does not feel very deeply the
amount of commitment, energy, resolve and passion
that he has brought to this most difficult of all United
Nations Envoy tasks.
We would like, through him, to also salute his
wonderful team, who have supported him — both the
members sitting behind him and some of those whom
we have seen via videoconference, and whom I also
personally know from previous incarnations. I would
like to welcome Geir Pedersen, but I will save that for
another time, when Geir has taken over. But I hope he
knows that we are very indebted to him and that we
recognize how much we owe him.
I think that, as other speakers have said, it is deeply
regrettable that there has not been more progress on the
constitutional committee. It is unfathomable that — for
an idea that was set up to advance the political process
at Sochi — there has not been more progress, because
it ought to have been possible to have made progress in
that area. There are just a handful of days left within
which to meet President Putin’s self-imposed deadline.
But even with just a few days to go, if progress can
be made, then we absolutely urge the Syrian authorities

18-4528517/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

and their supporters to take that opportunity. But when
all is said and done, the United Nations can only join
a process that is balanced. That is the fundamental
tenet on the basis of which the United Nations assists
Governments and the international community. We will
support the Secretary-General and the Under-SecretaryGeneral to the hilt in upholding that very central tenet.
I think it was the French representative who made the
point that the Astana guarantors had submitted at the
moment an unbalanced and unworkable list, and we
would absolutely agree with him. Again, even in those
last few days, if there can be a genuine consultation
process, then there should be one in order to achieve a
meaningful reconciliation.
But I would also like to say that we are meeting almost
on the third anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2254 (2015), and it remains the best agreement we have
made and the closest we have come to managing to work
towards an end to this crisis. It is a huge failure of the
international community — not of the United Nations,
but of the international community — that collectively
we have not been able to advance this more. But above
all, and very obviously, it is a huge failure of the Syrian
Government to protect its people that has led us to this
point, and the Syrian Government’s refusal to work
towards the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) is
at the absolute heart of all the horrors and all the awful
things that have been inflicted on Syria and its people.
The central problem in the whole Syria conflict has
always been the Syrian authorities’ refusal to address
the legitimate grievances of the Syrian people. That
is how the conflict came about in the first place. It
remains a central tenet, an essential element of what
has to be done if anything is ever to move forward. The
Special Envoy has often come to the Council unable to
record any positive movement by the regime.
I just want to stress again that, without movement
in that direction and whatever happens militarily,
Syria will not see reconstruction or rehabilitation
into the international community. Its people will not
see representative government, and whatever interim
arrangement comes into force in Syria, it will not help
the Syrian authorities hold their territory or govern
it, and it will certainly not do anything to address
the legitimate aspirations of all of Syria’s people,
regardless of the religious or ethnic community from
which they come. As such a central point, rehabilitation
means being able to stop a reversion to the tensions and
the situation that existed before the conflict. Without
18/27

20/12/2018

addressing the aspirations of all of Syria’s people and a
genuinely representative Government, there will never
be an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. I really
think that the Council should look ahead, focus and
keep that question of what will most help the Syrian
people in the future right at the forefront of its plans
and thinking.
Finally, if I may, I would like to say a word about
Da’esh. The United Kingdom has been a leading
member of the Global Coalition. We are proud of our
role, alongside other partners, in the fight against
Da’esh. Since military operations began, the coalition
and its partners in Syria and Iraq have captured the vast
majority of Da’esh territory and even in recent days
important advances have been made in the last area
of eastern Syria that Da’esh still occupies. The Royal
Air Force of the United Kingdom was active in just the
past 24 hours. Much remains to be done in the global
campaign, but we must not lose sight of the threat
that Da’esh continues to pose, even when it no longer
holds territory.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
for his briefing on the state of the political situation
in Syria.
On 18 December there was an important
breakthrough in that area in Geneva. It is a pity that
a number of members of the Security Council have
preferred not to notice it. After intense, painstaking
and difficult work based on the decisions of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress and with the active
assistance of the Astana troika, the composition of the
constitutional committee was decided on and a very
important step taken on the path to a settlement of the
Syrian crisis on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
On the same day, the Foreign Ministers of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Turkey, as guarantors of the Astana format,
held a trilateral meeting, as well as consultations
with Mr. De Mistura, at which they handed over the
list of civil-society candidates to be included on the
constitutional committee. I want to emphasize that
the list has been approved by both Damascus and the
Syrian opposition. I should remind the Council that
the Government and opposition lists for the committee
were sent to Mr. De Mistura in May and July. These
efforts were greeted with great appreciation by the
Special Envoy, who noted the considerable contribution
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that the Astana troika has made to getting the process
to this point, and we heard about that again today.
The Ministers adopted a joint statement that was
circulated yesterday as an official Security Council
document. It notes that at the meeting in Geneva, the
Foreign Ministers of the three countries affirmed their
commitment to assisting in launching the work of the
constitutional committee, including by working with the
Syrian parties and the Special Envoy to define its general
guiding principles. They particularly emphasized that
a spirit of compromise and constructive participation
on the part of its members is an essential condition
for ensuring that the committee’s decisions enjoy the
greatest possible support from the Syrian people.
It was agreed that every effort would be made to
hold the constitutional committee’s first meeting in
Geneva at the beginning of 2019, which would be an
important step in the preparations for constitutional
reform in Syria, which is the basis on which general
elections are to be conducted, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). We firmly believe that those
steps represent the beginning of a viable, long-term
political process, led and implemented by the Syrians
themselves, with assistance from the United Nations and
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the decisions of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi.
We are grateful to Mr. De Mistura for his active efforts
to advance the political process in Syria and the help he
has given the Astana format, which made a considerable
contribution to the shift from armed confrontation to
the political arena. We are particularly grateful to our
partners from Kazakhstan for their contribution to the
launch and functioning of the Astana platform.
We are aware that there are some who may be
unhappy with the achievements of the cooperation
between Russia, Turkey and Iran. But they are always
dissatisfied. There is always something that they do
not like. First among them are those who deep down
still cherish hopes for so-called regime change based
on their plans for reshaping the Middle East according
to a design that suits them. At first, they said that not
having a constitutional committee was a bad thing.
Now that the list has been agreed on, they say it is
unbalanced and no good anyway. We do not see the
logic in that. We call on everyone who is not bent on
denying the genuine desires of the Syrian people by
promoting scenarios based on geopolitical engineering
to help the three guarantor countries of the Astana
format to get to work on the comprehensive political

S/PV. 8434

process that Syria, the Middle East and the entire
international community needs, based on the decisions
of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi
and the Security Council’s resolutions on Syria. At the
same time, it will be important to make sure that the
results on the political front are supported by genuine
rather than hypothetical steps to resolve the Syrian
Arab Republic’s humanitarian problems and its postconflict reconstruction. We have frequently heard,
and continue to hear, particularly from our Western
partners, that increased cooperation and the lifting of
unilateral sanctions will be possible only when real
progress has been made on the settlement process. That
moment has come, and we hope that our colleagues
will not go back on their word and come up with new
politicized conditions.
We are not trying to create the impression that all
is well in Syria. There are many problems that will
have to be resolved in the future, first and foremost in
Idlib, where our Turkish partners are making serious
efforts based on their existing commitments to separate
terrorist and moderate groups. We once again urge all
who have influence with those groups to counsel them.
But the fact is that the situation in Syria has indeed
changed, and for the better. Many Governments have
acknowledged those changes. We have seen positive
steps on the part of States in the region that want to
normalize their relations with Damascus. We hope that
the desire for the full-fledged restoration of relations
between the Arab countries and Syria and Syria’s
speedy return to the Arab family will provide material
support to the settlement process in Syria, based on
the fundamental principles of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
We, the three guarantor States, have succeeded in
doing what we were urged, persuaded, pressured and
even threatened to do. Tell me, could anyone else have
done it? Does anyone suppose that it could have been
done simply by compiling our own list and handing
it to Mr. De Mistura? I want to emphasize that the
legitimate list was not going to be one that the small
group had given its consent to but rather the list that the
representatives of the Syrian parties, both Damascus
and the opposition, agreed on, and that is exactly
what happened.
We firmly believe that we all have a chance to
launch a genuine political process for a reliable, lasting
settlement in Syria. Logically, it will be based on the
results of the work already done by the Astana troika.

18-4528519/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

The Astana troika, in close coordination with the
United Nations, stands ready to energetically work on
this issue. At the same time, it is our view that the last
word has to remain with the Syrians themselves.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
information provided by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, whom we thank and acknowledge for the work
he has done over the years and for his tireless efforts on
this sensitive issue, not only for the Security Council
but also for the international community. We would
also like to wish his successor the best of success in the
work entrusted to him.
During the two years that we have occupied this
seat, we have witnessed the urgent need of the Syrian
people for a cessation of violence and for humanitarian
aid. Accordingly, we attended numerous meetings
through which we sought to promote consensus and
unity in the Security Council for the benefit of the
Syrian people. Many times we had to make a call for
this space not to be politicized or for it not to be used as
a sounding board for the conflict on the ground or for
the achievement of geopolitical objectives.
That is why we highlight the progress made in
stabilizing and reducing violence in the country, which
in recent months has led to a tangible change in the
state of the conflict on the ground. We believe that the
improvement in the situation has been thanks to the
efforts of the Astana guarantors, whose agreements
made it possible to establish important areas of détente,
and to those commitments made between Russia and
Turkey or between Russia and the United States at the
time, all of which made it possible to reduce violence
on Syrian territory, which resulted in relative peace for
the civilian population.
In recent days, the agreement signed in Istanbul on
27 October among Turkey, Russia, Germany and France
had a major impact on the population by allowing
humanitarian assistance and emergency medical care
to reach those most in need. We are convinced that it
is the result of openness to dialogue among the parties
involved, which we believe must be a constant. On
the other hand, we believe that any measure involving
unilateral sanctions is not only contrary to international
law but also works to the detriment of the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
We emphasize the importance of the meetings
held in recent weeks, and particularly the recent
20/27

20/12/2018

meeting in Geneva between the Special Envoy and
the Astana guarantors, which we believe served
once again to confirm the will to move forward
the political process in Syria. We hope that those
instances of rapprochement will bear fruit through
the establishment, in the near future, of a credible,
balanced, inclusive and representative, Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led constitutional committee, facilitated by
the United Nations, which will allow, in the medium
and long term, for a strengthening of the relative peace
that now exists on the ground.
That is why, throughout our presence in the Security
Council, we have stated that there is no military
solution to this conflict, and we rejected any attempt
at fragmentation or sectarianism in the country, as well
as the presence of foreign military forces without the
authorization of the Syrian Government. Within the
framework of international law, we request that they
be withdrawn as soon as possible, but mainly in the
context of respect for the principles of sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country. We believe that all parties involved should
respect those principles.
We reiterate our call to resolve this conflict through
an inclusive dialogue and concerted political process,
led by and for the Syrian people, that satisfies its
legitimate aspirations and allows for a peaceful solution
to the situation, within the framework of the Geneva
process and resolution 2254 (2015), under the auspices
of the United Nations and as agreed in the outcome of
the Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue, held in
the city of Sochi in January.
I would like to conclude by stressing the challenge
facing the Security Council to continue the efforts,
commitments and dialogue among the parties that will
enable the formation of a constitutional committee in
the near future, and, to that end, by emphasizing that
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy must be
constant. We believe that the Security Council must
meet the challenge of remaining united in order to
advance a political process that leads to a sustainable
solution for the Syrian people.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing.
China expresses its appreciation for his more than
four years of tireless efforts aimed at facilitating the
political-settlement process of the Syrian issue.
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In recent days, with the concerted efforts of the
parties concerned and the international community, the
political settlement of the Syrian issue has seen positive
new momentum. The Foreign Ministers of the three
Astana guarantors met with Special Envoy De Mistura
and issued a joint statement in which they agreed to
make efforts to facilitate the work on the establishment
of the constitutional committee, which will start early
next year. China appreciates that and hopes that all
parties will continue to work towards the same goal
and meet one another in the middle to push forward the
political process in Syria for an early result.
Years of conflict have taken a heavy toll on the
entire country of Syria. The Syrian people yearn for
peace, a return to a tranquil life and an early start to
rebuilding their homeland. Currently, the memorandum
on stabilizing the de-escalation zones in Idlib is
being implemented. The security situation in Syria
is generally stable, and a window of opportunity for
a political settlement to the Syrian issue has opened.
The international community should continue to stay
committed to diplomatic efforts and support the role of
the United Nations as the main channel of mediation.
We should focus on the following tasks moving forward.
First, it is necessary to continue to advance the
political-settlement process of the Syrian issue. Against
the backdrop of the new positive momentum for the
political settlement of the issue, the United Nations
should continue to strengthen communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government and work
for progress in the formation of the constitutional
committee, so as to launch a sustainable and effective
Syrian political process. The United Nations should
continue to enhance its mediation efforts. The members
of the Security Council should maintain unity and
speak with one voice in order to create conditions for a
political settlement of the Syrian issue.
Secondly, it is necessary to facilitate the
continued improvement of the security situation. The
parties concerned should continue to promote the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement reached
and maintain the effective functioning of the Idlib
demilitarized zone. The international community
should strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation,
unify standards and combat all terrorist organizations
listed by the Council as such, so as to prevent such
terrorist organizations from making a comeback
and undermining the hard-won improvement in the
security situation.

S/PV. 8434

Thirdly, the parties in Syria should be urged to work
towards the same goal and meet one another halfway.
The parties concerned on the Syrian issue should
follow the spirit of resolution 2254 (2015), inter alia,
and act on the basis of respect for Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and in
accordance with the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle to facilitate the efforts of the parties in Syria
to find a solution acceptable to all through an inclusive
political process.
China has always been committed to the political
solution of the Syrian issue. The Special Envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Syrian issue, Mr. Xie
Xiaoyan, recently visited United Nations Headquarters
in New York and Geneva to strengthen communication
and coordination with the United Nations and other
parties with a view to providing support for the
Syrian political process. China stands ready to work
with international community to play a positive and
constructive role in advancing a political settlement of
the Syrian issue.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would like once again to congratulate Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his excellent briefing on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We welcome the holding of the eleventh meeting of
the Astana process on the settlement of the Syrian crisis,
which took place on 28 and 29 November in Astana. My
country welcomes the joint statement issued at the end
of that meeting, which stressed the need
“to intensify consultations at all levels to help
the Syrian people to return to a normal life and
preserve the territorial integrity of Syria”.
The declaration further reaffirmed,
“the commitment to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations”.
I also call on all parties to the conflict to implement
the agreement providing for a demilitarized zone in
Idlib governorate, which was signed 17 September in
Sochi under the auspices of the Russian Federation
and Turkey.

18-4528521/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress
made within the framework of the pilot project prepared
by the working group established by the Astana process
and the United Nations, which aims at investigating the
fate of missing persons and releasing those detained.
That progress, which included the exchange of
prisoners between the Syrian Government and armed
groups in the northern part of Syria on 24 November,
constitutes a decisive step towards building confidence
among the parties to the conflict. The principles of
justice and accountability should also be applied by all
parties to the conflict as a necessary step in the search
for achieving peaceful coexistence among all Syrian
people of all creeds and communities.
My delegation is concerned about the announcement
by the Turkish President on 12 December of the launching
of a new offensive in Syria against the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units, which Ankara considers a separatist
terrorist organization. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on
the Turkish authorities to prioritize negotiations so as
to avoid a new outbreak of violence that would lead
to massive displacement of people and exacerbate the
already alarming humanitarian situation. Furthermore,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), my country
calls on the Syrian parties to create the conditions
necessary to enable refugees and displaced persons
to return voluntarily and in dignity and safety to
their home areas and to enable conflict-affected areas
to recover.
Côte d’Ivoire endorses the appeal made in Istanbul
on 27 and 28 October during the quadrilateral summit
for the effective establishment of a constitutional
committee and for drafting a new constitution by late
2018. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the most
recent Geneva meeting on the implementation on an
inclusive and credible constitutional committee. Such
a constitutional committee will enable relaunching the
political process, which is at a deadlock, and will pave
the way for the holding of free and impartial elections
under United Nations supervision.
As Mr. De Mistura is about to leave his post, Côte
d’Ivoire expresses its deep gratitude to him for his
unfailing commitment to bringing about peace in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Côte d’Ivoire would like to take
this opportunity to pay heart-felt tribute to him for his
tireless efforts during the mission that the SecretaryGeneral conferred upon him. My country recognizes his
excellent work over the past four years, his dedication
and self-sacrifice in significantly contributing to the
22/27

20/12/2018

restoration of peace and lasting stability in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire urges all
stakeholders to support Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new
Special Envoy, in successfully carrying out his mandate.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for a
political resolution to the conflict in Syria and urges the
Syrian parties to resume negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Special Envoy began his briefing today
by pointing out that the Syrian people have suffered
for a period longer than the duration of the Second
World War. What he said is correct. As members of
the Security Council know, however, every story has
a beginning and an end. That is why it is impossible to
summarize what the Council has termed “the Syrian
crisis” and reduce it to a few formal remarks, even
if they seem important. Council members who have
a long memory should not forget the circumstances
surrounding the beginning of the crisis and the hidden
roles played by certain Governments, some of whom
are members of the Council, to make up the crisis and
create the conditions necessary for it to worsen for the
sake of their agendas of internal interference in order to
change the geopolitical landscape in our region.
I would remind Council members of the following
minor, but important, detail. During an appearance
by the former Prime Minister of Qatar on national
television, he admitted that Qatar and Saudi Arabia
had spent $137 billion to destroy Syria by orders of
their American masters. That statement was made by
the former Prime Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad Al
Thani. Everyone will recall that he came to the Security
Council in 2011 to pit Council members against the
Syrian State. That man acknowledged on Qatari
television that Qatar and Saudi Arabia spent $137 billion
to destroy Syria. I am speaking only about Qatar and
Saudi Arabia having spent $137 billion. Would it then
not seem legitimate to make the link between the
statement of that Qatari official and the emergence of
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other takfiri terrorist
organizations in Iraq and Syria? Is that not a legitimate
question? Would any reasonable, intelligent person
believe that those terrorist organizations fell on Syria
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and Iraq like meteorites from outer space? That is the
question that I am asking the members of the Council.
I said this before and I will say it again in this
Chamber. More than ever, it is high time to objectively
and correctly read the situation in Syria in order to
help the Syrian Government rid itself of the waning
terrorist war with the help of our allies. Such a reading
is also necessary to eliminate the remnants of Da’esh,
the Al-Nusra Front and their affiliated misled and
thuggish groups. That is what should have been done
instead of adopting radical positions to blackmail
the Government and the people of Syria, prolong the
terrorist war and extend its destructive effects on Syria,
the region and the world. That should have been done
instead of repeating failed recipes that have resulted
in the destruction of more than one country. It is high
time for some to stop disassociating themselves from
reality. They must give up the last of their illusions and
realize that they will not be able to get through politics
that they were unable to get through terrorism and
sponsoring terrorism.
The Government of Syria has demonstrated its
openness to all initiatives and sincere efforts aimed at
bringing us out of the current crisis. That is why — and
the Council is aware of this — based on our sense of
national responsibility and what is in the interests of
our people, we have demonstrated our commitment to,
and cooperation with, United Nations efforts, whether
during the mission of Mr. Kofi Annan, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi or Mr. Staffan de Mistura. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir Pedersen as the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and we are prepared to work in close cooperation
with him.
Today I reiterate the willingness of the Syrian
Government to participate effectively in any serious
efforts aimed at reaching a political solution, one
in which Syrians exclusively decide on their future
through inter-Syrian dialogue and under Syrian
leadership. That solution should be based on the fact that
the people of Syria are the sole and exclusive holders
of the right to determine the future of their country
without external interference, while guaranteeing the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria. Those are matters that have all been confirmed
by international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the 30 Council resolutions concerning Syria.

S/PV. 8434

The success of any political solution in Syria
depends upon close cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government on various relevant issues.
Success also calls for international commitment and
genuine political will to fully eliminate the remaining
terrorist organizations and the removal of the
illegitimate foreign forces present on Syrian territory.
Success requires that the sincere efforts of the Syrian
Government and its allies to reach the political solution
to which we all aspire no longer be hindered.
Almost eight years after this dirty and unprecedented
war was imposed on my country, it is important to note
a strange paradox among certain States. That paradox
is the clear contradiction between their deeds and their
words, which reminds us of this Italian proverb: “There
is a sea between saying and doing”. Those States say
that the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria are to be respected, and that the
solution must be an inter-Syrian solution led by Syria
without external interference. How can those words be
reconciled with the actions of those States, in particular
their direct military aggression against Syria, their
invasion of some parts of Syria, their support to armed
terrorist groups, as well as their creation of political
groups whose only objective is to undermine the
inter-Syrian solution?
Those States continue to rely on the failed recipes
of the past. They are desperately trying to create the
image of a landscape characterized by confrontation
and the new division of roles in order to destabilize the
region, causing conflict among its various States for the
sake of the plans of Israel and its allies to “assassinate”
the Palestinian question. They also try to characterize
the foreign terrorists whom they have brought in from
the four corners of the world as the Syrian opposition.
On the subject of the moderate opposition, allow
me to present some of the key figures of that “moderate
armed Syrian opposition”. Those eminent persons
were genetically modified in the intelligence labs of
their parent countries in order to become the Syrian
opposition. The list is long, but I shall name a few:
Abu Omar the Chechen, Abu Mekdad the Turk, Abu
Musab the Saudi, Abu Suhaib the Libyan, Abu John
the Briton, Abu Muhammad the Tunisian, Abu Huraira
the American, Abu Moaz the Turkistani, Abu Hafsa
the Egyptian, Abu Abdul Rahman the Canadian, Abu
Abdullah the Jordanian, Abu Talha the Kuwaiti, Abu
Murrah the Frenchman, Abu Oud the Belgian, Abu Walid
the Australian, Abdulhaq Jundallah the Uyghur, and the

18-4528523/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

mufti of the Al-Nusra Front, Abdullah Al-Muhaisini
from Saudi Arabia. Those are the prominent figures of
the “moderate armed Syrian opposition”.
The political hypocrisy continues under the roof
of the Security Council, revealing the true political
intentions of those States that for eight years have
been putting their full military, media and political
weight behind investing in terrorism, in a grave moral
contradiction of all the resolutions of the Council. That
has led to innumerable tragedies and the suffering of
the innocent Syrian people.
The constitutional committee emerging from the
inter-Syrian national dialogue conference in Sochi
should be established as soon as possible. It must be
recalled that the Syrian State was the first to provide
the list of invited members, and the Special Envoy
attests to that. The Government of Syria has worked
very seriously with its allies to overcome the obstacles
imposed by some parties to prevent the formation of
the committee and to divert it from its set objectives.
Nobody therefore has the right to doubt the Syrian
Government’s support of that process or its commitment
to the outcome of the Sochi conference.
We have always welcomed the role of the Special
Envoy as facilitator of the constitutional committee,
and we will continue to do so. Nevertheless, we stress
once again that no one can proclaim to be a thirdparty participant in the process, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
neutrality, integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of Member States. That is what the founding
fathers of the Organization said. We ourselves took part
in the establishment of the United Nations in 1945.
We reaffirm that the constitution and all relevant
issues are purely sovereign issues to be decided by
Syrians themselves, without external interference. It is
unacceptable to set in advance conclusions or conditions
on the work of the committee and its recommendations.
The committee is autonomous. It is the committee
that decides what recommendations to make, and not
any other State or party. It is unacceptable to impose
deadlines or artificial timelines on the work of the
committee. That would be counterproductive because
the constitution will define the future of Syria for
generations to come.
In conclusion, my country, Syria, has always been
serious about working towards a political solution
through the inter-Syrian dialogue led by Syrians
24/27

20/12/2018

and without external interference. The fight against
terrorism is the priority at all stages of the political
process. All honest Syrians are called upon to take
part in that political process based on national interests
in order to move forward with the reconstruction of
what terrorism has destroyed. That reconstruction has
already begun thanks to the efforts of Syrians who
are loyal to their country. The same must be done to
guarantee the return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes.
We are confident that all Syrians will take into
account the following. It must be a Syrian-owned
political solution, reached through a credible political
process in our homeland, not in Istanbul, Doha, Riyadh
or Washington, D.C. The political solution must be
achieved in Syria on the basis that the Constitution and
all issues concerning it are sovereignty-related matters
that should be decided solely by the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my Government’s heartfelt thanks to
Mr. De Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and his team for all their efforts during
his tenure. There has always been close cooperation
between my Government and Mr. De Mistura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and for Iraq and Special Envoy for Syria.
He has visited our country many times. I hope that next
time he can visit as a vacation to have enough time to
see the various beautiful Iranian cities. I would also
like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Pedersen as the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria
and express our readiness to cooperate with him in
discharging his mandate.
From the beginning of the Syrian crisis until now,
the Islamic Republic of Iran has always had a principled
position: there is no solution to the conflict other than a
political settlement. Based on that principled approach,
we cooperated with Russia and Turkey in initiating the
Astana process. To date, we have made considerable
progress and will resolutely continue the path towards
a political settlement. After years of conflict, with
all its security, socioeconomic and humanitarian
ramifications, there is now an emerging consensus
in support of the political process. Nevertheless, the
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

international community should facilitate in that regard
rather than dictate the process.
In that context, we attach great importance to the
establishment of the constitutional committee as a
decisive element of that process. This year, the Astana
guarantor States have made every effort to prepare
the ground for the formation of the constitutional
committee. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the progress made to date, which should be considered
a joint success of the international community and
the Syrians, as it is towards a political solution to end
the crisis.
The latest round of our endeavours was the
ministerial meeting of the Astana guarantor States in
Geneva on 18 December, where the guarantors also
held consultations with Mr. De Mistura. During the
meeting, the positive results of the consultations with the
Syrian parties on the composition of the constitutional
committee were presented. The ministers reaffirmed
their determination to facilitate the constitutional
committee beginning its work, inter alia, by drawing
up its general guiding principles through interaction
with the Syrian parties and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria. The rules of procedure that
will ensure the committee’s efficient and sustainable
work will be determined on the basis of those principles.
Moreover, they agreed that the work of the
constitutional committee should be governed by a sense
of compromise and constructive engagement, aimed
at reaching general agreement among its members.
That should enable the outcome to receive the widest
possible support of the Syrian people. The Ministers
also agreed to make efforts to convene the first meeting
of the constitutional committee in Geneva in early 2019.
Finally, reaffirming their strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, they emphasized that those principles
should be respected by all sides. That means that all
foreign forces whose presence is not permitted by the
Syrian Government should leave the country.
While significant progress has been made so far
on the establishment of the constitutional committee,
we need to continue our efforts with the utmost care,
perseverance, prudence and patience.
With that in mind, our guiding principle must be to
ensure that the committee is an effective, pragmatic and
inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned vehicle in order

S/PV. 8434

to move forward. To achieve that, the committee needs
strong international support. However, ultimately,
the right to determine the future of Syria belongs
exclusively to the Syrians themselves.
At this critical juncture of the Syrian crisis, we
should all accept that there is no choice other than to
cooperate in facilitating an inclusive Syrian political
process. Therefore, all States that have influence on
the armed opposition groups are expected to encourage
those groups to end the fighting in order to join the
political process. That is absolutely crucial for any
progress to be gained in the political domain.
Likewise, parallel to the efforts in the political field,
fighting the terrorists should continue unabated. That
should of course be done by in line with international law
and with close attention to the protection of civilians.
In addition, given the ongoing positive direction
with regard to ensuring security and in view of the
increasing tendency towards the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, the international
community should further support the reconstruction
of the country, as well as the speedy return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. To that end, all
sanctions must also be lifted.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that the Islamic
Republic of Iran will continue to play a constructive
role in bringing about peace and prosperity in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing. As his tenure comes to an end, I wish to express
our deep appreciation for his tireless and remarkable
efforts, as well as those of his team, towards achieving a
political solution to the crisis in Syria. We look forward
to working with his successor, Ambassador Pedersen,
in the period ahead.
Since the outbreak of the Syrian conflict, Turkey
has maintained that there can be no military solution
and that the only way to end the conflict is through a
United Nations-mediated political process in line with
the resolution 2254 (2015). In all our consultations with
the other Astana guarantors and the United Nations, we
have advocated the revitalization of the Geneva process
through the establishment of a credible, balanced,
inclusive and legitimate constitutional committee.
The Astana format is not an alternative to the Geneva

18-4528525/27

S/PV.8434

The situation in the Middle East

process but an effort to complement it. Through the
Astana process, Turkey, Russia and Iran built solid
cooperation on common denominators.
Looking back, I would say that our constructive
engagement has been a game-changer, yielding
concrete results both on the ground and on the political
track. Since last September, the Astana format has
demonstrated significant achievements. First, the
memorandum on the stabilization of the situation in
the Idlib de-escalation area (see S/2018/852, annex)
ensured relative calm in the province. Secondly, the
pilot project on the mutual release of detainees was
implemented, Last but not least, we reached a critical
stage towards the finalization of the formation of the
constitutional committee.
As explained by Mr. De Mistura and the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
on 18 December the Foreign Ministers of the Astana
guarantor States met with Mr. De Mistura in Geneva
to share the positive results of their consultations
with the Syrian parties on the constitution of the
committee. The representative of Iran explained some
of the developments. After months of hard work and
intense consultations, we believe that we have made
considerable progress and reached the final stretch in
our efforts to finalize the constitutional committee. The
guarantor States are working closely with the United
Nations to finalize the minor adjustments to the middle
third list, which, for the most part, enjoys the support of
all sides, including the United Nations, and is workable.
Together with the other guarantors, we will step
up our efforts in the days ahead to ensure that the
committee will convene its first meeting in January
2019. We appreciate the efforts and cooperation of
Russia and Iran towards the formation of the committee.
We call on all our partners to support us and the United
Nations as we work on initiating a new chapter in the
political process in Geneva. Our purpose is to bring
the Syrian parties together as soon as possible and to
prepare a suitable basis for negotiations.
In Geneva, the three Foreign Ministers and the
United Nations also discussed the rules of procedure
of the committee and related arrangements. We will
continue to work closely with the United Nations to
ensure the effective functioning of the committee in all
its aspects. A functioning committee will be the key
to achieving the ultimate goal of finding a negotiated
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
26/27

20/12/2018

(2015), paving the way for free and fair elections in Syria.
That said, we are of course aware that the formation of
the committee is only the beginning. We therefore call
on the rest of the international community to support
those efforts towards expediting the political process.
In Geneva, we also took stock of our joint efforts
to maintain the ceasefire regime in Idlib. We continue
to work on the implementation of the memorandum that
I mentioned above. There is considerable progress in
the withdrawal of radical groups and heavy weapons
from the demilitarized zone. We are working hard to
ensure the separation of radical groups from civilians
and moderate opposition groups. Despite provocations,
we are determined to ensure that calm prevails in Idlib.
Ultimately, ensuring a stable ceasefire not
only prevents further bloodshed but also creates
an environment conducive to advancing on the
political track.
I listened carefully to the statements of all
representatives in the Chamber, including your
statement, Mr. President, in your national capacity. I
see value in putting on record the following few points.
Our collective efforts to fight terrorism also
contribute to the creation of viable conditions to
that end. Turkey will continue to combat all terrorist
groups, including the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK),
the Democratic Union Party (PYD) and the People’s
Protection Units (YPG), which undermine the territorial
integrity of Syria. The ethnic cleansing that they carry
out was well documented by Amnesty International
three years ago. They have been implementing a ban on
teaching in the Arabic language, which is documented in
a recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1041).
We will not stand idle in the face of any terrorist
threat that targets our national security and Syria’s
territorial integrity. The number of incidents of
harassment fire and hostile actions by the PKK/PYD/
YPG has recently increased. That exacerbates the
security threat posed by those terrorists across our
borders. The PKK/PYD/YPG units to the east of the
Euphrates are opening harassment fire on our border
posts. They are digging trenches and tunnels to fortify
their positions. We will never allow the entrenchment
of terrorists along our borders. Protecting our borders
is our sovereign right. Turkey will take the necessary
steps to ensure its border security against the PKK/
PYD/YPG threat as and when it deems necessary.
18-45285

20/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Turkey will continue its efforts to achieve a viable
political solution in Syria that is based on resolution
2254 (2015) and owned and led by the Syrian people
under United Nations supervision. The constitutional

S/PV. 8434

committee will be a crucial instrument in kick-starting
that political process. We therefore call on the Security
Council to put its weight behind the efforts to that end.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

18-4528527/27
