S/PV.8585

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8585th meeting

Wednesday, 24 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2019/549)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22856 (E)
*1922856*

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2019/549)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/549, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be in the Chamber
today to introduce the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/549).
I have four key messages to share with the Security
Council today with regard to the developments in West
Africa and the Sahel. First, since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8442), further progress has been made in
democratic consolidation in West Africa and the Sahel.
Secondly, such progress in the democratic space has
not been linear or without complications; it has been
the result of contestations that have sometimes been
palpably antagonistic. Thirdly, democratic progress has
been delayed and complicated and, on occasion, almost
negated by a rapid expansion of violent extremism in the
region. My fourth and final message, in recognition of
the progress made and despite continuing challenges, is
one of hope for the future and confidence in the Council’s
support as we work together towards sustaining peace
and preventing conflict in West Africa and the Sahel.
Indeed, we should first of all recognize and
celebrate the progress made in the consolidation of
democracy in the region, including through peaceful
transfers of power. In the past six months, presidential
2/15

24/07/2019

elections were organized in Nigeria, on 23 February;
Senegal, on 24 February; and Mauritania, on 22 June.
Ahead of those fiercely contested elections, I met all
of the presidential candidates and conveyed to them,
alongside regional and international partners, the
need to uphold high electoral standards in the region.
In Nigeria, my Office also organized, jointly with the
National Peace Committee and other partners, several
peace forums to appease tensions in electoral hotspots.
Beyond successful elections, the past six months
also saw the opening of political dialogue between the
ruling Governments and the oppositions in Burkina
Faso and Benin, while in Ghana political stakeholders
started a dialogue on vigilante groups. In Liberia, on
7 July, the Government indicated its respect for the right
to peaceful protests and agreed to begin a dialogue on
strengthening the economy.
However, pre- and post-electoral periods continue
to be characterized by tensions, antagonistic contests
and disputes, including around non-consensual
constitutional amendments. Addressing such potential
sources of conflict remains a major priority ahead of the
upcoming cycle of high-stake presidential elections in
West Africa, scheduled for next year in Burkina Faso,
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, the Niger and Togo.
Furthermore, tensions around electoral periods derail
the attention that must be given to the pressing need to
address questions of development and inequality.
My second message is therefore that the journey
of democratic consolidation in the region has not
been easy and cannot be taken for granted. Several
countries in the region continue to struggle with human
rights challenges. I am particularly concerned about
the instrumentalization of the judiciary for political
objectives in some cases and a predominant sentiment
of impunity for violent crimes, which undermine
respect for the rule of law. In this sense, I commend
the exemplary path chosen by the Gambia, in which the
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission and
the National Human Rights Commission have embarked
on their challenging tasks in a credible manner that has
contributed to transitional justice and social cohesion.
While the region saw a slight increase in the number
of female members of Government — and the firstever appointment of a female speaker of parliament,
in Togo — women’s representation remains a matter
of concern. A persistently high level of inequality
continues to have negative impacts on women, making
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

them prone to gender-based violence. The passing of
legislation in Cabo Verde classifying gender-based
violence as a priority prevention crime must be
applauded in this context.
Thirdly, since my last briefing, the region of West
Africa and the Sahel has witnessed an even more visible
and significant rise in violent attacks directly related
to violent extremism. The security situation remains
volatile in the entire Sahel region, where escalating
violence and insecurity have sparked an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, leaving a total of 5.1 million
Burkinabes, Nigeriens and Malians in need. Notably,
the past six months have shown a rapid deterioration
of the security situation in Burkina Faso. A total of
226 security incidents contributed to an acceleration
in the displacement of persons, rising from 47,000 in
December 2018 to 220,000 internally displaced and
more than 25,000 refugees in June, representing an
almost five-fold increase. The north and east of the
country remain the areas most affected by recurrent
attacks of terrorist and armed groups and an increase
in intercommunal violence, with the involvement
of seemingly uncontrolled self-defence groups.
Furthermore, terrorist groups are directly targeting
schools and forcing health centres to close. Today,
a total of 2,024 schools and 37 health centres remain
closed in Burkina Faso as a direct result of the crisis.
Amid the rapid escalation, Secretary-General
Guterres has requested a significant scaling-up of
the United Nations response and has put in place an
emergency task force in Burkina Faso. The task force
also builds on the findings of an inter-agency mission
that I was privileged to lead to Burkina Faso in February
and which defined a multisectoral response that would
address immediate needs and the structural causes of
insecurity. A humanitarian response plan with a budget
of $100 million has been launched and is currently
being revised upwards to accommodate rising needs.
In the Lake Chad basin, attacks by Boko Haram
terrorists and splinter groups continue to threaten the
peace and stability of the region. In the first half of
this year, 30 suicide bombings were reported, a 70 per
cent reduction on the number from last year, owing
to the efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
However, the period under review also witnessed the
deadliest attack to date on the Chadian military, where
Boko Haram fighters killed 23 soldiers in Dangdala.
The terrorist group also attempted to launch a rocket
attack on the airport in Diffa and led seemingly more

S/PV. 8585

sophisticated terrorist attacks in other parts of the Niger.
As of June, at least 147 civilians have been kidnapped
in the Diffa region, the highest number since 2015.
In view of this rapid escalation, including growing
linkages among terrorism, organized crime and
intercommunity clashes in the region, the Heads of
State of the Economic Community of West African
States decided, during their summit on 29 June, to hold
an extraordinary summit on terrorism in Ouagadougou,
now scheduled for 14 September. The summit will
aim to discuss a concerted security approach for
West Africa and the Sahel and represents a unique
window of opportunity to harmonize the fragmented
security arrangements.
While the implementation of humanitarian response
plans has seen laudable support, I urge Governments
and partners to redouble their efforts aimed at defining
a concerted approach to preventing a further expansion
of the terrorist threat and fostering support for greatly
needed medium- and long-term stabilization measures,
in line with the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel (UNISS). In this regard, the second meeting
of the Lake Chad Basin Governors Forum, which took
place only last week, on 17 and 18 July, in Niamey, once
again stressed the importance of holistic approaches
for effectively tackling instability in West Africa and
the Sahel and successfully launched a stabilization
facility for the Lake Chad region. Through inclusive
approaches based on national ownership and in line with
UNISS, we must continue to work harder at addressing
governance deficits, extreme poverty and the lack of
development that feed and sustain armed violence and
extremism. Enhanced support for the implementation
of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad Basin Region and the Priority Investment
Programme of the Group of Five for the Sahel, together
with a concerted effort to support national development
plans, remains essential for boosting development of
the region and exploring its full potential.
This is my fourth and final message of hope:
with support from the Council and guided by the
inclusive national ownership of the countries of
the region — and the region as a whole — I am
confident that the consolidation of democracy can
be further strengthened and the activities of violent
extremists better addressed and countered through
preventive measures.

19-228563/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In conclusion, let me assure Council members of
the continued commitment of UNOWAS to working
with all stakeholders in the region to promote peace and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. I trust that we
can continue to rely on the support of the Council. In
this regard, I am looking forward to the strategic review
of UNOWAS, which should contribute immensely to
responding to our quest for adequate resources that
enable us to sharpen our tools for preventing conflicts
and sustaining peace. I thank Council members for their
support and look forward to working further with them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chambas for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the African States members of the Security Council,
namely Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and Côte
d’Ivoire, I wish to thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening this briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/549).
The African States members of the Council commend
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWAS, on his
briefing, which once again enlightened the Council
on the profound forces affecting peace, stability and
development in West Africa and the Sahel.
The African States members of the Council note
with great interest the political, economic, security
and humanitarian situation described by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his
subsequent recommendations aimed at providing
diligent and effective responses to the multiple
challenges facing the region. They welcome the
generally stable regional political situation, as evidenced
by the calm post-electoral sociopolitical environments
following the presidential elections held in 2018. In
addition, according to the African Development Bank,
economic trends as a whole show an average forecasted
growth of 3.6 per cent for this year and 2020. We see
those trends as promising and believe that they are part
of the irreversible process of profound change currently
under way in the societies of West Africa and the Sahel,
despite current challenges.
We therefore urge the Head of UNOWAS to pursue
mediation efforts and use his good offices, in close
cooperation with the Economic Community of West
4/15

24/07/2019

African States (ECOWAS), in view of the elections
in many countries of the region planned for 2020,
particularly since the cooperation between ECOWAS
and UNOWAS was fully effective in preventing
and managing crises as seen in their successive
interventions in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Gambia. We also urge UNOWAS to work to
strengthen national and regional capacities for conflict
resilience and to support the consolidation of democracy
and good governance, in order to foster environments
conducive to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). At the same time, we are particularly
encouraged by the efforts to improve gender parity in
the region, thanks to the adoption of relevant legislation
that we hope will increase the number of women
in leadership roles and strengthen their effective
participation in decision-making processes.
Despite encouraging governance trends, we
remain concerned about the security threats posed
by non-State actors, particularly terrorist groups,
whose actions appear to be part of larger designs to
create a foothold for an Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant province in the region. The concerns raised
by these aspirations, which are at odds with the
values underpinning our States, are compounded by a
constantly deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
exacerbation of community violence. Indeed, terrorist
groups are unfortunately increasingly profiting from
intercommunal violence and conflicts between herders
and farmers that are born from the management of
natural resources, such as water and farmland. In this
regard, it is urgent to develop measures for resolving
intercommunal violence and conflicts between farmers
and herders, which constitute a growing threat to
security in West Africa and the Sahel and extend to
Central Africa. We welcome the commitment of the
States of the region to unifying and better coordinating
their efforts, as well as the holding on 14 September
of an extraordinary summit of the Heads of State of
ECOWAS to discuss security issues and consider a
broad coalition beyond their region to combat terrorism
in the Sahel.
In a regional sociopolitical context marked by
persistent security challenges, we remain convinced
that UNOWAS remains a relevant institutional tool, the
actions of which are perfectly in line with the range of
regional efforts for fighting insecurity and instability
and seeking durable solutions to the underlying
causes. In view of the next strategic review, which we
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

support, we stress that UNOWAS’s highly political
role as a tool for preventive diplomacy should be kept
in mind. UNOWAS must remain a mediation and
conflict-prevention tool, including through supporting
subregional organizations and advocating major issues
such as sustainable development.
In the light of UNOWAS’s achievements, the array
of current challenges it faces and its key role in managing
the transitions that are necessary following the closure
of certain missions, it is important that it benefit
from the additional resources required to implement
its mandate. We must also ensure that its actions are
streamlined and consistent with those of other United
Nations operations, as part of an integrated approach,
which would further enhance the Office’s effectiveness.
In addition, the transregional dimension of threats
to peace and security requires a strategic interaction
between UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa to address cross-border
issues as part of a coordinated and holistic approach.
We also welcome the collaboration of UNOWAS
with the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund in supporting national and crossborder programmes aimed at mitigating tensions
related to the effects of climate change and conflicts
related to transhumance, preventing violent extremism
and empowering youth and women in peacebuilding
processes and conflict-prevention mechanisms.
The African States members of the Council believe
that the current security responses must be accompanied
by development strategies aimed at addressing the root
causes of conflict and meeting the pressing social
needs of populations. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel, the aim of which is to intensify and better
coordinate support for the States of the region in their
efforts aimed at achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in order to achieve shared
prosperity and a secure environment in the Sahel, in
line with the African Union’s vision of silencing the
guns on the African continent.
In conclusion, the African States members of the
Council reiterate their support for the Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
We urge him to continue his mediation efforts and good
offices and to mobilize the resources that are essential
for achieving the SDGs in West Africa and the Sahel.
Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and Côte d’Ivoire

S/PV. 8585

truly hope that the forthcoming strategic review will
further strengthen UNOWAS, so that it can continue to
be an effective tool for preventive diplomacy to advance
peace, security and development in West Africa and
the Sahel.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
Chambas for his very comprehensive insights. Belgium
commends the Special Representative’s daily work on
prevention, mediation, lasting peace and the promotion
of the rule of law in West Africa and the Sahel.
The precarious security situation continues to
be a cause for our concern. In particular, I note the
intensification of intercommunal violence in several
countries of the region, such as Nigeria, Burkina Faso
and Mali, as well as unabating terrorist attacks. This
deterioration has a direct impact on the humanitarian
situation, causing the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of innocent people.
The persistence of conflicts between herders and
farmers deserves special attention, as these tensions
are currently a major factor of insecurity in the
subregion and beyond. I would like to congratulate the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) for broadly raising awareness on the
subject. It is now a matter of implementing the various
good practices that have been identified, particularly in
collaboration with the Economic Community of West
African States.
Belgium applauds the courage and sacrifice of
the security forces in their fight against terrorists
throughout the region. Nevertheless, my country
believes that the conflict cannot be resolved by
ignoring human rights; doing so will mean that the
successes of the security forces will be fleeting and
will jeopardize reconciliation and the ending of longlasting crises. Furthermore, as the Secretary-General
emphasizes in his report (S/2019/549), a response to the
challenges facing West Africa cannot involve security
alone. A holistic approach is needed to address violent
extremism, while also highlighting good governance,
the fight against impunity and sustainable and
inclusive development.
UNOWAS plays a leading role in studying the
impact of climate change on security, as part of a
conflict-prevention approach. This work is crucial,
and I encourage the Special Representative to continue
this effort.

19-228565/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In conclusion, I would also like to underline the key
role played by regional and subregional organizations.
I welcome their close coordination with UNOWAS
and encourage them to maintain this coordination in
the future.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel for his briefing, which was
as always very clear.
The situation in West Africa deserves our full
attention today. In this regard, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
is a valuable tool in terms of its role in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and support for various
regional initiatives. Its role is fully in keeping with
the Secretary-General’s vision for action across the
peace continuum. We therefore hope that the strategic
review to be announced in the coming months ensures
that UNOWAS has the resources necessary to fulfil its
important mission.
The deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel poses an unprecedented risk to
the stability of West Africa as a whole. The States
of the Group of Five for the Sahel are the first to be
affected today, but others will soon face the same
challenges if adequate responses are not urgently
provided. It is therefore a real race against the clock
to stabilize the Sahel — an undertaking to which
we are today collectively committed. It involves the
urgent implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, a determined fight against the
terrorist groups of the region, good governance and
the creation of sustainable economic prospects for the
population. More must also be done in the Lake Chad
basin to support the continued mobilization of the States
of the Multinational Joint Task Force and to ensure
that its activity is conducted in ways that ensure the
full support of the population. Only an approach that
combines political, security and development efforts is
likely to change the situation in the medium term.
The United Nations has a central role to play in
assisting States in the region to develop adequate
responses in all of those areas. In Burkina Faso, France
fully supports the process initiated by the SecretaryGeneral to that end. We hope that the United Nations
response will be ambitious and meet the expectations of
the Burkinabe authorities in the fields of humanitarian
aid and development, the training of national security
6/15

24/07/2019

forces, respect for human rights, promotion of the rule
of law and support for the fight against terrorism.
Beyond our mobilization on those crisis situations, it
is more important than ever to preserve the fundamentals
of regional stability in West Africa and the Sahel. This
means, first of all, holding credible, transparent and
inclusive elections. In Guinea-Bissau, it is essential that
the authorities respect their commitment to organizing
presidential elections in November, in accordance with
procedures recommended by the Economic Community
of West African States and the Security Council. In
other countries, such as Togo, Benin and Guinea, it is
important that all actors continue to work together to
strengthen the inclusiveness and suitability of upcoming
elections. Finally, particular attention must be paid to
strengthening the representation of women in areas of
responsibility, which today is far from satisfactory in
the countries of the region.
Respecting the rights of all and fighting impunity
are also essential factors of stability. The multiple
abuses committed against civilians in the various
conflict zones of the region must not be left unanswered,
regardless of who is behind them. Ongoing transitional
justice processes, particularly in Mali and the Gambia,
must be successfully concluded to create conditions
for lasting reconciliation. There must also be full and
complete cooperation with the International Criminal
Court. The protection of children in conflict and
the situation of the increasing number of internally
displaced persons and refugees in the area must receive
our full attention, and UNOWAS has a clear role to play
in addressing these issues.
Stability also goes hand in hand with long-term
support for countries emerging from crisis. The
continued mobilization of the international community
in Liberia, following the closure of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, is particularly critical to the success
of the remarkable democratic transition that took place
there a year and a half ago.
I will conclude by emphasizing that the link
between climate and security is becoming increasingly
evident in the countries of the Sahel. The effects of
climate change are stoking tensions over resources,
with a direct impact on the population. However, the
sustainable management of these resources, such as
water and farmland, is one of the essential conditions
for the maintenance of stability in an area like the Sahel
that is marked by political and social vulnerability
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and major forced population displacement. The
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Paris Agreement, as well as the establishment
of a regional dialogue on climate and environmental
issues, is essential in that respect. It is important for
UNOWAS to fully take these considerations into
account in its day-to-day work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his very informative
briefing on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the
current developments in the region.
Poland noted many positive developments in West
Africa and the Sahel during the reporting period. We
commend Benin, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria and Senegal
for holding generally peaceful elections and having
experienced the alternation of power. Against this
positive backdrop, pre- and post-electoral periods
continue to be characterized by tensions, antagonistic
confrontations and disputes. We therefore encourage
national authorities and stakeholders to work together
to ensure conditions conducive to peaceful, inclusive
and credible elections.
In that context, the equal participation of women
and youth in political, social and economic processes
is of the utmost importance. While welcoming the
progress made in the adoption and implementation of
gender-parity legislation in several countries in the
region, we call on national authorities to enhance the
participation of women and youth through national
peace, security and development strategies.
We remain gravely concerned by the deteriorating
security situation in West Africa and the Sahel, resulting
in spiralling terrorist activities and violent extremism.
The serious humanitarian consequences, including a
lack of access to basic services — especially health,
education, food and markets — are a matter of serious
concern. We are also concerned about the increasingly
visible involvement of extremist groups in several
West African countries. It is necessary to help these
countries build resilience to new threats, including
ethnic and religious conflicts inspired by extremists.
It is equally important to support local Governments in
the prevention of inter-tribal conflicts and to fight the
dissemination of stereotypes, the aim of which may be
to marginalize certain social and political groups and
destabilize the situation in the region.

S/PV. 8585

We therefore call on national, regional and
international partners to intensify their efforts aimed at
addressing the root causes of insecurity and instability
in the region, including poverty and inequality,
exclusion and marginalization, the lack of access to
social services and economic opportunities, human
rights violations and the impact of climate change.
The cross-border character of these threats requires
transnational responses. In this context, we commend
the efforts being made by countries participating in the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to address
the multifaceted challenges in the region.
The challenges in West Africa and the Sahel are
complex and multidimensional and require a sustained
and holistic approach from all stakeholders. In this
regard, we commend the engagement of all partners
in addressing these challenges, including through the
implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko
Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, the G-5 Sahel
Priority Investment Programme, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel. Accordingly, we also wish
to commend the Governments of West Africa and the
Sahel, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the G-5 Sahel, the Mano River
Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, for their engagement and
cooperation with UNOWAS.
Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
as well as the staff of UNOWAS, for their continued
efforts to advance peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing. We would
like once again to assure him that Russia supports his
personal efforts, as well as those of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), in
resolving regional crises, addressing issues related
to political mediation and providing assistance to
improving State institutions, as well as supporting the
search for ways to pursue economic development and
the fight against terrorism. The scale and results of his
work deserve the highest praise.

19-228567/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

It is encouraging that the political situation in the
region as a whole has remained stable. In the first half
of this year, elections were held in many countries of
the region — Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau and
Benin — without serious problems. We trust that the
electoral cycles that are in progress in other West
African countries will also take place under conditions
of law and order.
However, the security situation in the SaharaSahel region and in several West African countries
remains complicated. The international terrorists who
have gained a foothold there are increasing the scale
of their activities and attempting to expand their areas
of operation, and new radical groups and leaders are
emerging. This situation is rooted in the external
intervention and subsequent collapse of statehood
in Libya in 2011. The acute domestic political and
socioeconomic problems that persist in countries of
the Sahel, as well as inter-ethnic and interreligious
confrontations, are fuelling the activities of an extensive
network of jihadist structures. Collective steps taken by
States in the region and external partners to counter
these challenges have not yet led to a breakthrough in
the fight against extremists.
In Mali, a protracted conflict remains ongoing,
aggravated by the intervention of various terrorist
groups in the region and a power vacuum in the north
and the centre of the country. The firmly embedded
international extremists are expanding their activities
into neighbouring countries, such as the Niger, Burkina
Faso and Côte d’Ivoire. The number of victims from
jihadist attacks is on the rise. Disquieting assessments
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/549) and
the conclusions drawn from the Security Council’s visit
to the region in March are testament to the infeasibility
of drawing down the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali at this stage.
In Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso, the
terrorist activities of Boko Haram are expanding, and
Burkina Faso has also seen the appearance of the Ansar
Al-Islam group, which is affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The international and
African communities are keeping a constant focus on
the situation in the Sahara-Sahel region. An important
element of the work in this area is the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS), which
aims to improve the effectiveness of State governance,
strengthen the capacities of national and regional
security mechanisms and carry out development
8/15

24/07/2019

activities in the countries of the region. Financial,
military and humanitarian assistance continues to be
provided through various international programmes,
United Nations missions and on a bilateral basis. The
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is pursuing its
efforts to ensure the full-fledged deployment of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force in order to combat terrorism,
organized crime and drug trafficking. The Joint Force
has already carried out several operations on the ground
to date.
We greatly appreciate the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and
specialized agencies of the United Nations in providing
a broad range of assistance to West African countries.
It is crucial that such efforts be undertaken in close
coordination with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
organizations. We believe that it is important to improve
the effectiveness of UNISS and the related United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. In implementing
these instruments, the views of the countries for which
they have been developed are of the primary importance.
We believe that it will be impossible to get
anything done without the proper coordination of
the numerous assistance programmes for the region.
Their effectiveness depends, inter alia, on whether the
structures present there — first and foremost those
within the United Nations system — are acting within
their sphere of responsibility and taking into account
the principle of the division of labour. It is only through
collective focused actions, carried out in relevant
formats that do not create conflicting mandates, that
will we be able to achieve the desired results.
Russia continues to play an active role in resolving
the problems in West Africa and the Sahel. We are
taking steps to establish effective cooperation with
the G-5 Sahel. In April, the Permanent Secretary
of that entity, Mr. Maman Sidikou, and his team,
visited Moscow for the first time. During the visit,
agreements were reached on strengthening full-fledged
practical cooperation.
On a bilateral basis, we continue to provide
assistance to strengthen the combat-readiness of the
armies and security structures of States in the region.
In particular, military personnel and police officers
from Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso continue to
receive training at specialized Russian facilities. We
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

intend to continue to provide such assistance to our
West African friends.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
wish to thank the Special Representative Chambas, for
his informative briefing today and for his leadership of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of UNOWAS (S/2019/549) underscored just
how varied the realities are in West Africa. From
presidential and parliamentary elections where people
freely and fairly chose their preferred candidates, to
continued insecurity in the Sahel, where terrorism
and armed conflict have interrupted livelihoods and
made millions subject to food insecurity, the positive
and negative developments in West Africa are as big
and diverse as the region itself. UNOWAS has played
an important role in West Africa, and the United
States deeply appreciates the Office’s efforts aimed at
supporting long-term peace, security and stability in
the region.
West Africa has seen several noteworthy positive
developments over the past six months, as was
highlighted in the Council today. The United States
is encouraged by the success of the largely peaceful
elections held in Nigeria, Senegal and Mauritania,
and we extend our particular appreciation to Special
Representative Chambas for his efforts in all countries
to emphasize the importance of dispute-resolution
processes rather than violence as a means of pursuing
grievances arising from the electoral process. In
addition, we are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s projection of high economic growth across
the region for 2019 and 2020. While we know that such
projections are uneven across West African countries,
we are nevertheless optimistic that such economic
performance, when coupled with responsible fiscal
policy and good governance, is a bellwether for the
region’s future.
At the same time, the United States is deeply
concerned about the increase in security and governance
challenges across the region. Transnational organized
crime and the illicit trafficking of narcotics continue to
undermine responsible governance and fuel corruption
in Guinea-Bissau. We call on Government authorities
to maintain the momentum towards genuinely free and
fair presidential elections in November and encourage
all political leaders to refrain from volatile rhetoric.

S/PV. 8585

In Burkina Faso, the terrorism threat emanating from
Mali is fuelling instability and has displaced hundreds
of thousands, curtailed Government services in some
areas and disrupted livelihoods. We are concerned by
the potential spillover of the situation into neighbouring
countries. We encourage the Government of Burkina
Faso to continue to address the root causes of instability
and work with regional partners to address the growing
terrorism threat. In addition, we request that UNOWAS
continue its efforts in security sector reform.
In Mali, we are troubled by the insufficient progress
in implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation emanating from the Algiers process, and
by the insecurity in central Mali that has exacerbated
ethnic and intercommunal tensions. Such violence has
negatively affected such institutions as health facilities
and schools, which provide basic services, and forced
hundreds of thousands from their homes. With the recent
renewal of the United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Mali (resolution 2480 (2019)), the United States calls
on the Government of Mali and the signatory armed
groups to use this opportunity to take urgent steps to
implement the provisions of the resolution.
While the United States is a strong supporter of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) as a long-term security initiative in the region
and has provided $111 million to help operationalize
it, we must emphasize the need for the Council to
comprehensively review the problem of terrorism and
its root causes across the whole of West Africa, not
just the Sahel. It is time to transform the stand-alone
report and briefing on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force into
a broader discussion on terrorism challenges and root
causes across West Africa, with spillover to the littoral
States of the Accra initiative. This broader review
should draw attention to the impact of the conflicts on
millions of people across the region and the efforts of
all Governments of the States of the region to prevent
and counter radicalization and terrorism in general.
We must also focus on the threats emanating from
north-eastern Nigeria. Throughout the Lake Chad
region, the United States is supportive of coordinated
multinational efforts to bring long-term stability to
a region that has suffered for far too long from the
predations of Boko Haram and the Islamic State
West Africa Province. Terrorism remains a threat to
millions, and affected countries must redouble their
comprehensive efforts to counter these actors, protect
the civilian population and create the conditions for the

19-228569/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

safe, dignified return of the displaced. We share the
Secretary-General’s emphasis on the need to address
the root causes of insecurity and instability, including
inequality, exclusion and marginalization, human
rights violations and abuses, sexual violence and a lack
of opportunity and proper livelihoods. To that end, the
United States is working closely with Sahel countries
and international partners to support integrated
security-sector response efforts. In 2018 alone, we
committed more than $242 million in overall security
assistance to the G-5 Sahel countries.
The United States is committed to supporting
the millions of people across the region who have
suffered for too long from the worst of such conflict
and instability.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his valuable briefing on the latest developments in
the Sahel region. I also wish to commend the efforts
and activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for having provided
support to countries in the region in which elections
recently took place, for supporting the good offices
of Governments in the region with a view to reducing
tensions and differences between States, and for
playing a key role in promoting cooperation among
Governments in the face of security challenges.
I should like to focus on three key issues: the
security situation, the humanitarian and development
situation, and the role of UNOWAS.
First, with regard to the security situation, we
wish to once again highlight the deteriorating security
situation in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin in recent
times, in particular the terrorist attacks carried out by
armed groups in Burkina Faso, the Niger, Nigeria and
Mali. Despite the positive developments in West Africa
and the Sahel mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2019/549), the increasing number
of terrorist acts and suicide bombings perpetrated
by armed groups, claiming the lives of hundreds of
civilians, have negatively affected peace and stability
in a number of countries in the region. It is therefore
incumbent upon Governments in the region and the
international community as a whole to cooperate with
each other and intensify their efforts in addressing
security shortcomings.
10/15

24/07/2019

We call on the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) to continue their efforts in combating the
terrorist organization Boko Haram and other armed
terrorist groups, and we further encourage the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to capitalize on the support provided
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, in accordance with
resolution 2480 (2019), which provides for extended
support to all participating States. We also welcome
the role of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in coordinating regional efforts
to combat common threats across the region. In that
regard, we recall the final communiqué issued by the
ECOWAS in Abuja on 29 June, which emphasizes the
importance of fostering cooperation and the exchange
of information among States in the region, with a view
to combating terrorism. We also look forward to the
convening of an ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit on
terrorism to be held in Burkina Faso in the near future.
The State of Kuwait supports all regional initiatives
aimed at fostering cooperation among the countries of
the region and ensuring their stability and prosperity.
Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian and
development situation in the region, we must draw
a link between the humanitarian situation and the
deteriorating security situation. Owing to increased
suicide bombings, armed attacks against farmers
and herders, piracy and other maritime crimes, there
has been an overall increase in hunger, poverty and
epidemics, and the number of refugees and displaced
persons has increased across the region. In addition, as
a result of the violence, there has been a shortage of
basic human services. For example, it is estimated that
this year some 14 million people will require urgent
humanitarian assistance in Burkina Faso, Mali, the
Niger and Nigeria.
I would like to commend the work being carried out
by the various United Nations agencies to alleviate the
suffering of refugees and others in need. We thank the
Governments of countries in the region that have hosted
refugees and urge all parties to commit to upholding
the principles of human rights and ensuring unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance.
With regard to overcoming the various challenges
facing the region, a comprehensive development
approach must be adopted with a focus on capacitybuilding, strengthening Government infrastructures
and fostering economic growth. Confronting these
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

challenges is the only way to address the root causes of
conflict in the region. Security and development have
always been closely linked to the wider development
and prosperity of societies.
Thirdly, on the role of UNOWAS, the Office plays
a critical role in developing the security sector and
supporting political processes in West Africa and the
Sahel. We have taken note of the significant efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his team. We commend the work of UNOWAS
in supporting States’ good offices in their mediation
efforts to resolve disputes and support electoral
processes across the region. We hope that these efforts
will be expanded to include building security and
development capacities in the Sahel and enabling States
to combat organized crime and violence. We commend
the role of UNOWAS in this regard.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Chambas for his briefing.
The recent situation in West Africa and the
Sahel has generally been stable. Several countries
have successfully held presidential, legislative and
local elections, which China welcomes as a positive
development. At the same time, terrorist attacks,
transnational organized crime and other factors pose
challenges to regional peace and security, while
intercommunal conflicts and violence continue to grow.
In the light of the current situation, China wishes to
touch on three points. First, we must vigorously support
countries of the region in building their capacity and
institutions. The Multinational Joint Task Force of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) have
played an important role in combating terrorism at the
regional level. Their approach has set a good example
of how African countries can independently respond to
regional challenges and maintain regional peace and
security. The international community should continue
to support African countries in their efforts and help
them to strengthen their counter-terrorism capabilities.
China supports the United Nations in providing the
necessary financial support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. Based on the specific requests of States, we
should help them to establish mechanisms to prevent
and address intercommunal conflicts and promote
harmonious coexistence among communities.

S/PV. 8585

Secondly, we should fully leverage the role of
regional organizations and institutions, given that
challenges such as terrorism are transnational in nature
and especially given that the situation in Libya is having
a spillover effect on West Africa and the Sahel. The
coordinating role of relevant regional and subregional
organizations must therefore be fully utilized. Regional
and subregional organizations such as the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission have
unique advantages in facilitating dialogue, mediation
and good offices and in promoting political solutions
to regional problems. United Nations agencies should
strengthen their collaboration with the AU, ECOWAS
and other entities in order to help achieve peace and
stability in the region.
Thirdly, attention should be given to resolving
deep-rooted problems in the region. We should actively
promote the economic and social development of
countries in West Africa and the Sahel, focusing on
improving such sectors as agriculture, health care,
education, economy, trade, interconnectivity and
infrastructure, help countries of the region to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
eradicate poverty, and provide them with strong support
for their economic development, better livelihoods and
job creation.
China appreciates the positive role played by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
We hope that, while respecting the sovereignty and
leadership of the countries concerned, the Office will
continue to strengthen communication and coordination
with relevant countries and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU and ECOWAS.
China attaches great importance to strengthening
cooperation with Africa and developing countries.
The Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, which took place in September 2018,
identified areas such as peace, security and economic
development as the focus of China-Africa cooperation
in future. China is actively implementing the ChinaAfrica peace and security initiative, which was
announced by President Xi Jinping at the Forum.
We have taken practical steps to support the
Sahel region in its counter-terrorism operations and
in the capacity-building of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Within the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, China has been fully and pragmatically

19-2285611/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

24/07/2019

cooperating with West African countries, with a view
to helping them accelerate development and strengthen
their capacities. These measures reflect China’s firm
support for peace and development in West Africa and
the Sahel. China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to play a constructive role in
promoting long-term stability and security in the region.

the demographics, youth should be at the top of every
Government’s agenda. Furthermore, Governments
must focus on good governance in general, acting
with respect for national constitutions, particularly
with regard to the length of presidential mandates. Of
course, these are regional problems and therefore it is
necessary to take a regional approach.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I can be brief because I
feel there is general unity in the Security Council on this
issue. I should like to align myself in particular with the
statements delivered by my European colleagues who
have already taken the floor today.

I also wish to highlight what Mr. Chambas said with
regard to the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum for
Regional Cooperation on Stabilization, Peacebuilding
and Sustainable Development. It is very positive that
the Governors are genuinely addressing the problem of
extremists and are working together with the Heads of
State and the Governors of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as taking
on board the views of other neighbouring countries in
their work.

First of all, I would like to express Germany’s
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas.
We support his analysis and recommendations. With
regard to the analysis, there has been some progress
made on the democratic front, with some very specific
and positive steps having been taken. I would like
to reiterate what he said with regard to the Gambia’s
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission,
what he said about Cabo Verde implementing resolution
2467 (2019) on sexual violence, and what he said about
Senegal and Togo — two countries in which there are
more women involved. Those are very good examples,
and I hope that they are taken into account by others.
Nevertheless, the glass remains half empty.
Mr. Chambas mentioned the violent extremism that
is increasing in some areas, deterioration of security,
human rights violations, gender-based violence in many
countries, humanitarian crises, internally displaced
persons, drug trafficking, and herders and farmers
at each other’s throats. In this context, I would like
to highlight a point that we believe is very important
even if it was not mentioned by many speakers today,
namely, the security implications of climate change in
the region.
In terms of actions going forward, I feel that
when we put all of the burden on the United Nations,
we must remember that the most important thing is
national ownership. National Governments must do
their homework — and the international community
can support them in that — but there has to be national
ownership. It has to be through national ownership
that democratic rules are implemented, accountability
guaranteed, the judiciary strengthened, the participation
of women and wider civil society ensured, and the
involvement of youth prioritized. Indeed, if we look at
12/15

This is where the United Nations and its good
offices can help, and therefore cooperation with
ECOWAS and the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel
is very important, as are the efforts being undertaken
by Mr. Chambas and the Secretary-General with regard
to the One United Nations approach. The members of
the Security Council visited Mali and Burkina Faso
and we witnessed the many challenges they face there,
particularly in Burkina Faso, and how important One
United Nations, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund are there. The latter is being used
prolifically, which is something I can only encourage.
Finally, I would like to return to what I mentioned
previously regarding the challenges posed by climate
change. We support the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and are pleased to note that it is
working specifically on the preparation of a report
on climate-related security risks. Germany stands
ready to support the United Nations. We are spending
€50 million on strengthening the security sector in
Burkina Faso. The G-5 Sahel is also on our priority list,
and we have spent €150 million on the G-5 Sahel since
2016. We support the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Regional Stabilization Facility for
Lake Chad and have spent €40 million to this end, as
we believe UNDP needs to play a very important role
in the region.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Chambas for
his briefing and his good offices. We also support and
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for promoting peace and
stability in the region.
We note that the security situation throughout the
majority of West Africa and the Sahel has remained
relatively stable. This trend is reflected in the holding
of peaceful elections in the region, as well as political
dialogues and gradual progress in the implementation
of agreements. In this context, we wish to refer to three
fundamental issues.
First, regarding the security situation, we regret
that attacks on civilians and security forces by terrorist
groups, criminal networks and militias continue
to be recorded in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Lake
Chad basin. We acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by Governments and communities in their actions to
minimize violence; however, the security sector needs
to be reformed and strengthened in order to combat
this scourge. Deeper cross-border cooperation is
also required.
Only with regional commitment to enhancing the
capacity of the authorities to prevent and investigate
terrorist and violent acts will it be possible to reduce
attacks, sever armed groups from their livelihoods and
reduce impunity. The security situation has not only
caused deaths, but has resulted in massive population
displacement, food insecurity and malnutrition and has
decimated education and health services.
The second point I wish to highlight is the grave
humanitarian situation in certain parts of the region. We
echo the appeal made by the humanitarian community,
which has requested $1.6 billion but so far has received
only 23 per cent of this figure.
Thirdly, turning to the environmental issue,
despite the initiatives carried out by UNOWAS, we
remain concerned about the effects of climate change
in the region, especially in the Lake Chad basin. This
could contribute to the more frequent occurrence of
natural disasters that reduce the means of subsistence
for the population. We encourage the international
community to pursue its efforts in the implementation
of strategies that enable risk assessment and contribute
to strengthening the resilience of the most affected
sectors. In that context, we must also establish channels
of information and collaboration with local communities
in order to expand early warning mechanisms to assist
with joint planning.

S/PV. 8585

West Africa is facing great challenges and, in order
to overcome them we need a comprehensive regional
analysis of the root causes of the conflicts. Based on the
results of this analysis, we must implement sustainable
and inclusive strategies that are focused on providing
greater investment for the training of security forces.
A collective political commitment with a road map
and clear and realistic benchmarks is also essential.
To that end, we look forward to the conclusion of the
analysis and recommendations of the UNOWAS study
on pastoralism and security in West Africa and the
Sahel, as well as a road map that addresses the drivers
of conflicts between herders and farmers.
It is critical to strengthen United Nations strategies
for the entire region, to offer more opportunities for
young people and women and to provide livelihoods
through development and education. These are
indispensable factors in order to achieve lasting peace
and meet the Sustainable Development Goals in West
Africa and the Sahel.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like first to thank
Special Representative Mohammed Ibn Chambas for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in
West Africa and the Sahel, as well as the activities of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).
Indonesia fully supports the work of UNOWAS in
West Africa and the Sahel. There has been commendable
progress in areas such as political governance and
women’s participation. Yet, there remain challenges to
overcome in ensuring peace, stability and development
in the region.
The security situation in a number of countries of
West Africa and the Sahel remains a cause for concern.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2019/549), there has been an upsurge in terrorist
attacks and intercommunal violence fuelled by the
activities of violent extremist groups. It also suggests
that maritime crime, transnational organized crime and
illicit trafficking have increased in the region. This has
not only resulted in civilian casualties, but has also
exacerbated the humanitarian situation.
In this vein, I would like to reiterate three main
points which I deem important in order to address the
security challenge in the region.
First, Indonesia commends the initiative of
countries of West Africa and the Sahel to combat

19-2285613/15

S/PV.8585

Peace consolidation in West Africa

terrorism through collective security efforts such as the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of
the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel. Such initiatives
should receive all the necessary support. Indonesia
welcomes the expansion of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali’s support to all contingents of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force under resolution 2480 (2019). We hope that it will
contribute to the achievement of tangible results in the
operations of the Joint Force. We must note, however,
that the collective endeavours should be complemented
by national efforts to tackle terrorism. In this regard,
we believe that it is of utmost importance to strengthen
State presence and institutions, including police and
judicial institutions.
Secondly, it is crucial to address the root causes
of insecurity. A security approach is not a panacea
for insecurity in the region. There are many advances
necessary to ensure the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation, reconstruction and economic and social
development. Local grievances must also be addressed
to prevent the expansion of violent extremism.
International partners should continue to support
the implementation of the stabilization strategy for
countries affected by Boko Haram; the G-5 Sahel
priority investment plan, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel. These are important in order to
build a resilient society through inclusive social and
economic development.
Thirdly, it is necessary to adopt region-wide
approaches to conflict resolution and management.
The proximity of countries, the cross-border activity of
extremist groups and other factors raise the possibility
of a spillover of insecurity in the region. That must be
countered with greater cooperation among countries
in West Africa and the Sahel. Various United Nations
agencies should enhance their synergies and support
to regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, Indonesia welcomes the upcoming Economic
Community of West African States special summit on
terrorism, which will take place in September. Such
joint efforts could be more focused on preventing the
resurgence of violence and conflict in the region. That
is vital to ensuring that many hard-won gains translate
to lasting peace and prosperity in West Africa and
the Sahel.
14/15

24/07/2019

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
his briefing.
I too can be quick because, as the German
Ambassador said, there is a good degree of consensus
in the Council on today’s topic. I agree with the points
made by almost everyone here today. Let me just
highlight three issues.
First, concerning the elections, we very much
endorse the Special Representative’s assessment of the
recent elections in West Africa and welcome all the
good work he has been doing to support those elections.
The United Kingdom believes that inclusive democratic
processes are critical, not just for international
peace and security, but also for creating an enabling
environment for investments and, more broadly,
sustainable development. It is absolutely vital that all
authorities and international partners work together to
ensure that future elections in the region are timely,
peaceful and credible.
Secondly,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2019/549) highlights the devastating effect that the
deteriorating security situation in north-east Nigeria is
having on the people of the Lake Chad basin region.
It is a region that is often overlooked by the Council,
particularly in recent years. The United Kingdom is
discussing with the Nigerian Government what more
the international community can do to help it tackle the
crisis. Clearly, extending State authority into so-called
ungoverned spaces will be essential in order to stem the
advances of Boko Haram. We welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to
date and encourage further support to Governments in
the region to tackle the crisis and implement resolution
2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin region.
Thirdly and finally, turning now to the Sahel, which,
of course, remains a major concern for all of us on the
Council, I am pleased to say that the Government of the
United Kingdom has announced this week that it will
make a future commitment of 250 troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. However, we must all do more to help
address the root causes of the situation in the Sahel.
As we heard during our recent visit to the Sahel, that
includes reducing abuses by security forces, helping
Governments provide basic services and mitigating
the conflict over resources by helping people to adapt
to climate change. It is a good thing that the Council
19-22856

24/07/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

has become more focused on the link between climate
change and conflict in recent months.
I also agree with my Chinese colleague who
said that we need to make better use of international
coordination mechanisms on the Sahel. We should
be using the Council, the Sahel Alliance and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission to make sure that the
international community and our partners in the Sahel
work effectively together to address the long-term
drivers of instability and poverty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas for his useful briefing on the situation
in West Africa and the Sahel. We welcome the progress
he shared with us, in particular the contribution made
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) to elections in Benin, Guinea-Bissau,
Nigeria and Senegal, and improvements in gender
equality in the region. However, we are concerned
about the fact that insecurity and the humanitarian
situation have deteriorated in some countries. The
actions of terrorist groups, transnational organized
crime, clashes over the control of natural resources and
inadequate State presence are ever-present challenges,
in particular in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin
region. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
work of UNOWAS in three main areas.
First, in the area of conflict prevention, the good
offices of and preventive diplomacy demonstrated
by UNOWAS will be vital in the upcoming electoral
processes in the region, in particular through support
for inclusive dialogue and the strengthening of national
capacities in order to allow for transparent, inclusive
elections that foster the political participation of women
and young people. UNOWAS has also proved to be a
central actor in pre- and post-election environments,
helping to ease tensions and prevent the emergence or
deterioration of political crises by developing earlywarning capabilities.

S/PV. 8585

Secondly, with regard to promoting development,
we highlight the fact that UNOWAS has prioritized
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, in line with national and regional
needs and priorities. The Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund also conduct crucial
activities in that regard, all in an effort to help address
governance and justice gaps, poverty, exclusion and
marginalization and combat the root causes of conflict.
We also highlight the attention that UNOWAS pays
to intercommunal conflicts between pastoralists and
farmers as a result of the effects of climate change,
and to the promotion of women’s access to high-level
Government positions in West Africa and the Sahel.
Thirdly, with respect to regional cooperation, we
believe that cross-border cooperation and the creation
of subregional synergies are key to improving security
in the region, in particular when addressing the threat
of terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime, as
well as their respective linkages. We welcome the close
cooperation among UNOWAS and the Office of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the African Union, which help ensure a complementary
approach to those scourges. We stress UNOWAS
support for security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for excombatants and the promotion of dialogue at the local
level, as well as its collaboration with the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
I would like to end by expressing our strong
support for the role played by UNOWAS and encourage
the international community to continue to cooperate
closely with its efforts to achieve lasting peace in West
Africa and the Sahel.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

19-2285615/15
