S/PV.6790

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6790th meeting

Monday, 25 June 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Caballeros
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2012/376)

12-38661 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1238661*

S/PV.6790

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2012/376)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, His Excellency Mr. Harold
Caballeros. Their presence here today is an affirmation
of the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Jordan, the Republic of Korea, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, the Philippines, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Turkey, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General,
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip
Spoerri, Director for International Law and Cooperation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/376, which contains the report of

2

The Secretary-General: The report I present
today is my ninth on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2012/376). Its essential thrust is
clear — too many people are dying in too many places.
Sometimes they are caught in crossfire; frequently they
are targeted. They are the innocent victims of attacks
on their communities and, often, on places that rightly
should be sanctuaries — hospitals, schools and places of
worship. More and more, we are witness to an appalling
catalogue of sexual violence, forced disappearances,
torture and other acts that violate — often
egregiously — international humanitarian and human
rights law.
Let us consider some of the most recent developments.
Last year in Afghanistan, our Mission there reported a
rise in civilian deaths. Anti-Government forces were
responsible for more than 75 per cent of those killings.
In Somalia, attacks by Al-Shabaab take place most
frequently against unarmed civilians. Ongoing clashes
between the Sudan, South Sudan and their proxies
have caused many deaths, injuries and large-scale
displacements of people. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, civilians are routinely caught up in ferocious
fighting between Government forces and various armed
groups; too often, they are the targets of reprisals by
all sides. In Côte d’Ivoire, seven peacekeepers recently
lost their lives defending villagers from armed attacks
from across the border with Liberia.
And in Syria, Government forces and armed groups
are fighting with no apparent concern for civilian
populations. Attacks are growing in frequency and
brutality. As we speak, the city of Homs and other areas
are being shelled. United Nations observers have risked
their lives to report to the world on what they have
seen. They have reported armed assaults on civilians,
execution-style killings and opposition forces firing
from inside hospitals.
Across that geography of conflict, we simply
must do more. We must do more to protect women and
children, in particular; more to prevent attacks against
journalists; and more to save innocent lives.
The Security Council has made important progress
over the past year and a half. We saw the power of
unity in the Council in halting violence and upholding

12-38661

S/PV.6790

democracy in Côte d’Ivoire. In Libya, international
forces intervened to prevent a clear threat to civilians
in the east after the former regime had demonstrated its
readiness to carry out large-scale killings. The Council
has also shown greater willingness to use targeted
sanctions against those who violate international
humanitarian and human rights law.

Thirdly, when United Nations peacekeeping
missions are mandated to protect civilians, they must
have the resources and forces to do the job. Their work
to directly protect civilians must be accompanied by
effective political efforts to secure lasting peace and
assistance to build State institutions so the peacekeepers
can ultimately withdraw.

In recent months, landmark verdicts against Charles
Taylor and Thomas Lubanga marked important steps for
international justice and accountability. Commissions
of inquiry by the Human Rights Council also found
serious violations of international law in Côte d’Ivoire,
Libya and Syria. I welcome the continuing role of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.

Fourthly, for civilians trapped in conflict, survival
often depends on international aid. We need to do
more — much more — to ensure safe, timely and
unhindered humanitarian access.

And, of course, every day, tens of thousands of
civilians continue to depend on our peacekeepers for
protection. Our peacekeeping missions have made
important advances in tackling this most challenging part
of their mandate. They are identifying and addressing
threats through political efforts to prevent violence and
resolve conflict, immediate physical protection and
building a broader protective environment for civilians.
This includes assistance for State and local institutions
to better fulfil their fundamental responsibility to
protect their citizens. Drawing lessons from our
experiences, we have developed new tools to improve
peacekeeping efforts to carry out missions’ protection
mandates, including guidance on strategic planning and
training.
My report highlights five continuing core challenges
for civilian protection. First, parties to conflict must do
more to comply with international humanitarian and
human rights law. All violations require our attention
and action, but some demand particular scrutiny.
Among them is the growing use of explosive weapons
in populated areas.
This year, my report also spotlights attacks against
health-care services. According to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, that has become one of
the biggest yet least recognized humanitarian issues of
our time.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for a more
systematic engagement with non-State armed groups.
That does not presume recognition, but it does require
understanding on the part of the groups and their
leaders of their responsibilities and the consequences of
violating international humanitarian and human rights
law.

Fifth is accountability. When national authorities
fail to take the steps necessary to protect civilians or
bring the perpetrators of war crimes and gross human
rights violations to justice, I urge the Security Council
to exercise strong leadership in guiding the international
response.
Meeting these challenges requires political
will — the will of the parties to conduct hostilities
within the parameters of international law, to refrain
from using explosive weapons in populated areas,
to allow engagement with armed groups and open
access to those in need of assistance, and to enforce
discipline and hold accountable those who perpetrate
violations. It also implies the will on the part of the
Council to deliver on its long-standing commitment
to the protection of civilians by consistently using the
tools at its disposal, including the imposition of arms
embargoes, targeted sanctions and referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court. Beyond that, I also
urge the Council and Member States to consider new
approaches to preventing and responding to violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
and to ensure that the protection of civilians receives
the attention it demands.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/376) provides a compelling reminder of the
situation that confronts civilians affected by conflict
and violence, and of the pressing need to strengthen
efforts to protect them. Since the submission of the
report, a number of the situations to which it refers have
deteriorated.
In Syria, in recent weeks we have seen an
alarming intensification in the violence. The ongoing

12-386613

S/PV.6790

use of artillery and tanks by Syrian security forces
in populated areas is of the utmost concern, as are
reports of summary executions of civilians, torture
and other forms of ill-treatment by Syrian security
forces and militia, including against children. Schools
have been raided, used as military bases and detention
centres. Hospitals and health facilities have been
targeted. Anti-Government groups are also reportedly
responsible for violations, including torture, summary
executions and abductions.
Residents in the most affected areas are often
unable to access water, food or medical care. It is
imperative that civilians who wish to leave areas of
fighting be allowed to do so safely. All relevant parties
need to allow safe, timely and unimpeded access by
humanitarian organizations to all areas affected by
violence to enable the provision of assistance to people
in need.
The plight of civilians in other situations also
warrants our continued attention. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, intensified military operations
in North Kivu between the Congolese armed forces
and the March 23 Movement (M-23) have displaced
over 220,000 people since early April. Meanwhile, the
redeployment of some Congolese forces to fight the
M-23 has left a security vacuum elsewhere that is being
exploited by the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda and other armed groups in an effort to take
control of mines and towns. The result is that tens of
thousands of civilians have been displaced.
Continued fighting between the Sudanese Armed
Forces (or SAF) and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (or SPLM-N), including aerial
bombardment of civilian areas by the SAF, has resulted
in a sharp increase in the number of refugees fleeing
to South Sudan. Those remaining in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan urgently need assistance, yet the
Sudanese Government continues to refuse humanitarian
access to areas under SPLM-N control. We are in
ongoing discussions on this.
In Yemen, a Government offensive to regain
control of cities in the Abyan governorate has resulted
in civilian deaths and injuries. Road closures and the
presence of mines and unexploded ordnance have made
it difficult for civilians to obtain treatment and to leave
areas of fighting.
Fighting in northern Mali has forced 174,000
people to flee the country. An additional 170,000 are

4

internally displaced. Insecurity in the north has severely
restricted humanitarian access and forced a number
of humanitarian organizations to cease operations.
This is troubling given reports of arbitrary detentions,
extrajudicial executions, sexual violence, including
rape, and other violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law by the parties to the conflict.
In Afghanistan, the number of internally displaced
people has continued to grow, with more than 87,000
Afghans displaced in the first four months of this year.
As of April, there were an estimated 408,000 internally
displaced persons in the country. On a more positive
note, there was a 21 per cent reduction in overall casualty
figures in Afghanistan during the first four months of
2012, compared to the same period last year. However,
the deaths on 6 June of 40 civilians and the wounding of
67 others in indiscriminate attacks by anti-Government
elements and an airstrike by pro-Government forces
underline the precarious position in which civilians find
themselves. They also underline the need for all parties
to take the necessary steps to spare civilians from the
effects of hostilities. I welcome NATO’s decision this
month to cease aerial attacks on residential areas.
Lastly, I am concerned by renewed violence
this month in the west of Côte d’Ivoire and between
Israel and militant groups in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
The Secretary-General’s report provides important
recommendations for addressing the five core challenges
to enhance the protection of civilians. I would like to
focus on four issues identified in the report.
First is the need for a comprehensive and robust
arms trade treaty. The poorly regulated trade in arms
and corresponding widespread availability and misuse
of weapons fuel and facilitate many of the violations
that that we see in armed conflict. Next month’s United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty will
provide an opportunity to address the humanitarian
impact of the poorly regulated trade in arms.
Secondly, action is needed to address the use in
populated areas of explosive weapons with wide-area
effect, the humanitarian impact of which is clear in
parts of Syria. More than 21,000 civilians were killed
or injured by explosive weapons in 2011. Some 87 per
cent of these deaths and injuries occurred in populated
areas, including markets, schools, places of worship
and homes.

12-38661

S/PV.6790

I urge the Council to be more proactive and
systematic in calling on all parties, in Syria and
elsewhere, to refrain from using explosive weapons
in populated areas. The Council might also consider
more robust actions, such as the imposition of
targeted measures against the leadership of parties
that use explosive weapons in violation of applicable
international law.
The third issue I would stress is the need for
more systematic recording of civilian casualties.
Such recording, combined with regular reporting, can
confirm the causes of harm to civilians and the actions
needed to end such harm, including by the Council. It
also allows parties to conflict to better understand the
impact of their actions, enabling them to undertake
prompt corrective action to ensure their compliance
with the law.
I am encouraged by the commitment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia to establish a civilian
casualty tracking analysis and response cell, as well as
its adoption of the policy on indirect fire.
The final issue is accountability. In most, if not
all, of the situations mentioned, serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law are being committed. The perpetrators of such
acts must be held accountable, either domestically or
internationally. The Security Council and Member
States have a responsibility to ensure that this happens.
The workshop on accountability, convened in
November 2011 jointly by the Permanent Mission
of Portugal and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, discussed ways in which the
Council could more actively support and strengthen
accountability at both the national and the international
levels. I would urge the Council to engage in
further dialogue with a view to taking forward the
recommendations emerging from the workshop.
As the Secretary-General has reminded us,
the solution to many of the problems we see in
contemporary conflicts is strengthened compliance
by parties to conflict with the letter and spirit of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Ensuring such compliance begins, of course, with the
parties to conflict. But the responsibility is not theirs
alone. It is a responsibility that is incumbent upon us
all — the United Nations, its Member States and the
Security Council. We can and must do more to fulfil

that responsibility and ensure that the law has meaning
for those it is intended to protect.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I appreciate this opportunity to
deliver to the Security Council, on behalf of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, this statement on the
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
For the purposes of today’s debate, I would like
to focus on the issue of accountability in the context
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376), and to
highlight some key examples from specific country
situations to illustrate practical ways by which the
protection of civilians can be strengthened.
Despite efforts to restore calm in Syria, the situation
deteriorates relentlessly. The Government of Syria has
the obligation to ensure that civilians are adequately
protected. Its use of heavy weapons and indiscriminate
shelling of civilian areas cannot be justified and must
cease immediately. These attacks may amount to crimes
against humanity and other international crimes. Both
Government and opposition forces have been involved
in actions that have harmed civilians. Those responsible
must be held accountable, including for attacks against
United Nations observers.
I reiterate my call for the Security Council to refer
the case of Syria to the International Criminal Court. A
prompt referral would serve to remind the actors in Syria
that they will be held to account for their failure to abide
by international human rights and humanitarian law and
to protect civilians. The international community must
assume its responsibilities and act in unison to prevent
further violations. Actions that directly contribute to
escalating the violence, such as providing arms, can
only result in more civilians being killed and injured.
Commissions of inquiry are important mechanisms
for promoting accountability for serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law where
national authorities fail to take appropriate action. The
Commission of Inquiry on Syria continues its work
under its mandate from the Human Rights Council. I
welcome the Security Council’s increased practice of
referring to the findings of commissions of inquiry
established by other bodies. The Council can play an
important role in enhancing the impact of the work of
commissions, by requesting States and other actors to

12-386615

S/PV.6790

cooperate with them, making more consistent use of the
information and analysis that they produce, ensuring
the protection of persons who cooperate with them
and, indeed, by establishing them itself. Justice and
protection of victims can be advanced by supporting
the implementation of their recommendations and
by considering specific follow-up actions aimed at
ensuring accountability. My Office stands ready to
assist the Council in this area.
As the Council considers further responses to the
situation in Syria, it is worth looking at measures that
have been taken to strengthen the protection of civilians
in situations where more robust international action has
been mandated.
Under-Secretary-General Amos has already
referred to the civilian casualty tracking analysis
and response cell to be established in Somalia by the
African Union Mission in that country. In Afghanistan,
where conflict-related violence continues to exact a
heavy toll on the civilian population, especially women
and children, a civilian casualty mitigation mechanism
by the International Security Assistance Force is
being used to track incidents in which international
forces have been responsible for civilian deaths and
injuries. Such mechanisms can be an effective means to
document incidents that result in civilian casualties, to
launch investigations and to provide remedies to some
victims.
My Office is advocating for the creation of a
similar mechanism within the Afghan security forces
as an effective means of increasing civilian protection
and accountability during the transition to full Afghan
control of security. That would allow Afghan forces to
perform accurate, professional and timely investigations
into all incidents of civilian casualties caused by them
and to reduce re-occurrences.
Enhancing accountability requires a strong and
sustained commitment from the United Nations itself
to ensure that human rights lie at the heart of its
activities. The human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security
forces is an example of the Organization taking its
responsibilities seriously. It seeks to ensure that the
Organization does not provide support to security
forces involved in serious human rights violations, and
acts to reduce the risk of violations.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
implementation of the due diligence policy has led

6

to some tangible improvements in the behaviour of
the troops of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo. The United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office supports the implementation of
the policy through a profiling project created in 2010 to
identify and profile individuals in the security services
allegedly responsible for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The information
gathered on alleged perpetrators in the security services
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo provides a key
tool to assess risks of violence against civilians.
Today, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) released a report on the shocking armed
attacks on Lou Nuer and Murle communities that took
place in Jonglei state in December 2011 and January
2012. The report speaks about brutal killings of men,
women and children — some of them by machete. It
speaks about abductions of women and children and
calls for their immediate release, for accountability
and for strengthening of the justice system. In March,
to tackle the preponderance of small arms in those
communities and the likelihood of retaliatory violence,
the Government launched a programme to disarm
civilians in Jonglei. Concerned about the protection
risks associated with forced disarmament, UNMISS
persuaded the Government to embark upon a voluntary
disarmament exercise conducted with cooperation from
community leaders. Integrated monitoring teams, often
led by human rights officers, have undertaken more
than 60 missions to the areas where disarmament is
taking place to monitor conduct of the process by South
Sudanese forces.
With that disarmament programme under way in
South Sudan, let me join the calls made today for the
adoption of a global arms trade treaty. The supply of
weapons to conflict zones is directly harming civilians.
The effort to address this problem is key to strengthening
the protection of civilians around the world.
There are a number of other country situations that
continue to concern us. Israel’s illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip has been in place for five years and has led
to severe restrictions of basic rights, such as the rights
to food, health care and education. More than half of
Gaza’s 1.6 million people are children. Protecting
civilians in Gaza requires that Israel lift its blockade.
It also requires that all sides distinguish between
combatants and civilians and avoid provocations, such
as border incursions and targeted killings, which too

12-38661

S/PV.6790

often lead to destruction, injury and death, as witnessed
over the past week.

work around the world. The terrible human suffering
caused by those issues can and must be reduced.

I am seriously concerned by the reported deaths and
injuries of civilians resulting from counter-terrorism
operations carried out in Yemen, but also in Pakistan
and Somalia. Many of those casualties have resulted
from the use of armed drones. I share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General with respect to the
lack of transparency regarding the circumstances in
which armed drones are used.

Violence against health-care workers, facilities and
beneficiaries is one of the most serious yet neglected
humanitarian concerns today, as the Secretary-General
mentioned in his opening speech. It impedes access
to and the delivery of health care in many countries.
I will mention just a few examples. In Pakistan, the
kidnapping and murder of an ICRC health manager
earlier this year has deprived thousands of wounded
patients of adequate treatment. In Somalia, hospitals
have been shelled. In Libya and Syria, ambulances
have been shot at. Just yesterday, in Syria, a first-aid
volunteer of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent was shot
and killed. That is the fourth time since last September
that a member of the Red Crescent was killed while on
duty. In Afghanistan, wounded people may languish for
hours in vehicles held up at checkpoints. In sum, blatant
disrespect for the neutral status of health facilities,
transport and personnel is all too common.

Allow me to conclude. The human rights monitoring
and protection work undertaken by the United Nations
is essential to safeguard civilians in armed conflict and
elsewhere. I urge the Council to continue to include
explicit provisions on protection and accountability in
its resolutions. Where missions receive monitoring and
other human rights mandates, they should be given the
necessary material and personnel resources to carry out
their duties effectively. The vast terrain and security
environment in which they are often deployed may
require helicopters and armoured personnel carriers.
Appropriate human rights training should be provided
to all peacekeepers to prepare them for their duties. The
United Nations should also consider making greater use
of new technologies, such as satellite imagery, in the
protection of civilians. It is our responsibility to protect
the lives of civilians using every tool available to us.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spoerri.
Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) is honoured to brief the Security
Council once again and wishes to thank China, as
President, for the invitation.
We commend the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2012/376), which highlights several issues of great
concern to the ICRC. I will limit my remarks to three
of them. The first fundamental concern is threats
affecting the security and delivery of health care, the
second is the availability and use of arms and the third
is the failure to comply with international humanitarian
law. The need to improve respect for international
humanitarian law and to ensure accountability for
violations lies at the heart of all of those issues, which
continuously confront the ICRC in its daily operational

In response to that reality on the ground, the ICRC
has documented and analyzed hundreds of violent
incidents affecting health care in 16 countries where it
operates, over a two-and-a-half year period. The results
of the study, published at the end of last year, show that,
while the number of recorded incidents is striking, they
represent only the tip of the iceberg. A single violent
incident against health-care infrastructure or workers
can have immeasurable longer-term repercussions on
entire communities with war-related or chronic health
problems.
The ICRC and some 50 National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies subsequently raised this issue
at the thirty-first International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in November
and December of last year. That Conference saw the
adoption of a far-reaching resolution entitled “Health
Care in Danger”, demanding an effective response from
States, national societies and the health-care community
at large. The resolution called upon the ICRC to initiate
consultations with all major stakeholders in order to
identify and agree upon concrete measures for making
the delivery of health care safer in armed conflicts
and other emergencies worldwide. Such consultations
are under way, aimed not at creating new international
instruments or legal frameworks but rather at
producing practical recommendations and measures to
be implemented at the national level.

12-386617

S/PV.6790

While a concerted international effort is required
to tackle such major humanitarian concerns, primary
responsibility clearly lies with States. The ICRC
therefore makes a special plea to the members of this
Council to actively support this important humanitarian
endeavour.
Many threats to the security and delivery of health
care stem in fact from the widespread availability and
use of weapons, which is the second issue I would like
to highlight today. Each year, hundreds of thousands
of civilians pay a devastating price for the rampant
availability and misuse of conventional weapons.
Civilians remain at risk of being injured, killed or
displaced by violence involving weapons, even long
after a conflict has ended. That is partly a consequence
of the poorly regulated international trade in
conventional arms. The ICRC, in most of the contexts in
which it works, is confronted with the manifold effects
of inadequate control over transfers of conventional
weapons. That is why the ICRC strongly supports the
adoption of a global arms trade treaty.
One key objective of such an instrument must be
to reduce the human cost of that availability by setting
clear treaty norms for the transfer of conventional arms.
An effective arms trade treaty would require States to
assess whether the weapons they are transferring may
be used to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law and other relevant international
instruments, and to prohibit those transfers when such
clear risks exist. A strong treaty would save lives,
facilitate medical and other humanitarian aid and
strengthen compliance with international law.
The failure to comply with international
humanitarian law is the third issue that I wish to stress.
As set out in the Secretary-General’s report, weak
compliance with international humanitarian law and the
lack of accountability for violations seriously impact
the protection of civilians. Fortunately, some positive
developments have been observed. At the national level,
there have been many measures to improve compliance
and accountability, such as adopting legislation,
training public officials, including security forces,
and strengthening local judicial capacities. In parallel,
key decisions of the international criminal tribunals
have constituted major steps in the effort to ensure
accountability.
Still, major challenges remain. Last year’s
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red

8

Crescent endorsed ICRC proposals for further work to
strengthen legal protection for people affected by armed
conflict. A joint Swiss-ICRC initiative is already under
way to explore with States ways to make compliance
mechanisms more effective.
The Security Council has an essential role to play
in reminding the parties to conflicts to fully respect
the rules of international humanitarian law governing
humanitarian access. It is vital, however, that all
concerned understand and respect the roles played by
different actors on the ground, including organizations
without any judicial functions, such as the ICRC and
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. In that
vein, it was reassuring that the Secretary-General’s
report explicitly recognized the diversity and specific
mandates of protection actors and stressed their security
and need to have access.
As we deliberate here today, civilians in many parts
of the world are bearing the brunt of hostilities. The
ICRC urges the States in this Council to take practical
measures to counter a wide range of threats to health
care, to adopt a strong arms trade treaty and to commit
to strengthening legal protection for the victims of
armed conflict.
Resolute action in those three areas would go a long
way towards ensuring better protection of civilians
everywhere.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.
I will now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased that my presence in New York to attend
to matters unrelated to the Security Council has also
given me the opportunity to join you for the third
time since I became Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala five months ago. I also take this occasion
to thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of
his ninth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2012/376). I would also like to thank Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for her
briefing today, as well as, Navi Pillay, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her statement, as
read by Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović. I
would also like to thank the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Philip Spoerri, for his

12-38661

S/PV.6790

briefing. Their presence underscores the tremendous
importance of the strengthening of informal alliances
among the United Nations, the ICRC and the
community of non-governmental organizations that
deal with humanitarian issues and, more concretely, the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. The same
is, of course, true of more formal alliances in this area
among the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The protection of human life in general and the
protection of civilian populations from the appalling
consequences of armed conflict are at the core of the
raison d’être of the United Nations and were the main
sources of inspiration for the adoption of the Charter
following the horrors of the two world wars of the
twentieth century.
The majority of the reports that we have seen
regarding the protection of civilians in conflict situations
and its related aspects, including the protection of
women and children as well as humanitarian workers,
point to resolution 1265 (1999) as the starting point of
a new and prolific stage of the work of the Security
Council in that area.
However, it could be argued that the prevention of
conflicts before they erupt — which is the core mandate
of the Security Council — is the most effective manner
of protecting civilians from the scourge of war. Thus
the issue has underpinned the Council’s activities from
the outset.
Having said that, it is undeniable that starting in 1999
a qualitative leap took place in the work of the Council
when it added to its generic mandate — to preserve peace
and security at the international level — tangible and
specific actions aimed at protecting innocent civilians
from armed conflicts when, unfortunately, such
conflicts occur. In the not-too-distant past, peacekeepers
participating in stabilization or peacekeeping missions,
unable to intervene, were forced to be the passive
witnesses of serious violations inflicted by the parties
to a conflict on civilian populations.
Today an increasing number of the Security Council
resolutions establishing such operations contain very
explicit mandates on the protection of civilians. Unlike
in the past, the conflicts in question tend to be of an
intra-State, not inter-State, nature. Unfortunately, the
main victims of those conflicts are always innocent
civilians: often boys and girls, and especially women,

who suffer the most grotesque abuses against their life,
dignity and fundamental human rights.
We find intolerable the images of the dead, the
wounded, the crippled, the mutilated, the tortured,
those who have been stripped of all their belongings
and the displaced. In many cases such people have been
the victims of high-powered explosives, mines or direct
attacks. But such barbaric acts occur every day in
different parts of the world. This is not only a disgrace
to humanity; it also reflects a serious failure on the part
of sovereign States that do not comply with one of their
primary obligations: to protect their citizens. Speaking
from my country’s perspective, I would like to say that
such images offend us. That is why we have participated
actively through our troops in peacekeeping operations
that have strong mandates to protect civilians, such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Our Government aligns itself with the policies that
the Council and the Secretariat have been developing
over the years. Many of those policies are set out
in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/25), of
22 November 2010, especially in its detailed annex.
We also support the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s ninth report
(S/2012/376), presented to us today. We appreciate
the updating and further development of the five core
challenges identified in previous reports.
Looking ahead, we will continue to participate in
the work of the informal Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians. We are also pleased to see certain issues
brought into the mainstream of our deliberations — issues
that had been insufficiently elaborated on in previous
reports, such as the limited access to humanitarian
assistance by people in need of food, water and medical
supplies; attacks on humanitarian personnel, health
centres and ambulances transporting the wounded to
such centres; the kidnapping of humanitarian workers;
the difficult situation faced by migrant workers and
their families in situations of conflict; and the theft
of equipment and provisions intended to be used for
humanitarian assistance.
Now that we have acceded to the Rome Statute, we
will insist even more forcefully on accountability for
Government officials and for non-State armed groups
who, in conflict situations, flagrantly violate the relevant
provisions of international law and humanitarian law
by deliberately attacking civilians.

12-386619

S/PV.6790

Furthermore, we align ourselves with paragraph
21 of the Secretary-General’s report, which basically
proposes that we not politicize the noble task of
humanitarian assistance. We have made no secret of our
support for the norm of the responsibility to protect,
which overlaps and has some aspects in common with
the issue of the protection of civilians. However, we
believe that the continuing debate surrounding the
so-called third pillar of the responsibility to protect
should not affect the integrity of the broader concept
of the protection of civilians, which is rooted in
humanitarian law and which is the subject of today’s
meeting.
In conclusion, I should like to make two points.
First, we welcome the training modules for the
protection of civilians developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, and the fact that these are being offered to the
military and police personnel assigned to missions with
a mandate to protect civilians. That will allow us, inter
alia, to develop further the considerable achievements
made by the United Nations in the area of the protection
of civilians in conflict situations.
Secondly, we pay tribute to all those involved in
peacekeeping operations, past and present, who have
undoubtedly been directly responsible for saving
millions of lives. It is, however, regrettable that this
task is far from being completed.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important debate today, and let me also warmly thank
the Secretary-General for his opening remarks. My
thank also go to the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Valerie Amos; the Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ivan Šimonović; and the Director of
the International Law Division of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Philip Spoerri.
I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala in the Security Council this
morning, which highlights his country’s strong support
for this agenda, as, indeed, does Guatemala’s recent
adherence to the Rome Statute.
The
ninth
report
(S/2012/376)
of
the
Secretary-General expresses deep regret that civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflict and highlights the plight of the large number of

10

displaced civilians. It is important that the Council hear
and act on that sobering message.
As the report makes clear, ensuring the necessary
degree of compliance and thereby strengthening the
protection of civilians is essentially a matter of political
will. The international community must play its part
in helping States to fulfil their primary responsibilities
under international law.
It is therefore of great concern that we continue to
see humanitarian access to areas of need blocked or
constrained. Humanitarian access is fundamental to the
protection of civilians. We must be clear that impeding
this in any way is unacceptable and a violation of
Government responsibilities under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Since the last protection of civilians debate in
November (see S/PV.6650), we have seen a further
sharp deterioration of the situation for civilians in
Syria. The Syrian regime has shamefully failed in its
responsibility to protect its civilian population. Far
worse, it has deliberately targeted its civilian population
through the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of
force. The regime has now killed around 15,000 Syrian
civilians.
That is why the six-point plan of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States on Syria and two resolutions of this Council have
demanded the withdrawal of Syrian troops and heavy
weapons in order to facilitate a sustained reduction in
violence. Without that first step, the violence on all
sides will continue, the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic will not be able
to resume its operations and the Annan plan will fail.
We have now embarked on a final effort to breathe life
back into Mr. Annan’s plan, but it will succeed only if
the Council takes robust action to apply pressure on the
regime to meet its basic commitments under the Annan
plan and resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012).
As Mr. Šimonović has just said, combating
impunity is critical. We therefore commend the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and welcome
the recent convictions for war crimes. In March, the
ICC convicted the Congolese militia leader Thomas
Lubanga. In April, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone convicted Charles Taylor. Those verdicts are
examples of how the international community will
continue to challenge impunity and to shine the light
of accountability in all areas. It was right that on both

12-38661

S/PV.6790

occasions Council members publicly welcomed those
decisions.
We remain extremely concerned about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
civilians continue to suffer the effects of the ongoing
conflict and insecurity. A security vacuum in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has also
allowed armed groups to regain territory and commit
abuses against the population, including rape. The
responsibility for providing security to the population
rests with the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we encourage all neighbouring States
to support those efforts. We are working to ensure that
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo supports the
Government’s efforts and responds to the changing
situation on the ground, ensuring that the protection of
civilians remains its first priority while increasing its
emphasis on stabilization activity.
In Yemen, we welcome progress made by President
Mansour and his Government to move forward
with political transition. The Government’s clear
commitment to removing the threat posed by violent
extremism, notably in the south, must come with equal
determination to protect civilians.
The United Kingdom continues to champion work
on the protection of civilians. The informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians, chaired by the
United Kingdom, has met regularly this year, instituting
thematic and ad hoc briefings. The United Kingdom
has supported the work of the African Union Mission
in Somalia on the civilian casualty-tracking analysis
and response cell, and we have recently launched an
initiative on preventing sexual violence in conflict. Our
ambition is to bring new energy and focus to efforts
to combat sexual violence in situations of conflict and
repression by establishing the capability to rapidly
deploy a United Kingdom team of experts to investigate
and catalogue sexual violence. We shall use the United
Kingdom’s presidency of the Group of Eight in 2013 to
highlight the need to tackle this issue.
We look forward to working with Member States
and existing United Nations mechanisms, such as the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law, to take this forward.
In addition, we strongly support what Ms. Amos and
Mr. Spoerri said this morning about the importance of
rapidly moving to a conclusion of the negotiations on an
arms trade treaty.

In conclusion, resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirms the
Council’s commitment to the protection of civilians.
We must continue to act with clarity of purpose and the
utmost vigour on this important issue in all theatres of
war and armed conflict.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to welcome and thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his ninth report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2012/376) and for his important
briefing today. I would also like to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Mr. Ivan Šimonović and Mr. Philip Spoerri for
their detailed analyses of the matter.
The report draws attention to the need to comply
with the regulations of international humanitarian
law in order to reduce the impact of armed conflicts
on civilians. This matter is particularly relevant to the
Colombian State because we have had to defend our
democratic institutions from attacks by illegal armed
groups, whose warfare strategies openly violate those
laws. We share the Secretary-General’s concern with
regard to the situation faced by civilian populations
in situations of armed conflict in several parts of the
world, as well as the recurrent violation of the obligation
of all parties to conflict to respect and protect civilians,
in accordance with international law.
We agree that all parties to conflict should promote
respect for international law, that we should strengthen
protection for the United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions, and that we should improve
access to humanitarian aid and enhance accountability
for violations of the law. We believe that, as noted
by the Secretary-General, these issues not only pose
significant challenges for actions to protect civilians,
but that they also open important fields of action for the
Organization and its bodies. Similarly, we understand
that the report is intended as a complement to the
Council’s mandates in that area.
Moreover, the report refers to the importance of
enhancing legal compliance by non-State armed groups
and suggests that such compliance is dependent on the
existence of direct contact between the United Nations
and non-State armed groups. In that regard, I note that
Colombia has reservations regarding the second part of
that proposal. In order to further develop that typology,
the report identifies a formula that may work or have
worked in particular situations, and elevates it to the
status of a generally applicable solution. We do not
believe that one-size-fits-all solutions can work. Every

12-3866111

S/PV.6790

situation is different and must be approached by taking
into consideration its special circumstances.
In the particular case of measures directed at
non-State armed actors, in our case the suggestions
contained in the report conflict with the policies
adopted by the Colombian Government on the question
of possible peace negotiations. We believe that the
concern to enhance compliance by non-State armed
actors with international humanitarian law and other
relevant norms is valid, but we also believe that it is
amply covered by the first core challenge, namely,
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and, in particular, the
cardinal principles of distinction, proportionality and
taking precautions in attacks.
The report implies that in all non-international
armed conflicts, there should be ongoing and direct
engagement between non-State armed groups and the
relevant United Nations bodies in order to try to improve
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Furthermore, the report advocates greater
and more systematic engagement with such groups
in situations of armed conflict, and points out such
engagement must be initiated as soon as possible,
conducted at a high level by all parties concerned, and
sustained throughout the conflict. It concludes that,
while engagement will not always result in improved
protection, its absence will almost certainly mean more
civilian casualties in current conflicts.
Colombia cannot agree with that approach. While
we accept that some of those recommendations may be
successfully applied in certain situations around the
world, that is not the case for every situation. For that
reason, we must carefully analyse the recommendation
that Member States abstain from adopting policies
or other measures that impede the engagement of
humanitarian organizations with certain non-State
armed groups and, in particular, that impede activities
to promote respect for international humanitarian law.
Based on our recent and, I may add, painful
experience in Colombia, the Government of President
Juan Manuel Santos Calderón has adopted the policy
that any dialogue between the United Nations and the
illegal armed groups that have been internationally
designated as terrorist organizations can only be held
with the Government’s prior and explicit consent. That
message comes from the Government of Colombia in
cooperation with the United Nations.

12

Certainly, the Colombian Government wishes that
those illegal armed groups and their leaders would take
concrete action to abide by international humanitarian
law norms and principles, but it is also firmly convinced
that such compliance will not be achieved solely
through direct engagement between those groups and
United Nations representatives. We Colombians have
already gone down that path, with results that can only
be described as unfortunate.
On the other hand, the Government has been
equally firm in declaring that it is willing to initiate
peace negotiations with the armed groups at any time,
provided that they cease attacks against civilians,
abandon actions such as kidnapping and sexual violence,
and refrain from recruiting and using children, actions
which clearly constitute breaches of international
humanitarian law and which the Government and all
Colombians radically reject. Colombia would like to
thank States Members of the United Nations and the
Organization itself for showing understanding and
respect for that policy, which will continue to be in place
until the illegal armed groups operating in our country
modify their behaviour and comply with international
norms.
I would like to clarify that Colombia fully
understands that compliance with international
humanitarian law by non-State armed groups is
essential in order to effectively protect civilians, and we
advocate for this. Nevertheless, the existence or absence
of engagement on the part of the United Nations with
these groups is not a decisive factor in the application
of the rules governing armed conflicts.
Focusing on the possibility of engagements of
certain actors with illegal armed groups simply diverts
attention from the truly fundamental issue — the lack of
political will to comply with international humanitarian
law. An effective guarantee of the rights of civilians
during hostilities does not require engagement with
non-State groups, but rather the decision on the part
of those parties, either to abandon altogether the use
of violence and pursue their goals through democratic
debate, or, if they decide to persist in their armed
struggle, to comply with international humanitarian
law.
It is worth noting that the Government of Colombia
has always appreciated and welcomed the commendable
work carried out by the International Committee
of the Red Cross as a facilitator in the liberation of

12-38661

S/PV.6790

individuals kidnapped by illegal armed groups. During
the past 18 years, the Government of Colombia, acting
in close cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and in many cases with the support of
friendly Governments and civil society organizations,
has made it possible for more than 1,500 people to
regain their freedom.
My Government also understands and shares the
concern about the issue of humanitarian access and
agrees with the proposal that the alternatives stated
in the Secretary-General’s report aimed at reaching
people in need of humanitarian assistance — such as the
temporary cessation of hostilities, humanitarian pauses,
humanitarian corridors, de-confliction arrangements
and days of tranquillity — must be tailored to suit the
particular circumstances of each conflict.
Colombia would therefore welcome an open-ended
and objective debate on the constraints on humanitarian
access. A serious analysis in that regard could not fail
to show that international humanitarian law imposes
the adaptation of military efforts to humanitarian
imperatives, but it does not rule out that such efforts may
have to contemplate some form of control for practical
security reasons on the transit of people and goods.
That includes the creation of reasonable conditions
allowing civilians effective exercise of their rights and
implies the existence of the safe environment needed to
facilitate access to humanitarian assistance.
Colombia supports the idea, expressed in the
Council’s presidential statement of 22 November 2010
(S/PRST/2010/25), which calls for the protection of
civilians against violence, that the promotion of peace
processes and the establishment of sustainable peace
and development, as well as respect for human rights
and the rule of law, are of the utmost importance for the
protection of civilians.
Finally, allow me to say that Colombia, as a
200-year old democracy, has solid institutions with
a very complete and up-to-date legal framework. We
have spared no effort to improve and complement this
framework, as it is shown by our adoption of ambitious
initiatives to achieve peace and reconciliation. This is
the case for the transitional justice system embodied in
Colombia’s Justice and Peace Act of 2005, which enabled
the demobilization and reintegration into society of over
30,000 combatants; the innovative mechanism for the
restitution of and the granting of reparations to victims
set out in the 2011 Act on Victims; and a constitutional

amendment approved just a few days ago through which
a new legal framework for peace is to be established.
The Government of Colombia has adopted clear
policies aimed at maintaining public order and
achieving peace and security, which are compatible
with our international obligations and are in line
with the objective of protecting civilians. I apologize,
Mr. President, for speaking longer than usual.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): First,
Mr. President, I would like to welcome your
initiative to convene a public debate on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his detailed report
(S/2012/376) on the matter and for the relevant
recommendations contained therein. I also welcome
the presence among us of Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee for the Red
Cross. I welcome their contributions to this debate.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
throughout the world is a major concern of our time.
Deliberate or accidental violence inflicted against
civilians is a major source of concern for the Security
Council, which has devoted many meetings and adopted
several resolutions and statements on the topic in the
past five years. The Secretary-General’s report notes
at length the persistence of violence against civilians
in armed conflict. The protection of civilians in those
circumstances is not a choice but an obligation under
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
even traditional law.
Togo is pleased that the Secretary-General has
defined five core challenges that need to be met in
situations of armed conflict where civilians are caught
up, against their will, in combat zones. Sadly, given what
often continues to take place on the ground, it is still
difficult for the principles in question to be easily and
swiftly applied. The Secretary-General’s report cites
many countries throughout the world where civilians
are the targeted victims of armed conflicts. The report
has the merit of noting that all parties have committed
violations of humanitarian law, although it is generally
recognized that the majority of those crimes can be
attributed to non-State armed groups.

12-3866113

S/PV.6790

In Africa, the situations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan in areas where the Lord’s Resistance Army
holds sway, and in Côte d’Ivoire during the post-election
crisis of 2011, have highlighted the degree of violence
and the atrocities that combatants have inflicted on
civilian populations, even as they are urged to ensure
the protection of non-combatants.
The violence is particularly cruelly reflected in
premeditated murders, attacks against schools and
hospitals, obstacles to distribution of humanitarian aid,
sexual violence, forced disappearances, torture and
other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment, including
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts
or for other criminal purposes, as well as attacks
against journalists and human rights defenders. Those
are all reprehensible acts at variance with international
standards and should, as a result, be sanctioned and
punished, pursuant to the relevant international legal
texts. All sides and all combatants are caught up in one
or another of those aforementioned kinds of violence.
Nothing — or not enough — is being done by any of
the sides to ensure respect for human rights and prevent
violations of such rights. One result of this is an inability
to hold people accountable for their acts and a lack of
political will to bring them to justice.
Violence against civilians brings about, of course,
migrations towards stable areas and an exodus towards
neighbouring countries. The figures of 27 million
internally displaced persons and 15 million refugees are
a testament to this.
The situation needs to change. Mentalities need
to evolve. The law has to be enforced. The fact that
the principle of proportionality is not respected and
that heavy weaponry and explosive devices are being
used in populated areas explains the very high number
of civilians killed in armed conflict. Very often, it is
vulnerable people, such as women, children, the elderly
and the disabled, who bear the brunt of that violence.
What is happening currently in Syria, where
civilians are caught in the crossfire between heavy
artillery and aerial bombardment, is neither acceptable
nor justifiable. Such acts must simply be condemned by
everyone.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
should not be merely a concern felt by the international
community but also a commitment at both the political
and the legal levels.

14

The Security Council, on the basis of its previous
resolutions, should continue to pressure Governments
and the heads of non-State armed groups to respect
people’s physical integrity as well as private and public
property in situations of conflict. In deciding to apply
targeted sanctions against the perpetrators of violent
acts, the Council should reaffirm its determination
to use the necessary effective means to ensure the
protection of civilians. The arrest of persons accused
of violent acts and the prosecution of others are part
of that determination to put an end to impunity.
To be successful, such an undertaking requires the
cooperation of all countries, above all those in regions
where such acts are taking place.
For his part, the Secretary-General has undertaken
commendable initiatives, particularly in terms of
peacekeeping operations. In that respect, we are pleased
that his recommendations in his report (S/2007/643)
have been implemented when it comes to systematic
respect for international humanitarian law on the part of
peacekeeping operations and other missions authorized
to use force.
As a troop-contributing country committed to
upholding the rights of vulnerable groups and gravely
concerned by violations of international humanitarian
law by combatants, Togo has established, at its training
centre in Lomé, a capacity-building programme for the
protection of civilians designed for soldiers and police
officers prior to their deployment in peacekeeping
operations.
Besides all of those measures aimed at protecting
civilians, it is vital that countries apply the provisions
of the relevant international legal instruments. Under
no circumstances should the perpetrators of crimes
against civilians find sanctuary or protection in any
Member State. Members of the Lord’s Resistance Army
and the warlords from eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo who are still at large must be arrested and
delivered to the competent tribunals.
We believe that it is important to reiterate that
respect for the law and the rules by all combatants,
the protection of civilians by peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations missions, humanitarian
access and the protection of humanitarian workers, and
accountability are the main measures that the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, should
highlight in the context of efforts to protect civilians
in armed conflict. Reinforcing those measures through

12-38661

S/PV.6790

training and information sessions for the benefit of
military officials is necessary. But for those measures
to succeed, justice needs to be rendered and the
perpetrators of criminal acts need to be arrested, tried
and convicted.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate. Let me also thank the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović and Mr. Spoerri
for their important contributions to the discussion
of an issue of particular relevance to the work of the
Council. I also wish to welcome warmly the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, which
underlines the commitment of his country to human
rights and to the protection of civilians.
The report of the Secretary-General that is before
us (S/2012/376) is an important document, drawing
our attention again to old and new concerns affecting
the situation of civilians in armed conflict, which call
for serious consideration and decisive action. We share
those concerns and support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

aim of causing indiscriminate casualties and the flight
of whole populations.
In fact, if we look at the different scenarios of
present day conflict, be it in Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Sudan, Gaza or the areas affected by the
Lord’s Resistance Army, the plight and suffering of
civilians has worsened, not improved. This confronts
the Security Council with an increased responsibility.
How can we meet that responsibility more effectively
and translate our political will into increased protection
of civilians, especially women and children as the most
vulnerable, in the context of armed conflict? Allow me
to underline three areas.
First, we believe that United Nations peacekeeping
operations continue to play a crucial role in that context.
Sadly, peacekeepers continue to lose their lives in
order to protect civilians, as recently happened in Côte
d’Ivoire. I wish to pay a humble tribute to all of them
and to their courage and sense of duty.

Portugal naturally shares the views that will be
expressed later on by the observer of the European
Union on this subject, but allow me to underline some
aspects that we consider particularly relevant.

Along with entrusting peacekeeping missions with
strong protection mandates, improving the engagement
of the missions with local communities and humanitarian
agents can also have a positive impact in enhancing the
protection of civilians. It would undoubtedly reinforce
a much-needed early-warning capacity in different
conflict scenarios.

Let me state the obvious. Attacks against civilians,
wherever they take place, are unacceptable and should
be vigorously condemned. Parties to conflict should
abide fully by international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Even if such compliance would not,
in itself, reduce the violence and the suffering inherent
to conflict, it would surely allow for fewer civilian
casualties, less exposure of civilians to violations and
less displacement of populations.

But let us not dwell on illusions. Strong protection
mandates, which are needed, must be accompanied
with the necessary means for missions to fulfil such
mandates. There is indeed a worrying trend to enhance
mission mandates without sufficient consideration
being given to what that entails or to the specific
conditions in which peacekeepers must operate. The
primary responsibility in that matter lies with the
Council.

Civilians still constitute the majority of victims in
conflict. Too frequently, they are deliberately targeted
and used as instruments of war. Women and children
are particularly victimized, be it through the sexual
violence imposed on them, their recruitment to serve
as combatants or their simple murder. Care providers
and humanitarian aid workers and their facilities have
also increasingly been targeted in a deliberate move to
increase the vulnerability of the civilian victims of war.
The threat posed by mines and other explosive devices
in densely populated areas has also increased, with the

Also, for peacekeepers to engage usefully with the
population, they must of course be acquainted with
local conditions, be they political, social, or cultural.
But more importantly, they must be able to speak the
language of the country, which is too often not the case.
A second fundamental area would be to improve and
ensure the access of humanitarian assistance providers
to the civilian population. I fully recognize that this is
easier said than done, and I pay tribute to all that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Government and non-government agencies are

12-3866115

S/PV.6790

trying to do in that field, amidst all types of difficulties
and often confronted with deliberate opposition to their
efforts.
But it is plain that, in many dire situations, denial of
or constraints to humanitarian assistance are yet another
instrument of war aimed at increasing the pressure
on the civilian population. As such, they should be
vigorously opposed, and the Security Council should
act forcefully when such situations arise. Denying or
impeding humanitarian access are violations of human
rights and humanitarian law and should be treated as
such.
A third dimension by which we could decisively
increase our capacity to protect civilians is
accountability. Bringing perpetrators of crimes against
civilians to trial must become the norm and not the
exception. Recent verdicts of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the International Criminal Court are
not only important landmarks in terms of international
justice, but also demonstrate that it can be done.
Let me also take up the suggestion of Valerie Amos
for more systematic recording of civilian casualties and
the conditions in which they occur. That would also
contribute toward strengthening accountability.
The United Nations and the Security Council, in
particular, must show strong resolve in countering
impunity and set the example for national judicial
institutions. I believe that would have a positive effect
in terms of deterrence. But it is also obvious to me
that impunity and a lack of reparation for victims also
hampers reconciliation efforts and, ultimately, threatens
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations.
The Security Council should therefore fully utilize
all the instruments at its disposal, directly or through
other bodies such as the Human Rights Council, to
strengthen accountability.
Let me conclude by reiterating the need for the
Council to act in a consistent, determined and prompt
way in increasing the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, using all the available tools and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations to fulfil that aim.
It is not only our credibility that is at stake. It is also
the need to answer to the plight of millions of innocent,
suffering, victims whose pleading eyes we see daily on
our televisions.

16

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for your able
stewardship of the Council this month. We welcome
His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Guatemala to
the Council. We thank the Secretary-General and the
other briefers for their statements.
It has been over a decade since the Security Council
started addressing themes such as the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, children and armed conflict
and women, peace and security. The objective behind
addressing such cross-cutting themes was indeed
noble and we fully support it. However, there was also
some apprehension among the wider United Nations
membership. Questions were raised about the Security
Council’s role and mandate, its ability to objectively
deliver on such themes and its known inability to deliver
on issues that have been on its agenda for decades.
Notwithstanding reservations, the compelling need
to protect civilians in armed conflict has led to a broad
consensus that such protection be pursued objectively
and without politicization. Regrettably, however, we
are witnessing a trend of out-of-context and selective
reporting on that and other issues. The prior two
reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians (see S/2007/643 and S/2009/277), as well as
the one under consideration (S/2012/376), extend to
situations that cannot be described as armed conflict,
and therefore lie outside the mandate of the report.
On the other hand, the reports do not do justice to the
situations on the Council’s agenda, including situations
of foreign occupation.
The Secretary-General’s report has unwarranted
references to Pakistan, which we plainly reject.
Pakistan has suffered immensely from the menace
of terrorism, with thousands of lives lost among its
security and law enforcement bodies and civilians.
Pakistan’s law enforcement operation against terrorists
cannot be termed as armed conflict. Therefore, we are
disappointed that the authors of the report have clearly
violated the mandate by mentioning Pakistan. That
anomaly must be resolved.
The challenge of protecting civilians in armed
conflict is exacerbated by inequity in international
response. In some situations there is a quick and even
robust response, and in others perpetrators enjoy virtual
immunity. Many a time there has been sufficient public
concern, but the political will to act was missing. The
Security Council, in accordance with its mandate,

12-38661

S/PV.6790

should take impartial and non-politicized action in all
situations, in particular those that have been collecting
dust on its agenda for decades.
For example, the Council has failed to respond
to the crisis and unacceptable situation in the Gaza
Strip, where over 1 million people remain in virtual
incarceration and suffer from collective punishment.
Such unequal attention to various situations is also
evident in the priorities and activities of certain
international humanitarian organizations and actors, as
is clear from today’s debate.
The protection of civilians is part of many United
Nations peacekeeping mandates. Pakistan is the top
troop-contributor to such missions and has made
important contributions to carrying out their mandates.
At the same time, we emphasize the need to respect
host-country primacy in ensuring civilian protection.
National authorities alone can maintain long-term peace
and security. A peacekeeping mission protects civilians
in coordination with host authorities. Its ability to do
so effectively is inherently linked to resources — as
indicated by the Secretary-General — as well as other
elements such as training, intelligence capabilities and
the configurations of various components within the
mission, hence the need for realistic expectations from
peacekeeping missions.
In a display of such misplaced expectations, a recent
mandate revision asked peacekeepers to pre-empt
threats to the civilian population. Similarly, the notion
of the use of force in peacekeeping under the garb of
civilian protection is not helpful. We also need careful
evaluation of all legal aspects of civilian protection in
peacekeeping operations.
It is important to resist the urge to use Secretariat
reports to advance notions that have failed to gain any
traction in intergovernmental processes. A case in point
is the advocacy of a potential arms trade treaty that we
have heard today. The process that may or may not lead
to an arms trade treaty is still a work in progress. We
should not try to prejudge its outcome.
The annex to the Secretary-General’s report, on
constraints on humanitarian access, deals with the
issue of access in a partial manner. It overlooks the
possibility that there could be legitimate reasons
for restricting access. It also disregards the fact that,
regrettably, not all humanitarian actors perform
in accordance with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.

Any debate on humanitarian access would be fruitless
without complete cognizance of current realities. In
that context, we would also like to recall the annex to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, which requires
that humanitarian assistance be provided with full
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States. Humanitarian actors must
conform to, and work strictly within, the framework of
host country agreements.
This debate affords us an opportunity to renew
our commitment to protect civilians in times of armed
conflict while framing the debate in the proper context.
We hope that future reports on the subject will be
apolitical, objective and in strict compliance with the
mandate.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for introducing his report
(S/2012/376), as well as the various speakers for their
briefings.
France subscribes to the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
The past year has seen significant developments
in the area of the protection of civilians. The Council
has been able to react urgently and based upon clear
principles in order to protect civilians. I would like to
note the Libyan example and resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011). We remember the thanks that the Libyan
Prime Minister personally extended to the Council for
having avoided the deaths of thousands of civilians.
France also welcomes the fact that the protection of
civilians remains at the heart of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In that context, two
recent initiatives deserve highlighting: first, the policy
of reasonable due diligence in matters of human rights
established by the Secretary-General. The policy
makes it possible to ensure that national security
forces suspected of serious violations of human rights
do not receive United Nations support. It has been
implemented by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, and the policy should now be extended to
other United Nations missions.
We also welcome the establishment within the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the International
Security Assistance Force of cells tasked with tallying
and identifying civilian victims. Such policies could be

12-3866117

S/PV.6790

developed and extended to other missions so as to help
identify the harm done to civilians and to enable the
Security Council to respond appropriately.
The Secretary-General’s report also reminds us
of the challenges we continue to face in the protection
of civilians. How can we avoid mentioning Syria? So
far, the international community has failed to protect
that country’s civilian population. After 15 months
of repression, resulting in almost 15,000 deaths, the
majority of them civilian, Bashar Al-Assad’s regime
continues to violate its commitments and threaten
international peace and security. The massacres in
Houla and Al-Qubayr, following those in Homs and
Idlib, have proved that this regime knows no bounds.
Deploying a United Nations observation mission has
done nothing to change its murderous behaviour. It is
now more essential than ever for the Council to send a
firm message to the Syrian authorities on the need to
respect their commitments and the consequences they
face if they continue to violate them. Those responsible
for the atrocities, Bashar Al-Assad first among them,
will one day answer in court for their actions.
Turning to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the challenges to the protection of civilians there
are still immense. In the short term, the innovative
steps that MONUSCO has taken, such as recruiting
community liaison assistants and establishing early
warning networks, are essential and should continue
to be expanded. In the medium and long terms,
ensuring the protection of civilians demands a full-on
commitment on the part of the Congolese authorities. To
that end, the efforts undertaken to reform the security
forces, including adopting the necessary legislative
frameworks, are a step in the right direction and should
be pursued and implemented.
Finally we turn to Mali, where civilian populations
are hostage to the seizure of control in the north by rebel
groups linked to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Tens
of thousands of refugees and displaced persons have
been forced to flee the region in order to escape the
violence. The international community cannot stand
idly by in the face of such a situation. The Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union
and the countries of the region are working on a strategy
designed both to restore constitutional order in the
capital and to preserve Mali’s territorial integrity. It is
the Council’s responsibility to support those initiatives
with policy.

18

In every area of conflict, the situation of journalists
also remains worrying. In the almost six years since the
Council adopted resolution 1738 (2006), 300 journalists
and media professionals have lost their lives on the job,
and more have been threatened, abducted or tortured.
The rate of impunity for those who perpetrate violence
against journalists is estimated to be 90 per cent, which
is unacceptable. France supports UNESCO’s Plan
of Action for the Safety of Journalists. The Security
Council should continue to focus on the issue.
I will conclude by recalling that the protection of
civilians also involves combating impunity for those
responsible for atrocities. I have mentioned this in the
context of Syria. In that regard, the sentences passed on
Charles Taylor, by the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
and Thomas Lubanga, by the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for war crimes and crimes against humanity
are milestones of international criminal justice. The
results of these proceedings demonstrate that no Head
of State, minister or high military official — and this
message must be understood in Syria — can hope to
commit such crimes with complete impunity. We will
not forget. It is now essential that Bosco Ntaganda,
Thomas Lubanga’s co-defendant, be arrested as soon as
possible and brought before the ICC to answer for the
crimes of which he is accused, along with all those for
whom the Court has issued arrest warrants.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by expressing our gratitude to the Chinese presidency
for convening this open debate on the crucial issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. I would also like
to extend my special thanks to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/376) and briefing, as well as to
the other speakers — Ms. Amos, Mr. Šimonović and
Mr. Spoerri — for their presentations.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been a high priority on the agenda of the international
community, including the Security Council, for many
years. Through its resolutions, regular meetings,
statements, sanctions regimes and, most importantly,
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the Council has established important
standards and measures for the protection of civilians
and has consistently focused international attention
on this issue. However, as is also recognized in the
Secretary-General’s report, civilians continue to pay
the highest price in the wake of armed conflicts around
the world.

12-38661

S/PV.6790

The challenges to civilian protection are vast,
ranging from the scale of needs on the ground and
challenging security environments to a lack of proper
infrastructure and capacity. At the same time, the
most outrageous challenges are inaction and neglect
of civilians’ suffering, along with the prevailing
atmosphere of impunity and lack of accountability
for deliberate attacks against them. In that regard, the
best deterrent is undoubtedly putting a speedy end to
impunity and holding to account those responsible for
war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
other gross violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The recent cases involving
Charles Taylor and Thomas Lubanga have sent a clear
message to all perpetrators around the world that such
grave crimes are never forgotten, forgiven or tolerated,
even when committed by high-level figures.
Promoting a culture of impunity at the State level,
including fomenting wars of aggression and hatred of
one’s neighbours, as well as glorifying the perpetrators
of the gravest international offences, will only enable
further violations of humanitarian and human rights
laws, particularly in regard to depriving people of their
homes as a result of continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation. Ending
impunity is thus essential to ensuring sustainable
peace, justice, truth and reconciliation, and to
upholding the rights and interests of victims and the
well-being of society at large. All in all, the security
of civilian populations is an absolute precondition for
the long-lasting political settlement of conflicts and
for providing development assistance in post-conflict
situations.
Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians driven out of their homes
and displaced as a result of armed conflict. The
Secretary-General’s report states that the number of
internally displaced persons has steadily increased over
the past 15 years. Azerbaijan supports the continuing
efforts to raise awareness of the problem of internal
displacement worldwide. We believe that the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance
of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa — the first
binding document on internal displacement — will
further contribute to that process.
It is crucial that recognition of the right of
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and to concrete measures aimed
at overcoming obstacles to such return, be applied

more systematically by the international community.
Assuring the right of return constitutes a categorical
rejection of the results of ethnic cleansing and offers an
important measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land and deprived of their property,
thereby removing a source of possible future tension
and conflict.
My country’s familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay.
Some of the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, have been
committed in the course of the Republic of Armenia’s
ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan. Thus, the
forcible deportation of about 230,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 1980s
was accompanied by killings, torture, enforced
disappearances and other crimes throughout Armenia.
Even children were not spared.
The period from 1991, when Armenia initiated
combat operations on the territory of Azerbaijan,
until the establishment of the ceasefire in 1994 was
marked by an increase in the magnitude, intensity and
consistency of the attacks on Azerbaijani civilians.
In February 1992, the Azerbaijani town of Khojaly
was completely razed to the ground and its civilian
population was subjected to an unprecedented massacre.
The attack on, and the capture of, the town involved the
extermination of more than 600 Azerbaijani civilians,
including children, women and the elderly. Thousands
of civilians were wounded and taken hostage, many of
whom remain missing.
Despite the formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks
by the armed forces of Armenia against Azerbaijani
civilians and civilian objects, in contravention of
applicable international law, have become more
frequent and more violent over recent months, resulting
in the killing and maiming of many inhabitants residing
near the front line.
On 8 March 2011, a nine-year-old Azerbaijani
child was shot dead by an Armenian sniper. On 14 July
2011, in the village of Alibayli, in Azerbaijan’s Tovuz
district, which borders on the Republic of Armenia,
a 13-year-old Azerbaijani girl was killed and her
32-year-old mother was seriously wounded as a result
of the blast from an explosive device built into a toy.
The toy, stuffed with an explosive device, was found
by the victim in the river, which has its source in the

12-3866119

S/PV.6790

territory of Armenia and flows through that village.
According to the conclusions of the investigation,
the booby-trapped toy was made in Armenia and was
dropped into the river intentionally. Its target were
children of neighbouring Azerbaijani settlements.
The overall assessment of the causes and the tragic
consequences of the war unleashed by Armenia against
Azerbaijan makes it clear that the attacks on Azerbaijani
civilians, including the killing of children, are part of
Armenia’s widespread, deliberate and systematic policy
of aggression and hatred. That policy is clearly reflected
in the famous interview of 15 December 2000 with the
then Defence Minister, now the incumbent President of
Armenia, Serzh Sargsyan. Responding to the question
as to whether things could have happened differently
and whether he had any regrets about the deaths of
thousands of people as a result of the Armenian attacks
against Azerbaijani civilians, he said frankly that he
“has absolutely no regrets”, since “such upheavals are
necessary, even if thousands have to die”. No further
comments are needed here to explain the logic and
the attitude of the Armenian leadership to the issue of
civilian protection.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. All parties
to a conflict must abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law
and must strictly follow the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in attacks. Innocent
civilians should not pay the price for the lack of progress
in the settlement process. Keeping civilians in constant
fear by killing them, shelling their homes and inflicting
serious damage on their property on almost a daily basis
will not be averted by simply advocating artificial and
tactically driven confidence-building measures. It will
not serve as a stimulus for the other side to agree to such
measures. The best confidence-building measure is
showing a real desire to achieve progress in negotiations
based on the norms and principles of international law
and the withdrawal of occupying forces, as well as an
unwavering commitment to human life.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, which is enhanced by the
presence and participation of the Secretary-General. I
also thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Šimonović and Mr. Spoerri
for their briefings.

20

Much has been accomplished since 1999 in the
area of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
in particular in the humanitarian sphere and in
peacekeeping operations under such a mandate. We
welcome those positive developments, which must be
built on. The report of the Secretary-General of 22 May
(S/2012/376) rightly underscores the importance of
adopting a comprehensive approach that combines the
legal, humanitarian and security aspects in addressing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
protection of civilians is a complex and multifaceted
task. In order to better protect civilians and to mitigate
their suffering, it is incumbent upon us to strengthen
respect for international humanitarian law and to
give United Nations peacekeeping operations that are
mandated to protect civilians the financial, logistic and
human resources to do so.
The year 2012 is one for assessing civilian protection
strategies developed within peacekeeping operations.
Implementing civilian protection mandates needs better
coordination and a greater synergy with Headquarters, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The transition from the pilot stage to that of
an ongoing assessment requires sustainable logistical
resources, which are, unfortunately, still lacking in
many missions deployed in large areas requiring a high
mobility on the part of peacekeepers. The year 2012 is
also one for strengthening the national capacities of a
host State for it to be able to discharge its primary task,
namely, the protection of its own civilians.
In that respect, it is important to deepen
consideration of the relationship between security
sector reform and the protection of civilians by
Governments. National ownership must not remain
a slogan. It requires developing coordination
mechanisms between peacekeeping missions and the
various national and local actors from the deployment
phase to the withdrawal of the mission. The experience
of the Peacebuilding Advisory Office in developing
mechanisms for national ownership could be useful in
that regard.
The training of staff leading peacekeeping
operations is also an important aspect on which we
need to capitalize. In that respect, it is necessary to
mainstream the use of predeployment and training
modules for peacekeeping missions by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in close cooperation with

12-38661

S/PV.6790

the troop-contributing countries, without forgetting the
linguistic imperative.
In peacekeeping operations mandated to protect
civilians, the ultimate goal is to facilitate a peace
process by establishing an inclusive political process
and by ensuring transition towards a lasting peace. In
that respect, the transition topic merits more in-depth
consideration of the relation between security and
development with the challenges associated with
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Moreover, since the protection of civilians is inextricably
linked to successful security sector reform, it is
crucial to carry out disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. In that regard, we believe
that an additional effort should be made to finance
the crucial reintegration phase and to strengthen the
capacities of States in post-conflict situations.
Meanwhile, as Ms. Amos underscored earlier, the
protection of civilians requires enhancing international
disarmament efforts, given the human cost of a poorly
regulated arms trade, as well as arms smuggling and
related activities, in particular in areas in conflict
situations.
At the Security Council debate of 10 May 2011 (see
S/PV.6531), Morocco called on the Council to address
the challenge posed by non-State actors and their lack of
respect for international legal instruments. In particular,
my country draws attention to the militarization of
refugee camps, which makes it difficult to distinguish
between combatants and non-combatants, and thus
prevents humanitarian actors from accessing camps in
order to carry out their work and to provide care and
assistance to vulnerable people there.
We welcome the attention given by the 23 May
report to that issue and in which the Secretary-General
reiterates the need for non-State actors to better respect
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and to allow access with full security to those who
need assistance. The control of civilian populations
by non-State actors, and sometimes even the lack of
a distinction between civilian and armed elements
in the refugee camps, are major challenges that the
international community must meet. The stranglehold
over civilian populations by armed groups is a denial
of the elementary right to protection and a failure in the
duty to assist people in danger.
The Council it is seized of conflict situations in
which civilians are deliberately targeted on a large

scale. The use of artillery against urban zones, and
the shelling of buildings and social edifices such as
hospitals, schools and places of worship, are not only
contrary to international humanitarian and human rights
law but are, above all, unjustified and unjustifiable. It is
our collective duty to put an end to it.
Finally, I cannot conclude without paying due
tribute to the work carried out by the Blue Helmets,
other peacekeeping troops and humanitarian workers,
who are always ready for the ultimate sacrifice to
protect civilians in conflict areas.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Amos,
Mr. Šimonović and Mr. Spoerri for their briefings.
The issue before us today remains extremely
relevant in view of the difficult situation that prevails
with respect to the protection of civilians in many of the
world’s hot spots. Despite the efforts of the international
community and the presence of a significant
international legal basis for the protection of civilians,
thousands of people continue to die in conflicts. What
is particularly troubling is that the majority of them
are children, women and the elderly — in other words,
those considered to be the most vulnerable groups in
the population. We vehemently condemn deliberate
attacks on civilians and their deaths as the result of
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force.
We believe that unswerving respect on the part
of parties to an armed conflict for their commitments
under international humanitarian law is a guarantee for
the effective protection of civilians. However, that does
not mean we have to dream up any new international
legal or political concepts to bridge the supposed gaps
in the protection regime of the Geneva conventions.
In particular, we question the wisdom of proposals to
designate new categories of persons requiring special
protection under international humanitarian law. Such
ideas can in practice only weaken protection already
afforded to civilians.
To the same degree, we are alarmed at the tendency
to subjective interpretation of the standards of
international humanitarian law regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the tendency to
equate those norms with the highly ambiguous concept
of the responsibility to protect. Practice has shown that
invoking that concept with what initially appeared to
be noble goals often leads to interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States and to violent regime change.

12-3866121

S/PV.6790

In that respect, we reiterate that the priority for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
the understanding that primary responsibility in that
sphere lies with the belligerents, while the international
institutions and mechanisms should perform a
subsidiary role, assisting national efforts in that area.
Today, there is no single set of criteria for assessing
the effectiveness of implementation by the belligerents
of their responsibilities to protect civilians. We think
that efforts to artificially introduce such criteria
are fraught with serious political manipulation and
strengthen elements of intrusiveness in international
relations. We believe that, when assessing efforts in
that area, we need to take into account the economic,
social, historical, religious, cultural and other specific
aspects of countries and regions, as well as the nature
of each conflict, its root causes and options for finding
a settlement.

presence of Ms. Amos, Mr. Šimonović and Mr. Spoerri
and commend them for their invaluable work on the
protection of civilians.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
the debate.
Civilians continue to be victims of death, injury,
sexual violence and forcible displacement or are
subjected to conflict-induced increases in disease,
hunger and malnutrition. The violent and tragic events
in Syria and ongoing developments in, for example, the
Sudan, South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remind us of that worrying fact every day.
How can we get better at protecting civilians in
armed conflict? The Secretary-General has identified
a number of challenges that need to be addressed, some
of which I would like to touch upon.

Russia believes that the adoption by the international
community of any reactive measure to protect civilians
that involves the use of force is possible only with the
approval of the Security Council and in unswerving
respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

First, there is a need to continue exploring ways
to ensure that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law are held accountable
and that serious violations of international humanitarian
law continue to carry not only a strong stigma but also
consequences.

We regret cases of unsatisfactory implementation of
Council resolutions relating to the protection of civilians.
In particular, there remain a number of question marks
hanging over the participants in the NATO operation
in Libya regarding how the relevant Security Council
resolutions were implemented in practice. All cases of
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
during conflict that claims civilian victims need to be
investigated, and the guilty brought to justice.

Encouraging progress has been made since our
last debate (see S/PV.6650). The convictions of Charles
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone and of
Thomas Lubanga by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) are significant steps forward. Those judgments
send a strong signal to the perpetrators of atrocities.

We call on all members of the international
community to eschew indiscriminate, unilateral
approaches to the issue of the protection of civilians. We
believe that only strict compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights standards and
unswerving implementation of relevant decisions of
the Security Council can help us to resolve protracted
conflicts. Moreover, we believe that the Council has
sufficient capacities at its disposal and that it would be
unwise to create any new specialized Security Council
mechanisms for the protection of civilians.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376) and for
his comprehensive briefing today. I also welcome the

22

When national authorities fail to take the necessary
steps to ensure accountability, the Council’s role
should be strengthened. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s proposal to create a checklist to
guide the Council’s engagement with the ICC when it
considers the possibility of referrals.
Secondly, we share the view of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) that attacks against
health care and other interference with it remains
an underrecognized humanitarian issue. It deserves
increased attention, including that of the Security
Council. The recent decision by the World Health
Assembly to mandate the World Health Organization
to collect and report data on attacks on health care, and
the Council’s resolution 1998 (2011), are encouraging
developments. They ensure that perpetrators of acts
against hospitals and schools and related personnel
will be listed in the Secretary-General’s annual

12-38661

S/PV.6790

report on children and armed conflict. We support the
Secretary-General’s view that the Council must assume
a more proactive approach to preventing and responding
to such incidents.
Thirdly, a central question is the application of
the rule of distinction in today’s military operations.
Experiences in recent conflicts beg the question of how
the principle of distinction is implemented in practice,
in particular when conducting warfare within densely
populated areas. The devastating humanitarian impact
of explosive weapons in densely populated areas is a
major concern in this regard. We agree with the ICRC
that explosive weapons with a wide-impact area should
be avoided in densely populated areas. We welcome
initiatives to address this issue in a more systematic and
proactive way, including possible stronger engagement
of the Security Council in this regard.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that there
is a need for greater and more systematic engagement
with non-State armed groups on compliance with
international humanitarian law, while bearing in
mind that engagement does not constitute political
recognition of these groups. In the context of the
Council’s engagement on children and armed conflict,
the conclusion of action plans with non-State armed
groups by the United Nations to end the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict is a good example
on how such engagement can successfully lead to
improved compliance with international humanitarian
law by non-State actors.
Fourthly, continued widespread sexual violence
against women and children, as well as men, demands
our attention. The pursuit of justice and accountability
for such crimes remains of utmost importance. We
commend the continued efforts of the Secretariat and
United Nations missions on the ground to assist national
and local authorities in creating more protective
environments by supporting the establishment of
effective rule of law and security institutions and the
building of local and national civilian capacity in this
regard. Germany continues to actively support such
initiatives.
I now come to my fifth and final point. The absence
of international standards for the trade in conventional
arms has obvious negative consequences for civilians.
These arms are all too often used to commit serious
human rights violations on a massive scale. The
international community must act now to improve

control of these weapons and use the dual opportunity
presented by the upcoming negotiations on the arms
trade treaty and the United Nations Conference to
Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Germany strongly supports a strong, robust
and effective arms trade treaty that is comprehensive in
scope and legally binding.
In closing, I would like to briefly mention a few
country situations that are of great concern to us.
We remain very concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states of
the Sudan. The situation continues to deteriorate, and
people starve to death every day. Hundreds of refugees
arrive every day in neighbouring South Sudan. We urge
the Government in Khartoum and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army-North to accept the tripartite proposal
of the United Nations, the African Union and the League
of Arab States, which provides for humanitarian access
and the presence of humanitarian relief workers.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we are worried and appalled by the high numbers of
civilians killed and displaced by increased attacks
by armed groups using the security void left by the
Congolese armed forces. In this context, the sharp
increase in the recruitment of children by armed groups
and mutineers is of particular concern to us. Given
the persisting violence in the region, the protection of
civilians needs to remain the top priority of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Lastly, the appalling violence in Syria may be
the most blatant failure these days of a Government’s
responsibility to protect its own people. Not only
does Damascus fail to protect the Syrian people, as
the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council has reported, but the Syrian authorities
have for months now committed systematic and gross
human rights violations. We are particularly appalled
and disgusted by recent reports of the use by the Syrian
army of children as human shields. Opposition forces
also commit abuses, which we condemn. They too must
protect human rights, including those of children.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having organized
today’s debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General

12-3866123

S/PV.6790

for his report on the subject (S/2012/376) and for his
incisive statement. Our thanks are also due to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Assistant
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements.
It has been India’s consistent view that the protection
of its population is the foremost responsibility of every
State. The right to life is the foundation of any social
order. It is one of the fundamental rights enshrined in
the constitutions of a vast number of United Nations
Member States, including my own, from which no
derogation is permissible even in times of emergency.
India’s commitment to the right to life has been
demonstrated at the international level as well. More
than five decades ago, long before that term came into
common usage in the Council, Indian soldiers defended
the civilians of the Congo as part of the United Nations
mission. Since then, our men and women in uniform
have been at the forefront of turning this Council’s word
into deed, including through the services of the United
Nations first female formed police unit. We remain at
the cutting edge of many United Nations operations
in places where civilians are under threat. India thus
brings to this table a quantum of experience in actually
protecting civilians in peacekeeping missions that is
unique in its relevance and in its variety and depth.
The Security Council has been considering the
protection of civilians as a thematic subject since
1999 and has adopted a number of resolutions. This
issue has also been incorporated in the Council’s
resolutions on women, children, the protection of
humanitarian workers, conflict prevention and sexual
exploitation. A number of country-specific resolutions
also have provisions aimed at the protection of
civilians. These resolutions, taken together, have raised
awareness and strengthened the international legal
framework for protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding the development of
international humanitarian law and the efforts of the
international community, civilians continue to suffer
disproportionately during armed conflicts.
It is therefore necessary to take stock of what we
have achieved and where we have failed and why. The
latest report of the Secretary-General has identified
four challenges: enhancing compliance by non-State

24

armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations.
A study undertaken by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
makes it clear that the major share of the blame for
failures lies with the Security Council itself, which has
been unable, over more than a decade, to develop a clear
understanding of the nature and extent of the problem;
has been unable to give clear directions about what it
wants and how the DPKO should operate; and has not
given credence to the voices of countries whose troops
are actually deployed on the ground. As the report
succinctly states, the confusion over the Council’s intent
is evident in the lack of policy, guidance, planning and
preparedness.
It is important for the Council to act urgently to
address this situation. As was made clear by the Force
Commanders of United Nations missions in their
briefings to the Council last week (see S/PV.6789),
the primary gap facing the peacekeepers in protecting
civilians is the lack of adequate resources. Without an
adequate number of well-trained troops, equipped with
adequate equipment, assets and enablers, the Council
cannot hope to realize its aspirations for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In that context, my
delegation thinks that the Council’s responsibility does
not end with the generation of mandates. The Council
should be held accountable if unachievable mandates
are generated for political expediency or if adequate
resources are not made available.
At the normative levels, there are several other
issues that the Council needs to consider in the context
of the role it has assumed for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
First, the protection of civilians, when applied
as a basis for Security Council action, must respect
the fundamental aspects of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the sovereignty and integrity of
Member States. Any decision to intervene that is
associated with political motives distracts from the
noble principles and needs to be avoided. Also, the
response of the Council and international community
must be proportional to the threat involved.
Secondly, the principle of the protection of
civilians must be applied in a uniform manner to all

12-38661

S/PV.6790

parties to a conflict. The failure of the Council to
enforce the accountability of armed groups has served
to exacerbate the situation in several instances, and
must be addressed.
Thirdly, in the implementation of the Council’s
mandate for protecting civilians, there is a need to
ensure responsibility while protecting. The recent
actions of some organizations and Member States have
brought to the fore a considerable sense of unease about
the manner in which the humanitarian imperative of
protecting civilians has been interpreted for actual
action on the ground. Monitoring of the manner in
which the Council’s mandates are implemented has
therefore assumed great importance.
Fourthly, to enable States to fulfil their responsibility
to protect their populations, national capacities need to
be strengthened, where needed, without political or
extraneous motives. That calls for enhancing support for
socio-economic development and promoting inclusive
political institutions. It also calls for patient work,
rather than media-driven deliberations and actions.
Fifthly, the Council must resist the temptation to
resort to its Chapter VII powers instead of promoting the
pacific settlement of disputes under Chapter VI. In that
connection, the Council must also respect international
legal institutions, and not make use of them for political
purposes such as regime change.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Council’s responsibility for protecting civilians does
not end with a military or police response. Civilians
require humanitarian wherewithal for survival. That
requires a more integrated and holistic view. Multiple
stakeholders should be involved in that process, not just
the military. Engagement among warring factions in a
conflict situation in a nationally owned and inclusive
political process is of paramount importance. Such an
inclusive approach to national reconciliation, anchored
in State sovereignty, is the only way to move forward
and ensure the protection of civilians in an effective,
pragmatic and enduring manner.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Šimonović and Director Philip Spoerri of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements. I would also like to commend the
thousands of United Nations peacekeepers, observers
and humanitarian and human rights workers for their

dedication to protecting civilians in harm’s way despite
great challenges and risks.
Protecting civilians is a fundamental responsibility
of the international community, and a priority for the
United States. Too many situations still cry out for
stronger action. We must redouble our efforts to prevent
and confront abuses of civilians. Today I would like to
stress three priorities for the United States, namely,
ensuring safety and access for humanitarian workers,
advancing accountability, and strengthening United
Nations capacity.
The United States is appalled by the numbers of
reports of efforts to intimidate, obstruct and harm
humanitarian workers. This must stop. As stated in
resolution 1894 (2009), we must take “appropriate steps
in response to deliberate attacks against humanitarian
personnel” (resolution 1894 (2009), para. 16(c)).
Secondly, the United States strongly rejects
impunity and supports efforts to hold accountable
violators of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The conviction of Charles Taylor by the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the International
Criminal Court’s judgement against Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represent milestones for international justice.
There has also been steady progress in bringing
to justice those responsible for mass atrocities in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. But many perpetrators
remain at large, including the key architects of genocide
in Darfur. Moreover, justice has not yet been rendered
for the Walikale rapes nearly two years ago.
We support efforts to expose and document human
rights abuses, and have sponsored resolutions throughout
the United Nations system that stressed the need for
accountability. We agree with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council has not spoken out enough
about the failure to prevent attacks on journalists, as
called for in resolution 1738 (2006).
Thirdly, the United States remains firmly committed
to working with the international community and
the United Nations to protect civilians. Over the past
year, the United States has conducted a comprehensive
review of our own structures and capabilities, in order to
develop better tools and processes to prevent atrocities.
The recently released United States policy directive
supports efforts by the Secretariat and United Nations

12-3866125

S/PV.6790

field missions to review existing capabilities, identify
gaps and improve information-sharing and training.
The Secretary-General has encouraged all relevant
United Nations entities to brief the Council on the
protection of civilians, which is something that we
strongly support. In particular, we would welcome a
briefing to the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 1894 (2009), and an annual briefing
on the capacity of current United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping and special political missions with
respect to their efforts to protect civilians, particularly
to identify lessons learned and resources gaps.
In addition, we would ask that all relevant United
Nations entities include in future reports to the Council
information on the threats and vulnerabilities facing
populations, as well as their strategies to mitigate those.
The Security Council has proved that it can
act to protect civilians under threat. The perennial
question remains, when will it? Last year, the Council
and the broader international community took a
principled stand, saving untold lives in Libya. As the
Secretary-General said in his report (S/2012/376),
the Council’s response to the situation in Libya was
decisive. The Council first referred the situation to
the International Criminal Court, in resolution 1970
(2011). When Al-Qadhafi’s regime remained defiant,
we adopted, without opposition, resolution 1973 (2011),
which contained a strong civilian-protection mandate,
well understood by all members of the Council, to
authorize the use of force to prevent brutal actions by
that regime against the Libyan people. Those actions
have given Libyans a well-deserved chance to chart
a future where their sovereignty, dignity and human
rights are respected.
By contrast, the situation in Syria represents a
colossal failure by the Security Council to protect
civilians. For over a year, the Council has not been
willing to protect the Syrian people from the brutal
actions of their Government. During our last debate
on this topic, in November (see S/PV.6650), the High
Commissioner for Human Rights estimated the death
toll from months of violence at 3,500. It has at least
tripled since then. The regime’s relentless campaign of
violence against its own people has grown ever more
reprehensible, and ever more dangerous to international
peace and security.
The recent suspension of operations by the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria is a testament

26

to the gravity of the situation. It is a shame that the
Council continues to stand by rather than to stand up.
We must take meaningful steps, including by imposing
binding sanctions under Chapter VII, to pressure the
Syrian regime to comply with the Joint Special Envoy’s
six-point plan and work towards a political transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people.
In the Sudan, the Government in Khartoum
continues not only to fail to protect civilians, but to
bomb civilian areas and impede the delivery of urgently
needed humanitarian assistance. The United States
strongly condemns the violations of international law
and the human rights abuses in Darfur and the two
areas. We and many others have repeatedly called on
the Government of the Sudan to end its indiscriminate
aerial bombardments and provide immediate and
unrestricted humanitarian access in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile States. The Sudan must also guarantee
unrestricted humanitarian access to all of Darfur.
In conclusion, since the Council’s presidential
statement of 22 November 2010 on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2010/25), we have witnessed robust
international action to protect civilians, including in
Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of course Libya, as I mentioned earlier, but we have
also witnessed the failure to help those in dire need.
The United States remains committed to the protection
of civilians and will continue working with the Council
and our international partners towards that end.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express our appreciation to the delegation of
China for facilitating a discussion on the crucial topic
of the protection of civilians.
It is important for the Council to periodically
evaluate its response to the protection of civilians,
because the protection of civilians from the scourge of
conflict is at the core of maintaining international peace
and security. If the Council is not seen to be protecting
civilians and if innocent children, women and men
continue to suffer on our watch, then we have failed
the mandate entrusted to us. South Africa is thus fully
committed to the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and continues to support a strengthened normative and
legal framework for enhancing such protection. In that
regard, the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376)
is welcome. That report, along with previous reports
from the Secretary-General, provides us with practical

12-38661

S/PV.6790

steps that the Council and Member States should
adopt in order to address contemporary challenges in
protecting civilians. Addressing the five core protection
challenges identified in his reports remains urgent.

in advancing the protection-of-civilians agenda. The
responsibility for such failure must be borne by those
who abuse the trust of the Council through idiosyncratic
interpretations of protection mandates.

The Security Council has made commendable
progress in including protection of civilian mandates
in its decisions. The two new peacekeeping operations
deployed in 2011, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, both have such components. Additionally,
several other United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have developed comprehensive
protection-of-civilian strategies. Those actions have
operationalized the commitments made by the Council
in its resolution 1894 (2009).

Another challenge relates to the use of unmanned
aerial assets against targets, which inevitably leads
to the killing of innocent civilians. That concern is
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General, and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Navi Pillay, is on record as stating that drone
attacks raise serious questions about compliance with
international law. Those challenges to the protection
of civilians underscore the importance for this Council
and the international community in general to engage
robustly with the concept introduced by Brazil of
responsibility while protecting. Those entrusted with
the protection of civilians have a stake in ensuring that
our actions do not undermine the very same objectives
that we seek to advance, and there has to be scrupulous
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law in carrying out those mandates.

My delegation wishes to underscore the very
encouraging and noteworthy strides made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia to mitigate the killing
or injury of civilians in its active military campaign in
Somalia. Those commendable efforts, highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his report, relate to the improved
recording of casualties and its policy of “indirect fire”
to mitigate harm against civilians. That also includes
a component of voluntarily making amends for harm
suffered as a result of lawful efforts.
While we have made important advances in
protecting civilians, we must at the same time
ensure that such efforts are not abused for furthering
objectives that fall outside of the scope of that noble
and moral endeavour and sensitive responsibility.
Equally, we must ensure that the protection of civilians
is not selectively pursued, as that wwould erode the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
that goal. It is therefore regrettable that the plight of
civilians in Palestine, Afghanistan and Western Sahara
is being ignored without any accountability.
A further challenge relates to the abuse of
protection of civilians mandates, which erodes not only
the credibility of the Council when it acts but also its
ability to act. Abusing the authorization granted by this
Council to advance political and regime-change agendas
has created mistrust within the Security Council and
has led to paralysis and inaction on the part of the
Security Council when faced with similar challenges
and has prevented the Council from acting resolutely

Additionally, United Nations peacekeepers should
always remain impartial in carrying out their mandates.
Their mandates for protecting civilians under imminent
threat could be compromised if the United Nations
were perceived as being biased and found to be unable
to perform on its protection mandate owing to a lack of
the requisite resources and capabilities, in particular air
assets. Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires a mission-wide response and strategy. While
peacekeepers can assist States in providing immediate
protection for civilians in the short term, it is only by
building national institutions in the areas of the rule
of law, justice and security sector reform that we can
ensure the long term protection of civilians.
The Secretary-General in his report correctly places
emphasis on the need to protect medical facilities,
medical personnel and hospitals. Health-care personnel
must be able to provide aid unhindered and in safety.
This is a real and present challenge. South Africa
wishes to express its condolences on the occasion of the
killing of a volunteer for the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
yesterday in eastern Syria. It is deplorable that that is
the fourth time since last September that a member
of the International Committee of the Red Cross has
been killed while on duty. South Africa appreciates the
excellent and outstanding work that the International
Committee of the Red Cross continues to do under very
challenging circumstances.

12-3866127

S/PV.6790

My delegation also shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General with regard to the plight of migrant
labourers, particularly those from sub-Saharan Africa
recently caught in the conflict in Libya. Our delegation
has consistently raised that concern in the context of
the Libyan conflict. In that regard, we have consistently
condemned all acts of killing, sexual violence,
discrimination and arbitrary arrest perpetrated against
migrant workers and their families.
In conclusion, we wish to underline that it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected, and the failure by both State and non-State
actors to uphold that principle should not go unpunished.
Accountability must first and foremost be sought
at the national level. Failing that, the international
community has a collective responsibility to act, using
mechanisms at its disposal, including independent
fact-finding commissions, commissions of enquiry
and the International Criminal Court. On 19 January,
the Council adopted a presidential statement on justice
and the rule of law (S/PRST/2012/1), which reiterated
the Council’s call on all parties to armed conflict to
comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law and to take the required
steps to protect civilians. The Council also reaffirmed
its strong opposition to impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and stressed States’ responsibility in that regard.
We hope that our debate today will not be a mere
formality or an exercise in rhetoric but rather that the
Council will, through its decisions and actions, lend its
full authority to efforts to protect civilians everywhere.
It is only when we carry out that responsibility
consistently and without fear or favour that we can truly
be the champions of “we the people” on whose behalf
we act.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement and for his report to the Security
Council (S/2012/376). I have listened attentively to the
statements made by Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović
and Mr. Philip Spoerri on behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

28

Civilians suffer the most in war and bear the brunt of
its scourge. Innocent civilians caught in armed conflict,
especially women and children, must receive effective
protection. In recent years we have witnessed frequent
outbreaks of regional conflicts and turmoil, which pose
increasing challenges for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The practice of the Security Council of
assigning mandates on the protection of civilians has
triggered enormous controversies and prompted deep
reflection by the international community. I should like
to focus on the following four points.
First, all parties to the conflict must spare no
effort in protecting civilians. In the event of an armed
conflict, the primary responsibility to protect civilians
from violence and the scourge of war lies with national
Governments. At the same time, all parties involved
in conflict and other relevant domestic and foreign
actors are also in duty bound to abide by international
humanitarian law and other relevant provisions of
international law, and to fulfil their responsibilities
in the protection of civilians. The actions of one party
to the conflict in violation of international law should
under no circumstances constitute an excuse for any
other party to breach its obligations under such law.
The report of the Secretary-General makes reference to
the use of drones and other challenges in the protection
of civilians, all of which deserve our focused attention.
Secondly, in the process of fulfilling the duty of
protecting civilians, the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations must be upheld,
especially the principles of respect for national
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity as well as
that of non-interference in internal affairs. Operations
involving the protection of civilians must be authorized
by the Security Council and carried out in an orderly
manner under the auspices of the United Nations. No
party should arbitrarily interpret Security Council
resolutions; no actions overstepping Council mandates
should be allowed. The protection of civilians is
humanitarian in nature and should not be exploited to
serve political motives or objectives, including regime
change. The rigorous and effective monitoring of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions has
become an important task that must be accomplished
urgently.
Thirdly, the authorization of the use of force in
the protection of civilians must be approached with
extreme caution. China believes in the political and
peaceful resolution of disputes, as military intervention

12-38661

S/PV.6790

often proves counterproductive. There are serious
shortcomings in such interventions, such as ill-defined
responsibilities, unclear authorizations and lack of ex
post facto accountability. Rather than resolving conflicts
and protecting lives, military intervention adds fuel to
the fire and exacerbates humanitarian crises.
Last but not least, the practice of selectivity and
double standards must be abandoned. Many Member
States have long been urging the Security Council to
uphold the principles of fairness and impartiality and
pay equal attention to all items on the Council’s agenda
relating to the protection of civilians, including the
situations in the Gaza Strip, Somalia, Afghanistan and
Iraq. China endorses such views. Adopting a practice
of selectivity or double standards would only harm the
role and authority of the Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before I give the floor to the representatives of
States that are non-members of the Council, I wish to
request that they limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/376), which once again makes for a sobering
read. The abysmal state of the protection of civilians
is, of course, first and foremost the responsibility of the
parties to a conflict, including non-State armed groups.
But it is also clear that the mechanisms developed and
deployed by the international community so far are
not sufficient. We must therefore undertake to develop
effective mechanisms for monitoring compliance with
the core instruments of international humanitarian law.
My remarks today will focus on the issue of
accountability. In addition, my delegation aligns itself
with the statement of the group of friends to be delivered
by the representative of Switzerland.
We commend the Secretary-General for his initiative
to undertake a review of United Nations experience in
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
mission processes. These investigative tools have
increasingly been used in recent years and have time
and again shown their tremendous value. We agree that
United Nations support for such mandates needs to be

improved and that greater dedicated capacity within the
Secretariat needs to be deployed. Overall, commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions should be able
to rely on specialized back-office support and apply
consistent methods and standards, at least to the extent
possible in specific situations. It would also be useful
to have a roster of experts available who may be called
upon to serve on a commission if and when the need
arises.
All of these resources should also, and especially,
be available to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in particular, as the
Human Rights Council has recently emerged as the
leading body in establishing such commissions. We
also strongly agree with the notion that such mandates
should be established early in a crisis in order to prevent
further violations and provide the relevant United
Nations organs with a factual basis for further action.
Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
may also provide important information for judicial
processes that may be launched as a follow-up, such
as investigations by the International Criminal Court.
They may also form the basis for further action taken
by the Security Council, as was the case in the first-ever
decision to refer a situation to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), with respect to the situation in Darfur.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call on
the Council to begin a dialogue aimed at strengthening
the Council’s role in enhancing accountability at
both the national and international levels. That is, in
fact, in line with one of the recommendations to the
Security Council that we had advocated as a member
of the group of five small nations in draft resolution
A/66/L.42 before the General Assembly.
One central element in that regard is a more
coherent use of the Security Council’s power to refer
situations to the ICC. That requires predictability
and a degree of consistency in choosing situations
that require investigation by the ICC. In that respect,
it is necessary to underline that the crisis in Syria is
also a crisis of accountability. There is increasing
evidence that atrocious acts amounting to crimes
against humanity are being committed in the country,
possibly by different parties to the conflict. Under these
circumstances, it is the responsibility of the Council
to have a serious discussion of the accountability
dimension of the protection of civilians in Syria.

12-3866129

S/PV.6790

The Council’s past practice with respect to referrals
to the Court, seeking to exempt certain nationals from
the Court’s jurisdiction and thus infringing on the
powers of the Court under the Rome Statute, needs
to be reconsidered. Equally problematic is the past
practice of implying that the United Nations may not
contribute to the financing of such referrals, thus
infringing on the powers of the General Assembly under
the United Nations Charter and the United Nations-ICC
Relationship Agreement.
Another central element is greater ownership in
following up on such referrals. Whenever the Council
refers a situation to the ICC, it does so on the basis of
its powers under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. Legally, the Security Council is acting as if it
were establishing its own tribunal, with its own statute,
by imposing the obligations of the Rome Statute — in
its entirety — upon the country concerned, a point that
would perhaps be worth emphasizing in future referral
decisions. That would also imply, as is currently
relevant in the situation in Libya, that Court officials
enjoy immunity from detention under article 48 of the
Rome Statute.
The work of the Court based on Security Council
referrals is thus not very different in nature from the
work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Follow-up to referrals, in particular regarding
cooperation, should therefore be much higher on the
agenda of the Council. Non-cooperation with the Court
in the case of Security Council referrals is as much of
a problem for the Council itself as it is for the ICC. In
practical terms, it may be useful to establish a forum
to advance questions of cooperation with the Court at
the level of a subsidiary body of the Security Council,
such as, possibly, a working group on the relationship
with the International Criminal Court. That would offer
a useful and necessary space for concerted action on
all related matters, such as notifications from the Court
on non-cooperation, but also the ongoing situation
regarding the detention of ICC staff in Libya. In that
context, we would like to call on the authorities in
Libya to release the detained ICC staff without delay.
Overall, the Security Council has a very limited record
in following up on the referrals it has made to the
Court — a situation that needs to be rectified.
Let me conclude with a few words on the issue
of reparations and amends. We agree with the
Secretary-General that this issue is often overlooked and

30

needs greater attention. It also needs a certain degree
of creativity and innovation, since the sheer number of
affected victims often makes individual reparation all
but impossible. In that regard, we would like to commend
the work of the International Criminal Court’s Trust
Fund for Victims, which is actively engaged in assisting
affected communities as a whole. We also strongly
support efforts to increase the practice by parties to
conflict of offering amends to civilians harmed in the
context of lawful combat operations, despite having no
legal obligation to do so. Such policies underline the
commitment of conflict parties to legal conduct and
to minimizing civilian harm, and contribute to the
preservation of the human dignity of civilians caught
in the crossfire. An important prerequisite in that
regard is, however, the systematic tracking of civilian
harm, which in itself is indispensable for transparency
and the effective monitoring of the implementation of
international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians, which is composed of Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, the United
Kingdom, Uruguay and Switzerland as the Chair.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate and for inviting
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos,
Assistant-Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Šimonović and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2012/376) is a stark reminder
of the importance of our continued collective efforts
to address the challenges posed by the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As we speak, more than
26 million persons are internally displaced because of
armed conflicts and more than 15 million are refugees.
Finding ways of responding more effectively to the
five core challenges identified by the Secretary-General
in his last three reports should help the Security
Council in its deliberations on protecting civilians,
as parties to conflict all too often fail to comply with
their obligations. The widespread violence against

12-38661

S/PV.6790

women and children, as well as sexual violence, the
indiscriminate use of weapons in densely populated
areas, and the targeting of schools and health-care
facilities are worrying and unacceptable trends that
must be acknowledged. The Group of Friends believes
that serious and timely consideration should be
given to the concrete recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in that regard in his latest report.
The Group of Friends wishes to use this opportunity
to highlight the need to rebuild consensus around the
concept of the protection of civilians. In our endeavour
to re establish confidence, it is of the utmost importance
to reaffirm the basic tenets of the protection of civilians
as a legal concept based on international humanitarian
law, human rights refugee law and international
criminal law. Ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law, which applies to all parties to armed
conflict, including the dissemination of international
humanitarian law, is critical to effective protection,
as emphasized in resolution 1894 (2009). Parties must
be reminded time and again that even wars have limits
and those limits apply to all. The Security Council
must demonstrate its leadership in that regard and
systematically reaffirm the basics whenever the need
arises. For the protection message to be understood,
it is essential to promote a positive perception of
humanitarian action, devoid of any political connotation.
Such a perception is also key to the safety and security
of humanitarian actors, who often operate in complex
environments. In that regard, the Group of Friends
looks forward to the conclusion of an ongoing study on
the impact of national counter-terrorism measures on
humanitarian space.
The protection of civilians is a concern for everyone.
We must therefore act together, by strengthening
communication channels between Council members
and troop — and police-contributing countries, for
instance, and by improving cooperation between
the Security Council and other players — Member
States and civil society actors alike. To that end, the
Group of Friends has been briefed by various civil
society organizations working on issues that the
Secretary-General has identified as likely to benefit
from further research and discussion. On the issue of
civilian casualty recording, for instance, the Council’s
discussions may benefit from an overview in the next
Secretary-General’s report of existing practices, as well
as from specific recommendations on ways to ensure
systematic and reliable data collection in compliance

with humanitarian principles. Parties to conflict have
a duty to assess the impact of their actions on civilians.
Parties to conflict should improve documentation and
transparency — complying with their obligation to
investigate violations under international humanitarian
law — and enable assessment by independent monitors.
The Group of Friends was also briefed on the
humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons
in densely populated areas, which was identified as an
issue by the Secretary-General. We call for compliance
with international humanitarian law in the use of
all weapons, to ensure and strengthen international
humanitarian law training for those who operate them
and compliance with international humanitarian law
with respect to targeting.
We also take note with interest of the increasing
practice of some parties to armed conflict to offer
amends in the form of recognition and assistance to
civilians harmed within the lawful parameters of their
combat operations, despite having no legal obligation
to do so. We would encourage the promotion of the
steps taken so far by warring parties committed to the
protection of civilians to minimize civilian harm.
However, I cannot conclude without recalling
that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with the State. When international
assistance is provided, it should also be supportive
of the Government’s capacity to sustain longer-term
efforts to protect civilians and involve all stakeholders
in a spirit of cooperation that transcends the action of
individual actors involved in protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations can play an important role in
enhancing the host Government’s capacity to protect its
civilians, including through assistance in strengthening
national rule of law and security institutions.
Finally, efforts towards durable solutions
must not exclude accountability. The report of the
Secretary-General contains several recommendations
in that regard. We invite the Security Council to take
them into account when formulating and renewing
mandates.
(spoke in French)
I will now speak briefly in my national capacity. A
longer version of my statement was distributed in the
Chamber.
Switzerland is gravely concerned by the situation
in Syria and firmly condemns the escalation of violence

12-3866131

S/PV.6790

against civilians. We recall that all allegations of
violence must be investigated so that those responsible
for such acts can be prosecuted. Whoever the
perpetrators of the crimes in Syria are, they must know
that they will have to answer for their acts in a court of
law. Switzerland therefore asks the Security Council to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court,
which is the appropriate international institution for
prosecuting and judging the alleged authors of crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The struggle against
impunity is a necessary condition for a lasting peace.
I would also like to mention the worrying situation
in the border area between the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are pleased that the question of access to Blue Nile
and South Kordofan states is again being dealt with
specifically by the Security Council.
Humanitarian access remains a critical point in the
protection agenda. In contemporary armed conflicts,
securing and maintaining such access in order to assist
civilians is becoming increasingly difficult. To meet
that challenge, Switzerland has launched a project,
in conjunction with interested partners, to develop
instruments to achieve and maintain humanitarian
access. Those instruments clarify the normative
framework and provide practical information and
advice on humanitarian access.
Non-State armed groups continue to pose a
challenge to the protection of civilians, especially when
it comes to convincing them of the need to improve
their compliance with international law and to allow
humanitarian staff access to populations needing
assistance and protection.
Switzerland calls on the Council and Member States
to take into account the potentially negative effects of
certain measures and legislation adopted while pursuing
the legitimate goal of fighting terrorism. It would be
regrettable if those measures complicated or even
prevented the establishment of a dialogue for purely
humanitarian purposes, prevented access to vulnerable
populations by humanitarian staff or weakened respect
for international humanitarian law by armed groups.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for China’s initiative to
organize this open debate. I would also like to thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon

32

for his important briefing and for his participation
in this meeting. I also express our appreciation
to Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law at
the International Committee for the Red Cross.
It gives me great pleasure today to address the
Council on the eve of the announcement of the first
real presidential elections in Egypt. On this occasion, I
would like to remind the Council of what the Egyptian
President-elect said in his speech to Egyptians and the
world yesterday, namely, that Egypt will respect its
international treaties and legal obligations and that it
intends to strengthen and support respect for human
rights at the national, regional and international levels.
This debate comes at an important time, since
civilians are still subject to violence, murder and
destruction during armed conflicts throughout
the world, especially in the region where Egypt is
situated — in Africa and the Arab world, and more
especially in the Syrian Arab Republic and the occupied
Palestinian territories. Egypt affirms what the most
recent Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376) has
stated in terms of the need on the part of States and
armed groups in conflicts to respect international
law and international humanitarian law. All parties,
especially States, must respect the principles of
proportionality and differentiation in all armed
conflicts. The States Members of the United Nations
have a greater responsibility in that regard, in that
they are essentially the ones who have the authority
to use force by virtue of their laws and sovereignty. A
violation of those principles does not justify the use of
force by other parties.
The international community, and specifically the
Security Council, must guarantee the accountability,
in an entirely effective manner, of anyone responsible
for violations against civilians. We also welcome the
establishment of national and international commissions
to investigate such violations. However, simply setting
up commissions is not enough to guarantee protection
or to deter violations. Such commissions must arrive
at genuine, timely and effective results that serve to
identify and hold responsible those responsible for
targeting civilians, including compensating those who
were harmed and their families, especially by States
that commit such violations.

12-38661

S/PV.6790

Egypt reaffirms the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping missions that participate in the protection
of civilians. We support enabling those missions with
the necessary mandates, personnel and equipment. At
the same time, we reiterate the need to bear in mind and
respect the principles of the sovereignty and the culture
of the countries where those peacekeeping missions are
present. In that regard, we support the idea of establishing
a framework to support peacekeeping missions’
efforts in a manner that guarantees the protection of
civilians, as well as holding them accountable for any
violations that happen during the implementation of
their mandates. We also support the effective follow-up
by United Nations bodies on the protection of civilians,
including by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council, each according to its own specific
mandate.
On this occasion, I would like to draw attention to
the importance of protecting civilians from the effects
of sanctions that might be imposed by the Security
Council or unilaterally by countries in order to deal
with specific disputes. The concept of protection must
also apply to protecting the economic and social status
of civilians that are not involved in hostilities.
In conclusion, on the occasion of Egypt’s presidency
of the Group of Arab States for this month, I would like
to call for the participation of all United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, in implementing what
was called for by the resolution of the League of Arab
States adopted on 2 June on the need to protect civilians
in Syria and provide the United Nations Supervision
Mission with the necessary tools to do that, as well as to
take the necessary measures and decisions according to
the relevant articles of the Charter of the United Nations
in order to put an end to the attacks that are targeting
civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Moreover, we call on the Security Council and the
relevant United Nations bodies, especially the Human
Rights Council, to take firm measures to put a stop
to random attacks against civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as to lift the unjust siege
imposed by the Israeli authorities for many years on
Gaza, which is a form of collective punishment imposed
on the residents of the occupied Palestinian territories
in a manner that takes no account of proportionality
or differentiation and clearly violates the principles of
international humanitarian law.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Amos, Mr. Šimonović
and Mr. Spoerri for their statements. Of course, we
also thank Minister for Foreign Affairs Caballero for
Guatemala’s leadership on the protection of civilians.
I would also like to associate Australia with
the statement just delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians.
The situation in the Syria has rightly and inevitably
been an important focus this morning. The deliberate
targeting of civilians in the conflict is unacceptable and
violates international norms and law. Those responsible
must be held to account. My own country supports
calls for strong action in Syria under Chapter VII of
the Charter.
We also share the strong concern of others about
the other situations that have been mentioned this
morning, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, the Sudan and South Sudan.
I would like to focus my remarks, however briefly,
on the distinct body of work on the protection of civilians
that has evolved in the United Nations in recent years.
As has been said, we must rebuild consensus about that
work on the protection of civilians. The protection of
civilians is intrinsic to the purpose and the identity of
the United Nations. We must recall that it is also a legal
concept, rooted firmly in international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law.
I would like to highlight three protection of
civilians issues that require sustained attention. The
first is the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. There has been much progress recently
in ensuring that peacekeepers know how to fulfil
their mandates to protect civilians — that they have
the necessary training and guidance, in addition to
resources and capabilities.We would like to echo the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that Member
States utilize the new Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support protection of
civilians modules fully. We encourage the Secretariat
to continue to refine them based on feedback from the
field. We are encouraged to hear about and we strongly
support the development of protection of civilians

12-3866133

S/PV.6790

operational guidance. My own country is continuing to
support the African Union in that area to develop its
own protection of civilians guidance.
The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host Government, and a
peacekeeping mission should not be there forever. The
protection of civilians will therefore only be sustainable
in the long term through strengthening national
capacities and institutions.
That was the subject of the fifth workshop on the
protection of civilians Australia co-hosted with Uruguay
two weeks ago. The results are being circulated, and the
key outcomes included agreement on the importance of
missions devoting sufficient attention and resources
to building host Government capacities; a recognition
of the importance of building rule of law and security
sector institutions that are trusted and responsive; and
a recognition of the need, which has been mentioned by
other speakers this morning, in relation to transitions
to begin planning for full handover of protection
of civilians responsibilities very early. Transition
processes need broad national ownership, should
emphasize capacity development, and need to involve
strong coordination with other partners.
My second issue is the forthcoming United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, which begins
next week. Small arms are the worst weapons of mass
destruction in terms of the numbers of civilians killed
and injured every day, and the life of an illicit firearm
can span generations. We can only really curb armed

34

violence through a treaty that includes small arms and
light weapons and ammunition. We recognize that the
treaty will present implementation challenges for many,
but that should not be an argument against a strong
and legally binding outcome. Australia is supporting
approximately 50 delegates from developing countries
to attend the Conference so that the outcome takes
their interests into account. We stand ready to provide
assistance for treaty implementation.
My third, and final, issue concerns the use of
powerful explosive weapons in populated areas
without proper regard for international humanitarian
law restrictions, which is a clear violation of the
limits of conflict. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on this. We encourage greater
collection of data on the issue. We welcome the Council’s
attention to this threat in Syria, and we encourage the
Council to be systematic in its approach in this area.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s discussions
will serve to strengthen consensus on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and to enhance the Council’s
work in support of the protection of civilians. Such
protection, as we know, is fundamental to the Council’s
purpose.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

12-38661
