268

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Noting with satisfaction the statement of the administering Power that it endorsed the policy that representatives
of the Territory should participate in forums in which the
Territory was the subject of discussion,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the United States
Virgin Islands, and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter
of priority in order to promote economic stability,
Recalling the dispatch in 1977 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 26

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to the United
States Virgin Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in the United States
Virgin Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in conformity with resolution 1514 (XV), as well as all other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
United States Virgin Islands themselves to determine their
future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, and, in that connection, reaffirms the importance
of fostering an awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of
their right to self-determination;
6. Notes that the Select Committee, established by the
Legislature of the United States Virgin Islands in 1983 to
ascertain the views of the people of the Territory on their
future status and to make recommendations in that regard,
conducted public hearings from March to August 1984
and submitted its report to the Sixteenth Legislature in
January 1985; 27
7. Also notes that the Legislature endorsed the report,
which included, inter alia, a recommendation that a referendum on the status issue should be held on 4 November
1986, in conjunction with the next general election, for
people of the United States Virgin Islands to choose
between a variety of status options including independence, statehood, free association, incorporated territory,
status quo or a compact of federal relations; 27
8. Further notes that the Legislature decided to appoint
a new committee to continue the process of public hear26 Ibid., chap. XXV
27 Ibid., para. I 0.

ings in order to ensure that the people of the United States

Virgin Islands were fully aware of the implications of the
various status options by the time of the referendum; 27
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure
with a view to reducing the economic dependence of the
Territory on the administering Power;
10. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development of the United States Virgin Islands;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of the United States Virgin Islands,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development;
12. Urges the administering Power to seek in the Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development a status for the territorial Government similar to that
of other dependent Territories within the Group;
13. Calls upon the administering Power to facilitate
further the participation of the United States Virgin
Islands in various regional intergovernmental bodies and
organizations, particularly in their central organs, and in
other organizations of the United Nations system;
14. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures to comply fully with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly
relating to military activities and arrangements by colonial
Powers in Territories under their administration;
15. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/50. Question of Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 39/40 of 5 December 1984 on
the question of Western Sahara,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 28
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of Western Sahara, 29
28 Ibid., Supp/emenl No l3 (A/40/23). chap. X.
29 A/40/692 and Corr I

VII. Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX) on Western
Sahara,30adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12June 1983,
I. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
2. Reaffirms also that the solution of the question of
Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution
AHG/Res.104 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity,
which establishes ways and means for a just and definitive
political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;

3. Again requests, to that end, the two parties to the
conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia et-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to
undertake direct negotiations, in the shortest possible
time, with a view to bringing about a cease-fire to create
the necessary conditions for a peaceful and fair referendum
for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, a
referendum without any administrative or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the current Chairman of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to promote a just and definitive
solution of the question of Western Sahara;
5. Invites the current Chairman of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to exert every effort to persuade the two parties to
the conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de
Oro, to negotiate, in the shortest possible time and in conformity with resolution AHG/Res. l 04 (XIX) and the present resolution, the terms of a cease-fire and the modalities
for organizing the said referendum;

6. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of that
organization, in particular resolution AHG/Res. I 04
(XIX);

7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United
Nations informed of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity relating to Western Sahara;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation
in Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resoluticn and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
30 For the text, see resolution 38/40, para. I.
31 01/icia/ Records of the General Assembl_v, Fortieth Session. Supplement
No. 2.f (A/40/23), chap. VIII.

269

40/Sl. Informadon from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nadons
The General Assembly.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations 31 and the action taken by the Committee in
respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question, 32
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and
to take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 39/41 of 5 December 1984,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII),
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in
terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December I 985

40/52.

Acdvides of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementadon
of the Declaradon on the Granting of Inde-

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
10 Namibia and in all other Territories under

colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
32 A/40/629.
