United Nations

S/PV.6675

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6675th meeting
Tuesday, 6 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
2001 (2011) (S/2011/736)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-62375 (E)

*1162375*

S/PV.6675

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 2001 (2011)
(S/2011/736)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/736, which contains the first
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6
of resolution 2001 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler. Since this is
Mr. Kobler’s first appearance before the Security
Council, I should like to extend him a particularly
warm welcome and wish him success in his work.
Mr. Kobler: It is a great pleasure and an honour
for me to be here today. I would like to thank you, Sir,
for having invited me to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/736) on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and to brief the Council on the latest developments in
that country.
I am also grateful for the Secretary-General’s
decision, with your support, to entrust me with the
responsibility of leading the activities of the United
Nations in Iraq at a particularly historic moment. Like
my predecessors, I look forward to fulfilling the
mandate this Council has entrusted to UNAMI, in close
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities. In that regard, I
would like to express my deep and sincere appreciation
to Iraqi leaders for their warm and cordial welcome
and interaction thus far.

2

Let me begin by condemning in the strongest
possible terms yesterday’s terrorist attack on Ashura
pilgrims, which killed dozens and injured many more.
My condolences go to the families of the victims. Iraqi
religious and ethnic diversity is the ultimate strength of
the country. That diversity is at the heart of the
country’s efforts to establish a peaceful, prosperous
and all-inclusive society.
It has been almost two months since I took up my
assignment in Iraq — a country I left four years ago in
a different capacity and under very different
circumstances. Since my arrival, I have met with many
Arab and Kurdish political and religious leaders,
including in Najaf, to take the pulse of the country. I
have visited all UNAMI hubs in Erbil, Kirkuk and
Basra to better familiarize myself with the activities of
the Mission and of the United Nations country team.
Finally, on 23 and 24 November I travelled to Kuwait
to discuss the outstanding issues and points of common
interest between Iraq and Kuwait.
During that initial period, I must say that I
witnessed a great number of changes and
improvements, and despite many obstacles ahead there
is significant degree of good will and determination to
achieve further progress. Yet, I also came to realize
that some of the pressing challenges of yesterday
remain the same today. They are covered in greater
detail in the report of the Secretary-General, and
include wealth distribution, power-sharing, delivery
and access to basic services, strained relations between
communities that have lived together in Iraq for
centuries, and unresolved issues between Iraq and
Kuwait.
Today, I would like to focus on the following five
areas: first, the significance of the withdrawal of
United States forces from Iraq for the Iraqi people and
the United Nations; secondly, the current political
situation; thirdly, United Nations activities on the
ground; fourthly, the possible impact in Iraq of events
unfolding in the region and the state of affairs between
Iraq and Kuwait; and last but not least, the issue of
Camp Ashraf, which has monopolized much of the
attention and efforts of UNAMI and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) attention over the past several months.
The withdrawal of the United States forces from
Iraq by the end of the year will lead to a remarkable
change for the Government and the people of Iraq. It

11-62375

S/PV.6675

will also be an important milestone in Iraq’s history as
the country rebuilds and strengthens its relations with
regional and international partners. Yes, there will be
challenges ahead and many seem concerned by what
the future may entail. However, it is above all an
opportunity for all Iraqis to prove to themselves and to
the world that they can build a peaceful and better
future for their children, and an opportunity for all
political leaders and elected official to respond to the
legitimate aspirations of their constituencies and bring
democracy, political stability and economic prosperity
forward.
UNAMI and the United Nations country team
stand ready to work with the Government and redouble
its efforts to consolidate the country’s democratic gains
and economic recovery. The United Nations has a
proven track record in assisting to build up strong
institutions and mechanisms for good governance,
including in the fight against corruption. I am pleased
that Prime Minister Al-Maliki himself has made this
topic one of his Government’s priorities. I look forward
to building upon the work that has already been done,
especially with regard to human rights and electoral
and legislative support, all of which could contribute to
fostering political stability in the years to come.
The task ahead should not be underestimated and
will require further progress on the security front. For
several months now, the Iraqi security forces have
assumed full control of the security of the country.
However, they continue to face armed opposition and
terrorist groups carrying out complex mass-casualty
attacks that affect the lives of hundreds of citizen
across the country. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, they also pose significant
challenges to the delivery of United Nations assistance
on the ground.
Let me now turn to the latest political
developments. As Iraq makes further progress in
regaining its rightful place in the community of
nations, it is even more crucial that its leaders from all
sides work collectively to overcome their differences
and promote confidence and tolerance. In my
consultations, in particular with Kurdish interlocutors,
I have sensed a growing discontent at delays in fully
implementing the Kurdish-Arab agenda. As called for
by the Secretary-General in his report, Iraqi leaders
should take the steps necessary to overcome the current
stand still in the appointment of security ministers and

11-62375

to resolve other pending issues
Government formation process.

regarding

the

Arab-Kurd relations and issues pertaining to
disputed internal boundaries have always been at the
core of UNAMI’s mandate. They represent a major
element in the country’s stability and remain one of
UNAMI’s top priorities. I am pleased that Prime
Minister Al-Maliki has asked me for UNAMI’s
continued involvement and assistance on this matter.
To this end, we are currently exploring ways to
reinvigorate the standing consultative mechanism as a
forum for addressing the issues of the disputed internal
boundaries through dialogue.
I have already initiated discussions with all
concerned on the issue of Kirkuk, including holding
elections and improving security, and a possible thirdparty role for UNAMI in the combined security
mechanism. The recent deployment of the Iraqi Army
around the Kirkuk airport was viewed with concern by
leaders of the Kurdistan Regional Government and
further underlined the need to ensure that the necessary
mechanisms are in place for settling disputes. In this
regard, I call upon the parties involved to use existing
mechanisms to avoid confrontation and to provide the
necessary space for UNAMI to assist.
After the withdrawal of the United States forces
from Iraq, it will be of particular importance that
democratic standards, including respect for the rule of
law in relation to electoral processes and human rights,
be safeguarded and further advanced. There must be no
rollback.
The transparency and professionalism of future
electoral processes are essential to ensuring that Iraqi
citizens accept the results. Iraq has a busy electoral
calendar ahead, for which a professional and
independent electoral commission is essential. The
appointment of the new Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission, to be
completed by April 2012, will be the foundation of the
credibility of all upcoming elections. I am pleased to
report that the Council of Representatives has formally
requested UNAMI to perform an advisory role in the
selection process of the next Board of Commissioners.
I turn now to the situation of human rights. Much
has still to be done to address the difficulties faced by
all Iraqis in their daily lives. Every month, an average
of 600 to 800 incidents, resulting in at least 10 civilian
deaths per day and many more injuries, continue to be

3

S/PV.6675

reported. I would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the victims of these atrocious acts, and I call
on the Government of Iraq to do everything in its
power to protect the victims of violence and to ensure
that those who perpetrate such acts are held
accountable according to law.

Democratic and economic development can
prosper only in a stable regional environment and
Iraq’s stability depends on good-relations with its
neighbours. Those relations, however, could be
significantly affected by various unfolding events in
the region.

More specifically, the confirmed recent killing of
a human rights activist by an improvised explosive
device attached to his car in Kirkuk on 20 November
brings the number of reported violent incidents against
human rights defenders to 11 since the beginning of
October. Of equal concern are attempts against
freedom of expression — a fundamental right in all
democracies. During the reporting period, journalists
continued to be the targets of attacks. UNAMI’s Office
of Human Rights continues, together with the
Government of Iraq, to follow up each and every
individual case. They will be included in the Mission’s
upcoming regular report on the situation of human
rights in Iraq.

As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, tensions escalated in northern Iraq following
the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) terrorist attacks on
19 October against Turkish forces in the south-eastern
province of Hakkari, which resulted in the deplorable
loss of 24 lives and led to subsequent air and ground
offensives by Turkish forces against PKK terrorists in
Iraqi Kurdistan. Despite that difficult situation, the
Governments of Turkey and Iraq, together with the
Kurdistan Regional Government authorities, have
proactively engaged in constructive crisis management.
To date, those mitigating efforts have proven
successful, and I would like to thank all concerned for
those efforts.

On the development side, the United Nations
country team’s partnership with the Government
continues in the implementation of the United Nations
Development
Assistance
Framework.
The
Government’s efforts to allocate a specific line of
funding for development projects within its investment
budget for 2012 demonstrate its commitment to
supporting the country’s key development priorities.
The United Nations stands ready to provide the
Government with support in implementing those
priorities.

As one can easily imagine, unfolding events in
Syria are of concern to many of my interlocutors, who
fear possible repercussions in Iraq. A contingency plan
has been prepared by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), with a
view to addressing any movement of population into
Iraq and is being regularly updated to take into
consideration the fluid situation in Syria.

With respect to integrated development priorities,
UNAMI will in the coming months focus on three
issues with political, security and governance
implications: youth, water resource management and
environment. I strongly believe that these provide
opportunities for a cross-cutting impact across Iraq’s
critical development challenges. They are at the core of
Iraq’s potential to realize sustainable development and
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.

Of particular importance are the relations
between Iraq and Kuwait. Both countries share a
difficult past. The 2009 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/385) envisaged a road map for the
normalization of Iraq’s international status. There has
been, however, little progress. In my recent discussions
with the Iraqi Government, I have encouraged them to
quickly implement Iraq’s outstanding Chapter VII
obligations, as outlined in that road map. That in turn
would open the door for the early normalization of
Iraq’s status in the international community by the
Security Council, which is now long overdue.

I would also like to focus on question of
improving the situation of women. Specifically, I will
focus my efforts on three priority activities: first,
promoting the participation of women and their role in
building Iraq’s sustainable and peaceful future;
secondly, combating all forms of violence against
women and girls; and thirdly, promoting education for
women and girls, including vocational training.

Further efforts are therefore needed to promote
confidence between the two countries and facilitate
solutions to deal with outstanding bilateral issues. I am
encouraged by the resolve that both Iraq and Kuwait
have demonstrated to improve bilateral relations,
particularly through reciprocal high-level visits earlier
this year and the establishment of a Joint Ministerial
Working Committee. I hope that following the

4

11-62375

S/PV.6675

forthcoming visit of Prime Minister al-Maliki to
Kuwait, the two sides will be able to resume the work
of the Joint Ministerial Working Committee in the near
future.
During my recent meetings with Iraqi leaders, I
was encouraged by the goodwill they have expressed
towards improving relations with Kuwait. Similarly,
during my recent visit to Kuwait, I was encouraged by
the goodwill towards Iraq shown by my Kuwaiti
interlocutors. While reiterating the importance they
attached to a letter from Prime Minister al-Maliki
reaffirming Iraq’s land and maritime borders, in
accordance with resolution 833 (1993), they responded
positively to my suggestion that the focus for the time
being should be on the implementation of Iraq’s
Chapter VII obligations on a priority basis, for
example, border management projects, maintenance,
and compensation and relocation of farmers.
I believe that UNAMI is well placed to help
normalize Iraq’s relations with Kuwait in the
framework of concerted United Nations engagement
and with the support of the Security Council. UNAMI
and I, personally, stand ready to assist, including by
exploring new avenues to address the standstill
between the two countries and facilitate progress
towards Iraq’s full compliance with, and eventual exit
from, Chapter VII, while providing Kuwait with the
necessary safeguards and assurances it is looking for.
I would now like to draw the Council’s attention
to the situation with regard to Camp Ashraf, which
remains a matter of great concern. The Government of
Iraq has asked the United Nations to help facilitate a
peaceful and durable solution to the matter, and we are
making an exhaustive effort to do so. We believe that
such a solution is possible. However, the positions of
the Government of Iraq and of the Camp residents and
their leadership continue to remain far apart.
The Government of Iraq repeatedly emphasized
its intention to close down the camp by 31 December
of this year and to transfer its residents to another
location until countries are found outside Iraq where
they can resettle. That deadline is fast approaching.
The position of Camp Ashraf residents is to
remain in the camp until countries are found to receive
them. They still do not agree to be transferred to a new
location outside the camp without the protection of
Blue Helmets.

11-62375

I am pleased by the progress made so far and by
the Government of Iraq’s agreement to allow UNHCR
to play the role it has under its mandate. The
Government of Iraq is also committed to the principle
of non-refoulement and gave assurances to the
Secretary-General of its commitment to find a peaceful
solution. There is, however, a real danger of
confrontation and even violence unless a mutually
acceptable solution is found. We are therefore calling
on all concerned to act with restraint and flexibility to
ensure that such a peaceful solution can be found.
The United Nations efforts are being led on the
ground by UNAMI and UNHCR. Those efforts have
intensified in recent weeks in the context of a working
group on Camp Ashraf, which has been meeting
frequently with the Government of Iraq. UNAMI
continues its regular visits to Camp Ashraf, the most
recent of which took place this past weekend. Those
visits provide the opportunity to listen to the concerns
of the residents and to brief them on the proposals
being discussed.
The Secretary-General has spoken personally to
Prime Minister al-Maliki to appeal for flexibility and
full support for the United Nations efforts to facilitate
the peaceful solution the Government has assured that
it seeks. He has asked me to attach the highest priority
to that issue.
In trying to facilitate a solution, we are
emphasizing a number of important points. First, we
must keep in mind that lives are at stake and must be
protected. The Government has a responsibility to
ensure the safety, security and welfare of the residents.
Any forced action that results in bloodshed or loss of
life would be both ill-advised and unacceptable.
Secondly, we believe that any workable solution
must be acceptable to both the Government of Iraq and
to the residents of Camp Ashraf. A solution must
respect Iraqi sovereignty, on the one hand, and
applicable international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law on the other hand.
Thirdly, a solution must also respect the principle
of non-refoulement. No resident of Camp Ashraf
should be returned to his or her home country without
his or her consent.
While some progress has been made in our latest
discussions in Baghdad, many obstacles remain to
arriving at a plan that would meet the concerns and

5

S/PV.6675

requirements of all interested parties. Subject to all
conditions being met, UNHCR is ready to begin the
verification and interviews for the purposes of refugee
status determination. However, the process will take
time to complete. Clearly, the situation cannot be fully
resolved before 31 December. I therefore appeal to the
Government of Iraq to extend the deadline in order to
permit adequate time and space for a solution to be
found.
I also appeal to the leadership and residents of
Camp Ashraf to engage constructively and with an
open mind to the proposed process. They should give
serious consideration to the proposals under discussion.
There should be no provocation or violence from their
side nor a challenge to Iraqi sovereignty.
Finally, I appeal to the international community
to do more to help. A lasting solution cannot be found
unless Governments step forward and offer to accept
Camp Ashraf residents for resettlement in their
countries. I will be travelling to Brussels today and
will emphasize that point, in particular with my
interlocutors there. In that context, I also welcome the
readiness of the Islamic Republic of Iran to receive
those residents of Camp Ashraf who express a desire to
voluntarily return to their home country with the
assurance that their welfare, security and safety will be
respected.
Let me say that the situation of Camp Ashraf is a
complex one but that the problems are not
insurmountable. A process is under way, and if all
concerned act responsibly at this time, it will be
possible to arrive at a peaceful, durable solution that
respects both the safety, security and welfare of Camp
residents and Iraq’s understandable desire to assert its
sovereignty.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their continued support. I
would also like to express my deepest appreciation for
the security support provided to the United Nations by
the Government of Iraq and the Member States
contributing troops and police to UNAMI.
Finally, I would also like to pay tribute to the
United Nations national and international staff who
work in Iraq, under the most challenging
circumstances. I am confident that with their
determination and the support of the Council, we can
achieve more in Iraq, in line with our mandate. I
appreciate, in this context, the openness of all my

6

interlocutors and their stated expectation to see the
United Nations engaging with the people and the
Government of Iraq to consolidate the significant gains
made thus far.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank the previous President of the
Council, the Permanent Representative of Portugal, for
his efforts during the month of November. I also
congratulate Mr. Martin Kobler on his assignment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Iraq, and I wish him success in his new position. In
addition, I thank Mr. Kobler and his team in Baghdad
and New York for their sincere efforts in helping the
Government and the people of Iraq.
After reviewing the important points mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2011/736),
my country’s delegation would like to address the
following issues.
The political and security situation in Iraq has
witnessed tremendous and notable improvements in the
past few months. The coming year will bring great
challenges and responsibilities for the Iraqi
Government after the United States forces withdrawal
by the end of this year. However, the strategic
framework agreement between Iraq and the United
States will underpin the next stage of the relations
between the two countries at the political, economic,
technical, cultural, and scientific levels.
Here I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the United States forces and the United States
Government and all the countries that have helped Iraq
to bring about democracy, human rights, the rule of law
and stability in the country. As Mr. Kobler noted, some
of yesterday’s challenges are still the same today for
Iraq and the Iraqi Government.
Regarding the implementation of the status-offorces agreement between the United States and Iraq,
on 1 October the United States air force transferred
control over the Iraqi airspace in the Baghdad/Balad
sector to the Iraqi Civil Aviation Authority. All air
traffic in this area, which is the busiest and most

11-62375

S/PV.6675

complicated in Iraq, is now conducted by Iraqi airtraffic controllers. With this step, Iraq has assumed
complete control over its airspace, for the first time
since 2003. Iraq also took over control of 485 military
bases from United States forces as part of the plan for a
complete withdrawal by the end of the year.
I would like to inform the Security Council that
my Government has worked hard in recent months to
improve its defensive capabilities to stand against
terrorist attacks, to protect internal security and to save
democracy in Iraq. In this context, I would like to point
to Mr. Kobler’s praise of the improvements in the
security situation in Iraq, which are in line with the
perceptions of the United Nations about the future of
Iraq through 2015.
As part of the successes achieved by the Iraqi
security forces since they took charge of security duties
in the country, a statement by the Ministry of Health
showed that the number of civilians who were killed in
acts of violence had decreased to 110 in September
2011, compared with 155 in August 2011. That number
represents the second-lowest number of casualties in
the space of a month for this year; this shows clearly
the huge decrease in violent attacks, which reached
their peak in 2006 and 2007.
The Government of Iraq affirms that the duty of
officials in all Government sectors is to meet the
demands of citizens using all of the capabilities of the
Government. Although the Government inherited a bad
situation and a heavy burden of debt from the former
regime, it is working to alleviate the burden on citizens
and to provide them with the best possible services.
The General Secretariat of the Council of
Ministers in Iraq and the United Nations Development
Programme launched the United Nations Global
Compact in Iraq on 15 October 2011. The agreement is
aimed at empowering the private sector through
sustainable collaboration based on the principles of
human rights, a sustainable environment and business
transparency.
The Iraqi Government is moving forward to solve
the electricity crisis in Iraq through a plan that is being
implemented at a steady pace. In addition, the
Government has taken a number of urgent measures
aimed at relieving the intensity of the crisis until a final
solution is reached. Those urgent measures include the
distribution of additional quantities of fuel to a number
of sub-generator units in order to provide a relative

11-62375

level of comfort to citizens, especially during the
summer.
My Government asserts that the oil is the
property of all Iraqi citizens, and that the duty of the
Government is to invest this energy in a way that
provides the best return for citizens. In this context, the
Southern Gas Company signed an agreement in
principle with the Shell and Mitsubishi oil companies
on 22 October 2011 to establish a joint company to
benefit from the natural gas associated with oil in the
province of Basra. That step was taken after decades of
wasting the natural gas wealth associated with oil.
The Iraqi oil industry maintained its monthly
production levels; crude-oil exports for the month of
September 2011 totalled 63.1 million barrels, with
average daily exports of 2.1 million barrels. The Oil
Ministry is currently aiming to increase its production
levels to 2.9 million barrels a day in order to reach this
year’s goal, which is 3 million barrels a day.
Iraq is witnessing today a new era in which the
foundations of democracy, personal and private
freedoms, freedom of the press and expression, the
freedom to create political parties, political diversity
and a peaceful transition of power are being
established. We in Iraq are also working to strengthen
the foundations of the culture of human rights in all
sectors, so as to ensure that all Iraqis, from different
ethnic, religious and sectarian backgrounds, enjoy their
basic rights as stated in the Constitution.
As part of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to determine the fate of missing victims in
mass graves, the Ministry of Human Rights is
preparing, in collaboration with the Institute of
Forensic Medicine and the Martyrs Association, to
launch a national campaign in all Iraqi provinces and
the Kurdistan region aimed at establishing a national
database for victims in mass graves using DNA
samples to identify them. In that context, on 24
October the Ministry of Human Rights signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Institute of
Forensic Medicine and the Martyrs Association to
establish an organizational structure in order to begin
the process of identifying victims in mass graves.
The Iraqi Government has endeavoured to assist
social groups that are less fortunate, especially the
disabled. The Ministry of Human Rights announced its
readiness to hold training sessions in sign language at

7

S/PV.6675

Iraqi national institutions in order to support the deaf
and enable them to perform their role in society.
The Iraqi Government is also endeavouring to
spread and establish the culture of human rights. The
National Institute of Human Rights, along with the
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research,
organized, on 18 October 2011, an advanced training
session for human rights professors at Mosul
University.
The Iraqi Minister of Human Rights stated,
during his meeting with Mr. Francisco Mota, Director
of the Human Rights Office of UNAMI, on 12 October
2011, that the Ministry was conducting regular visits to
detention centres and prisons. Those visits are
welcomed by the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Supreme Judicial Council. The Minister also expressed
the Ministry’s readiness to arrange for joint visits with
the UNAMI Human Rights Office to Iraqi detention
centres and prisons to evaluate the human rights
situation there. For his part, Mr. Mota pointed out that
he had contacted Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch to view the reports that they had issued,
and he stressed the need for the statistics and
information included therein to be accurate.
The political changes and reform movement that
began within the context of the Arab Spring prove,
without any doubt, that we have selected the correct
political process in Iraq since 2003. They also prove
that Iraq has been a pioneer in achieving political
change and in adopting democracy through elections
and the peaceful transfer of power as a process for
political life in the new Iraq.
Iraq asserts the importance of holding the Arab
Summit Conference in Baghdad on the designated date
at the end of March next year, as we have completed
all the preparations and finished all the necessary
projects for holding the Summit. My Government
believes that it is the time to hold the Arab Summit
because it is very important to the Arab world after the
changes that have taken place in the region. That
imposes a duty on Iraq, in line with its leading role, to
face the changes in the region in order to find
appropriate Arab solutions to deal with the situation in
a way that meets the aspirations and hopes of the Arab
people.
The Government of Iraq, based on its deep belief
in people’s right to express aspirations and choose their
legitimate representatives, voted on 16 September in

8

favour of the General Assembly resolution that accepts
the credential documents of the Libyan National
Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of
the Libyan people to the United Nations (General
Assembly resolution 66/1). That was preceded by my
Government’s recognition of the Libyan National
Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of
the Libyan people.
I would like to point out that the Council of
Ministers, as part of its support for the democratic
changes in the region, issued a decision at its meeting
on 19 October to send a delegation from the Iraqi
Independent High Electoral Commission to Tunisia,
headed by Mr. Faraj Al-Haidary, Chair of the Board of
Commissioners of the Commission, to express
solidarity with the Tunisian people in their elections.
The Council of Ministers also decided to provide
$1 million as a contribution to the success of that
election.
Despite the challenges that it faces, Iraq is
committed to its humanitarian role in the world in
times of disasters and crises. That was reflected in the
Iraqi Government’s decision to donate $10 million to
help the victims of the earthquake in Japan and by its
decision of 25 August to donate 22,500 tons of wheat
and $5 million to support the efforts of the Somali
Government in fighting the effects of drought and
hunger in the Horn of Africa. My Government also
donated $2 million to finance the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Iraq is committed to respecting the sovereignty of
neighbouring countries and to not allowing the use of
Iraqi territories to attack neighbouring countries. In
that regard, I would like to point out the statement of
the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 20 October that
denounced the terrorist attacks by armed groups
affiliated with the Kurdish Workers Party on Turkish
towns near the Iraqi border. At the same time, the Iraqi
authorities condemn the bombardment by Turkish and
Iranian forces of Kurdish villages on the border of the
two countries, which caused civilian causalities.
We would like to affirm that Iraq is committed to
solving all unresolved issues with our neighbour
Kuwait. I would like to assure the Council that there is
positive collaboration between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
Governments to settle all unresolved issues between
the two countries that were the result of Saddam

11-62375

S/PV.6675

Hussein’s aggression against Kuwait and his invasion
in 1990. As Mr. Kobler said, he was encouraged by the
goodwill of the two countries. I reaffirm my country’s
commitment to resolving the remaining issues under
the framework of the related resolutions adopted by the
Security Council. I also affirm that the relationship
between Iraq and Kuwait is developing positively.
In that context, I would like to point out the
approval in August by the General Secretariat of the
Council of Ministers to establish a committee to
coordinate efforts regarding the Kuwaiti national
archives. The committee is chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and its membership comprises
representatives of the Council of Ministers, the
Ministries of Defence, Interior, Finance, Justice,
Higher Education and Scientific Research and the
Central Bank of Iraq.
Regarding the port of Mubarak, we assert that we
are dealing with the issue of the port through official
channels and collaboration with the Kuwaiti side. I
would like to point out that Prime Minister of Iraq Nuri
al-Maliki announced his acceptance of an invitation
from the Kuwaiti Prime Minister, Sheikh Naser
Al-Mohammad Al-Sabah, and stated that he intended
to visit Kuwait this month. However, the visit was
postponed after the resignation of the Kuwaiti Prime
Minister.
We affirm that Iraq has achieved great progress in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
resulting in the adoption of resolution 1957 (2010),
which lifted all restrictions and sanctions imposed on
Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait. That has paved the
way for Iraq to return to the international community.
That was affirmed by the Director-General of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
during his meeting with Mr. Hoshyhar Zebari, Foreign
Minister of Iraq, in The Hague on 7 September, when
he stated that he valued the complete cooperation of
Iraq in fulfilling its obligations as a member of the
Organisation. He also affirmed the cooperation of the
competent Iraqi authorities to close the file on weapons
of mass destruction. He expressed his appreciation of
Iraq’s supportive and positive role in getting rid of
such weapons.
I would also like to mention the successful visit
by the inspection team of the Technical Secretariat of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons from 1 to 5 May, the assertion of the head of

11-62375

the inspection team of the success of the visit at all
levels and his praise of Iraq’s flexibility.
I would also like to mention the letter dated 3
December 2011, sent by Foreign Minister Hoshyar
Zebari to the Secretary-General and, through him, to
the members of the Security Council, regarding the
steps taken by Iraq to implement its obligations under
resolution 1957 (2010). In that letter, Mr. Zebari
mentioned decision No. 119 of the Council of
Ministers, dated 12 April, to approve the first stage of
the removal process for the decommissioned
Al-Muthanna facility, which was used by Saddam
Hussein’s regime to produce chemical weapons. The
Council of Ministers also designated approximately
$5 million for the project. The letter also discussed
Iraq’s outstanding cooperation with the International
Atomic Energy Agency inspection team.
With regard to Camp Ashraf, which was
addressed in detail by Mr. Kobler, I would like to
assure the Security Council that my Government does
not want to force anyone to return to Iran. Moreover,
we believe that approximately 900 of the residents hold
dual nationality. We very much encourage them to go
back to the countries of which they hold the
nationality. The relocation decision, which will be
implemented by the end of the year, will help the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to interview the people in the camp and to
decide of their own free will what they intend to do.
With the camp residents preventing the Iraqi
forces and Government from entering, we do not know
exactly what is going on. That is Iraq’s sovereignty.
There is no country in the world that, with respect to
sovereignty, allows people to be in the country without
that country’s authority. However, we believe that we
need the help of the countries and members of the
Security Council to assist us in taking some of the
residents of the camp so that we can conclude this
issue once and for all. According to our Constitution,
we cannot allow any group inside Iraq that attacks
neighbouring countries. That will cause great
problems.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm my
Government’s appreciation for the role performed by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and for
the efforts of the Special Representative in providing
the support requested by the Iraqi Government, in

9

S/PV.6675

accordance with the mechanisms agreed upon by the
two parties.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite

10

Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

11-62375
