VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

on the implementation of articles 4 and 7 of the Convention 25
and reiterates its request to the Committee to explore the
possibility of also preparing for the Conference a study on
the implementation of subparagraph (e) of article 5;
15. · Takes note of decision 1 (XXVI) of 19 August
1982 of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 26 in which the Committee requested the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of
the Philippines, to explore the possibility of arranging for
the twenty-eighth session of the Committee to be held at
Manila immediately prior to the holding of the Second World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.

90th plenary meeting
3 December I 982

37/47.

Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the Convention,
Convinced that the Declaration and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, 27 as well as the programme of
activities to be undertaken during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
34/24 of 15 November 1979, and their full implementation
will contribute to the final eradication of apartheid and all
other forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and is a gross violation of human
rights and a crime against humanity. seriously threatening
international peace and security,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued policy of
apartheid, repression and "bantustanization" and its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, thereby perpetuating
on Namibian territory its odious policy of apartheid, racial
discrimination and fragmentation,
Gravely concerned over the widespread torture and illtreatment of political prisoners and trade unionists detained
by the racist regime of South Africa, leading to the death
in detention of many prisoners, including Neil Aggett, Tshifiwa Muofhe and Ernest Moabi Dipale,
Deeply concerned about South Africa's repeated acts of
aggression against sovereign African States, which constitute a manifest breach of international peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain States
and transnational corporations with the racist regime of South
Africa in the political, economic, military and other fields
as an encouragement to the intensification of its odious
policy of apartheid,
Underlining that the strengthening of the existing mandatory arms embargo and the application of comprehensive
mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the

Ibid .. chap. VI.
Ibid., chap. IX.
,
.
27
Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 Au!/USI /978 (United Nations publication,
25

26

Sales No. E.79.XIV.2). chap. ll.

181

Charter of the United Nations are vital in order to compel
the racist regime of South Africa to abandon its policy of

apartheid,
Recalling its resolutions 36/172 A to P of 17 December
1981 , in particular resolution 36/ 172 B in which it proclaimed the year 1982 International Year of Mobilization
for Sanctions against South Africa,

Stressing the need to disseminate on a wider basis more
information on the crimes committed by the racist regime
of South Africa, taking into consideration the recommendation contained in the documents adopted by the International Seminar on Publicity and the Role of Mass Media in
the International Mobilization against Apartheid, held at
Berlin, German Democratic Republic, from 31 August to
2 September 1981 , 28
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism
and colonialism and for the effective implementation of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence demands more than ever all necessary support by the international community and, in particular, further action by the
Security Council,
Commending the work of the Preparatory Sub-Committee
for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and the recommendations contained
in its report to the Economic and Social Council, 29
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis and the
implementation of its provisions without any delay are necessary for its effectiveness and would be a useful contribution towards achieving the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 30
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention that
have submitted their reports under article VII thereof, in
particular those that have presented their second reports,
and appeals to those States parties that have not yet done
so to submit their reports as soon as possible;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay;
4. Appreciates the constructive role played by the Group
of Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established
in accordance with article IX of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, in analysing the periodic reports of States and in publicizing the experience gained in the international struggle
against the crime of apartheid;
5. Requests States parties to the Convention to take fully
into account the guidelines prepared by the Group ofThree;' 1
6. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention to
implement fully article IV thereof by adopting legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring to
trial and punish. in accordance with their jurisdiction, persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts enumerated in
article II of the Convention;
7. Again calls upon all States parties to the Convention
and the competent United Nations organs to consider the
conclusions and recommendations of the Group of Three
28

A/36/496-S/14686, annexes 1-111.

'° E/1982/26.
10
11

A/37/149 and Corr. I
E/CN .411286, annex

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

182

contained in its reports 32 and to submit their views and
comments to the Secretary-General;
8. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to undertake the functions set out in article X of the
Convention and invites the Commission to intensify, in cooperation with the Special Committee against Apartheid, its
efforts to compile periodically the progressive list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of
States deemed responsible for crimes enumerated in article
II of the Convention, as well as of those against whom or
which legal proceedings have been undertaken;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take
into account General Assembly resolutions 33/23 of 29 November 1978 and 35/32 of 14 November 1980, as well as
relevant documents of the Commission and its subsidiary
organs reaffirming, inter alia, that States giving assistance
to the racist regime of South Africa become accomplices in
the inhuman practices of racial discrimination and apartheid;
10. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention and
competent United Nations organs to continue to provide the
Commission on Human Rights, through the Secretary-General, with information relevant to the periodic compilation
of the above-mentioned list, as well as with information
concerning the obstacles that prevent the effective suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to
the attention of the public by all means of mass
communication;
12. Invites the Special Committee against Apartheid and
the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat to publicize
the above-mentioned list and related particulars as widely
as possible;
13. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and international and national non-governmental organizations to step up their activities in enhancing
public awareness through denouncing the crimes committed
by the racist regime of South Africa;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the
Convention;
15. Calls upon all States to participate actively in the
Second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, to be held in 1983, and to contribute to
achieving effective results at that Conference;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380
(XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning
the implementation of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/48.

International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/151 of 17 December 1979
and 35/126 of 11 December 1980, by which it decided to
designate and observe 1985 as International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
32

IV.

Recalling also its resolution 36/28 of 13 November 1981,
by which it endorsed the Specific Programme of Measures
and Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the
International Youth Year, 33
Recalling further its decision 35/318 of 11 December
1980 on the appointment of the members of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year,
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct participation of youth in shaping the future of mankind and the
valuable contribution that youth can make in the implementation of the new international economic order based
on equity and justice,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth the
ideals of peace, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the objectives
of progress and development,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the energies,
enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to the tasks of
nation-building, the struggle for self-determination and national independence, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and against foreign domination and occupation, for the economic, social and cultural advancement of
peoples, the implementation of the new international economic order, the preservation of world peace and the promotion of international co-operation and understanding,
Emphasizing again that the United Nations should give
more attention to the role of young people in the world of
today and to their demands for the world of tomorrow,
Recalling the topicality of assessing the needs and aspirations of youth, and reaffirming the importance of current
and projected United Nations activities designed to increase
the opportunities for young people and for their active participation in national development activities,
Believing that it is urgently desirable to consolidate the
efforts of all States in carrying out specific programmes
concerning youth and to improve the activities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies in the field of youth,
including youth exchanges in the cultural, sporting and other
fields,
Aware of the valuable contribution which the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
is making to the promotion of international co-operation in
the field of youth,
Reaffirming the necessity of better co-ordination of efforts
in dealing with specific problems confronting young people
and in examining the manner in which those problems are
being treated by the specialized agencies and by various
United Nations bodies,
Convinced that the preparation for and observance in 1985
of the International Youth Year with the motto "Participation, Development, Peace'' will offer a useful and significant opportunity for drawing attention to the situation
and specific needs and aspirations of youth, for increasing
co-operation at all levels in dealing with youth issues, for
undertaking concerted action programmes in favour of youth
and for involving young people in the study and resolution
of major national, regional and international problems,
Confident that the International Youth Year will serve to
mobilize efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels in order to promote the best educational,
professional and living conditions for young people, to ensure their active participation in the overall development of
society and to encourage the preparation of new national
and local policies and programmes in accordance with each
country's experience, conditions and priorities,

E/CN.4/1358. sect. IV; E/CN.411417, sect. IV; E/CN.4/1507, sect.
" A/36/2 I 5, annex, sect. IV. decision I (I).
