UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/34
8 August 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3687th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 August 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina annexed to the letter from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Council of 9 July 1996 (S/1996/542).
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the conclusions
reached at the Peace Implementation Council in Florence, Italy, on
13-14 June 1996 (S/1996/446). It stresses the importance of the
forthcoming elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to be carried out in
accordance with the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement,
S/1995/999, annex), which will allow for the establishment of the common
institutions and which will be an important milestone for normalization in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It calls upon the parties to ensure the prompt
functioning of these institutions after the elections. It supports the
preparatory work done in this regard.
"The Security Council expects the parties to increase their efforts
towards the maintenance and further enhancement of conditions necessary to
ensure democratic elections, as provided for in Article I of Annex 3 of the
Peace Agreement, and to abide fully by the results of those elections. In
that context, the Council stresses the importance of the agreement reached
by the Bosniac and Bosnian Croat leaderships in Mostar and facilitated by
the European Union Administration of Mostar (EUAM) that has at last secured
Bosnian Croat participation in a unified city administration in Mostar on
the basis of the election results of 30 June 1996. The Council expects the
Bosniac and Bosnian Croat leaderships in Mostar to implement this agreement
fully and without delay, and stresses that failure to do so would seriously
undermine crucial efforts to ensure lasting peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It expresses its full support for the international

96-20194 (E)

080896

/...

S/PRST/1996/34
English
Page 2

organizations which are currently working in Mostar, and in particular for
the EUAM, and calls on both leaderships to cooperate fully with the EUAM.
It calls on the Government of the Republic of Croatia, which bears a
special responsibility in this context, to continue to use its influence on
the Bosnian Croat leadership to ensure full compliance with its
obligations. The Council will continue to follow closely the situation in
Mostar.
"The Security Council underlines that the continued lack of progress
in transferring authority and resources to the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a potential danger for the peace implementation process.
The Council calls upon the Federation partners to accelerate their efforts
for the establishment of a fully functioning Federation, which is an
essential prerequisite for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council notes with particular concern the conclusions of
the report of the High Representative on the implementation of the human
rights provisions of the Peace Agreement that the parties are not
implementing their commitments in respect of human rights, and that this
failure is impeding the return of refugees. It condemns all acts of ethnic
harassment. It calls upon the parties to then Peace Agreement to take
immediately the measures identified in the report to stop the trend of
ethnic separation in the country and in its capital, Sarajevo, and to
preserve their multi-cultural and multi-ethnic heritage. The Council
deeply regrets the undue delay in implementing measures regarding,
inter alia, the development or creation of new independent media and the
preservation of property rights, and calls upon each party to implement
them immediately. The Council is ready to consider further reports by the
Office of the High Representative on all aspects of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement, including those mentioned above.
"The Security Council stresses that, under the Peace Agreement,
persons indicted by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
who have failed to comply with an order to appear before the Tribunal may
not stand as a candidate or hold any appointive, elective or other public
office in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any continued holding
of such an office is unacceptable. In this context the Council notes the
fact that, as a first step, Radovan Karadzic, after officially handing over
his executive powers in Republika Srpska on 30 June 1996, agreed on
19 July 1996 to cease definitively all political and official activities,
thus facilitating the electoral process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Council expects this undertaking to be implemented fully and in good faith,
and will closely monitor further developments.
"The Security Council stresses that all States and concerned parties
have an obligation, in accordance with resolution 827 (1993) of
25 May 1993, other relevant resolutions and the Peace Agreement, to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal and to comply without
exception with requests for assistance or orders issued by a trial chamber.
The Council has considered the letter from the President of the
International Tribunal of 11 July 1996 (S/1996/556), which referred to the
conclusion of the Trial Chamber of the International Tribunal regarding the
/...

S/PRST/1996/34
English
Page 3

failure to execute the warrants of arrest issued against Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic due to the refusal of the Republika Srpska and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Tribunal. It condemns this
failure to execute these arrest warrants. The Council notes the recent
visit by the delegation from the Republika Srpska to the International
Tribunal in The Hague for the purpose of discussing all aspects of
cooperation with the Tribunal, and expects that cooperation with the
Tribunal to bring to justice all persons indicted will be realized. The
Council condemns the failure to date of the Bosnian Croat leadership and
the Croatian Government to comply with the orders of the International
Tribunal regarding several persons indicted for war crimes. The Council
demands the full cooperation of all parties concerned in the immediate
execution of all warrants of arrest and the transfer to the Tribunal of all
persons indicted, in accordance with article 29 of the Statute of the
Tribunal. The Council further condemns any attempt to challenge the
authority of the International Tribunal. The Council underlines the
importance of the obligations undertaken by the parties to the Peace
Agreement to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal and stresses
that failure to arrest and transfer persons indicted by the Tribunal is a
violation of these obligations. The Council stresses that compliance with
the requests and orders of the International Tribunal constitutes an
essential aspect of implementing the Peace Agreement, as provided by
previous resolutions; the Council is ready to consider the application of
economic enforcement measures to ensure compliance by all parties with
their obligations under the Peace Agreement.
"The Security Council condemns any threat or act of violence directed
against international personnel in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular
those directed against personnel belonging to the United Nations
International Police Task Force on the territory of the Republika Srpska.
It condemns also the obstacles put in the way of forensic investigations
carried out by international organizations on the territory of the
Republika Srpska as well as on the territory of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It calls upon all parties to lift those obstacles and to
ensure full freedom of movement and safety for all international personnel.
"The Security Council reiterates its full support for the High
Representative and for all international organizations currently working in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
Council stands ready to consider the need for further action in order to
continue and consolidate the efforts made for full implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The Council welcomes all initiatives which will lead to a
greater degree of stability and cooperation in the whole region."

-----
