94

General Assembly-'Iblrty-fourth Session

gency disaster relief assistance are now inadequate to
respond to requests for assistance from disaster-afflicted
developing countries,
Emphasizing once more the need for all involved in
relief operations to implement measures to expedite international relief assistance and to remove any obstacles
to its delivery,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator23 and the
statement made by the Co-ordinator on 2 November
1979; 24
2. Commends the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator for his continued efforts on behalf of those
who suffer as a result of disasters;
3. Calls upon recipient Governments to co-operate
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator by
informing his Office of the relief contributions offered
and received;
4. Requests the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator to develop further his working arrangements with donors and recipients of relief assistance;
5. Renews its call upon Governments and international organizations to provide the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator with detailed information on
their current and intended relief contributions, in cash
and in kind, in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to ensure the provision of all necessary assistance to the
survivors of disasters;
6. Invites Governments, intergovernmental agencies
and non-governmental organizations concerned with
relief operations to co-operate with the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in his efforts to ensure the
rapid and timely delivery of appropriate international
relief and to consider the adoption of appropriate legislative, administrative or operational measures to remove
obstacles and expedite international relief assistance to
the survivors of disasters;
7. Welcomes the decision taken by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
at its twenty-sixth session to give consideration to the
inclusion of technical co-operation activities for disaster preparedness and prevention in national and regional programmes; 25
8. Requests that additional funds be provided in the
regular budget for the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator for the biennium 1980-1981
to permit the Co-ordinator to respond to at least twelve
requests for emergency disaster assistance in any one
year, with a normal ceiling of $30,000 per country in
the case of any one disaster;
9. Requests the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to take into account, in its deliberations, matters concerning disaster
relief, preparedness and prevention;
10. Urges all Governments to contribute to the
trust fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, taking into particular consideration the financial problems of the subaccount for emergency assistance as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
28

A/34/190.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 1-13.
25
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 10 (E/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap. XXI, sect.
D, decision 79/17.
24

34 / 56.

Measures to be taken in connexion with the
earthquake in Montenegro, Yugoslavia

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret the tragic consequences of
the severe earthquake which struck the Montenegrin
sea-coast of Yugoslavia, causing the loss of many human lives and enormous destruction and leaving more
than 100,000 of the inhabitants homeless,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1979 /58 of 3 August 1979,
Noting the energetic and urgent measures taken by
the people and Government of Yugoslavia to provide
immediate relief for the victims of the earthquake and
to restore normal living conditions for the people,
Noting also the long-term needs for the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of the affected area and the measures
taken in this regard by the Government of Yugoslavia,
Taking note with appreciation of the assistance rendered, in the true spirit of international solidarity, to the
people of Montenegro by many nations, the organizations of the United Nations system and various nongovernmental organizations, and the role played by the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Noting, in particular, the assistance rendered by the
United Nations Development Programme and the loan
extended by the World Bank for the reconstruction of
the stricken area,
1. Expresses its profound sympathy to the people of
Montenegro and to the Government of Yugoslavia in
this disaster;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/58, by which
all States were invited to consider what further assistance
they might be in a position to offer to Montenegro, and
appeals to them to assist in the reconstruction of the
stricken area;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and of the funds and
programmes of the United Nations system to bear in
mind the long-term needs for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the area affected by the earthquake when
deciding on services to be provided to Member States
in the light of funds available.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
34/57.

Examination of long-term trends in economic
development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3508 (XXX) of 15 December
1975 on the examination of long-term trends in the
economic development of the regions of the world,
which initiated activities in that field in the United Nations system, and its resolution 32/57 of 8 December
1977, as well as Economic and Social Council resolution 2090 (LXIII) of 25 July 1977,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VIO of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
