S/PRST/2002/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4539th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 May 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the elections held in Sierra Leone on 14
May 2002. It congratulates the people of Sierra Leone on the peaceful and
orderly way in which the elections were held. It commends the National
Electoral Commission and all those responsible for the successful management
of the elections, and commends UNAMSIL for their invaluable supporting
role. The Council notes that the various electoral observation groups were
impressed by the Sierra Leonean people’s commitment to democracy and their
determination to vote. The Council calls on all political parties and their
supporters to work together to strengthen democracy and thereby assure
continuing peace.
“The Security Council considers the elections an important milestone on
the road to peace and security in Sierra Leone and the Mano River region. The
next challenge for Sierra Leone and the international community is the further
consolidation of peace. There is much still to do, including the extension of
public services to make real the restoration of government authority
throughout the country, the further enhancement of the operational
effectiveness of the security sector, and the effective reintegration of all excombatants. A sustained effort from the international community will be
needed to achieve our shared objective of sustainable peace and security,
which must be the basis for Sierra Leone’s economic regeneration and future
development. The Council urges all donors to contribute generously towards
these ends, including by providing urgently needed funds to the Special Court
and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
“The Security Council will continue to pay close attention to
developments in Sierra Leone and the Mano River region. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to monitor the situation there closely and to
keep the Council informed of any significant developments.”

02-39547 (E)

220502

*0239547*
