S/2014/72

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 30 January 2014 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to Mali from 31 January to 3 February 2014. The mission
will be led by Ambassador Gérard Araud of France and Minister Counsellor Banté
Mangaral of Chad. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of
reference of the mission, which are annexed hereto.
The composition of the mission is as follows:
Second Secretary Marcos Stancanelli (Argentina)
Ambassador Gary Francis Quinlan (Australia)
Minister Counsellor Banté Mangaral (Chad)
Counsellor Hugo Ignacio Llanos Mardones (Chile)
Ambassador Gérard Araud (France)
Counsellor Shen Bo (China)
Minister Mahmoud Hmoud (Jordan)
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė (Lithuania)
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas (Luxembourg)
Ambassador Usman Sarki (Nigeria)
Ambassador Oh Joon (Republic of Korea)
Minister Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana (Rwanda)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
President of the Security Council
14-22295 (E) 030214

*1422295*

S/2014/72

Annex
Security Council mission to Mali: terms of reference
1.
To welcome the full restoration of democratic governance and constitutional
order in Mali, following the successful conduct, with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), of
peaceful and transparent presidential and legislative elections in 2013; to consult
with the newly-appointed and elected authorities.
2.
To welcome the initial efforts of the Government of Mali to launch a series of
national consultative events on the situation in the north of Mali and to encourage
further steps towards consolidating stability, advancing national reconciliation,
fostering social cohesion and addressing the underlying causes of recurrent crises
which have affected Mali; to assess progress on conflict mitigation and prevention
activities at the national and local levels, including through local partners, and the
national dialogue and reconciliation process, including through the participation of
civil society.
3.
To reiterate the urgent call of the Security Council for an inclusive and
credible negotiation process open to all communities of the north of Mali, with the
goal of securing a durable political resolution to the crisis and long-term peace and
stability throughout the country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Malian State, as called for in the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement of 18 June 2013.
4.
To underscore the call of the Security Council for all the signatories of the
Preliminary Agreement and those armed groups in the north of Mali that have cut
off all ties with terrorist organizations and committed unconditionally to the
Agreement to swiftly and fully implement its provisions, including the cantonment
of armed groups, the progressive re-establishment of State administration
throughout the country and the launching of inclusive and credible peace talks.
5.
To reiterate the full support of the Security Council for the facilitation of an
inclusive process through the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali, in close coordination with the international community,
including the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and
the European Union in accordance with paragraph 4 of Council resolution 2100
(2013), towards the restoration of peace and security throughout the national
territory of Mali, in the context of a comprehensive agreement ending the crisis.
6.
To reiterate the call of the Security Council for all relevant Malian parties to
agree without any delay on active measures to further the cantonment of armed
groups as an essential step leading to an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement; to assess
how MINUSMA can further support the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
7.
To reaffirm the support of the Security Council to MINUSMA and to receive a
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2100 (2013), in particular the
operational deployment of MINUSMA to stabilize key population centres,
especially in the north of Mali, and to support the re-establishment of State authority
throughout the country and the promotion of the rule of law and protection of
human rights.

2/4

14-22295

S/2014/72

8.
To reiterate the concern of the Security Council about the volatile security
situation and to receive a briefing on the security situation, particularly in the north
of Mali, and the threat posed to regional stability by terrorist groups; to get updates
on the implementation of the MINUSMA mandate, in support of the Government of
Mali, of protecting civilians and stabilizing the key population centres, especially in
the north of Mali, and, in this context, deterring threats and taking active steps to
prevent the return of armed elements to those areas, and of contributing to the
creation of a secure environment for the safe, civilian-led delivery of humanitarian
assistance, in accordance with the United Nations guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance; to receive updates on the cooperation of all parties with
MINUSMA, with a view to ensuring the Mission’s safety and security; to receive a
briefing on the implementation of the mandate of the French forces to support
MINUSMA when under imminent and serious threat.
9.
To reiterate the call of the Security Council for maintaining Malian civilian
control and oversight of the Malian Defense and Security Forces as a key element of
the overall reform of the security sector and, in this regard, to encourage the
Government of Mali to continue to make progress and to assess the contribution of
MINUSMA and other international donors, including the European Union through
the Common European Security and Defence Policy and the European Union
training mission in Mali.
10. To emphasize the continuing concerns of the Security Council about the
protection of civilians, the importance of the fight against impunity and the need to
address the issue of sexual violence and strengthen child protection; to advocate
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, to encourage the
Government of Mali to ensure that those responsible for serious violations and
abuses of human rights are swiftly brought to justice and to continue to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court.
11. To emphasize that the perpetrators of sexual violence must be held accountable
and to stress the need to ensure the full, equal and effective participation of women
at an early stage of the stabilization phase, including in the security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, as well as in the
national political dialogue and electoral processes, bearing in mind Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000); to further emphasize that perpetrators of violations and
abuses against children must be held accountable and to ensure that specific
attention is given to the protection of children in security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
12. To underscore the need for the Government of Mali to continue to address the
humanitarian challenges, including the food crisis, and to achieve lasting solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons, including by creating conditions
conducive to their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return.
13. To reiterate the call of the Security Council for all relevant United Nations
agencies and the international community to strengthen their support for the efforts
of the Government to provide assistance to the affected populations, particularly
women and children, and to support the provision of basic services to the
population, in particular in the north of Mali; to encourage the international
community to coordinate actions for addressing the immediate and long-term needs
of the population of Mali, including in the context of the high-level international
donors conference held in Brussels on 5 February to support the development of

14-22295

3/4

S/2014/72

Mali, in consultation with the Government; to reiterate the call of the Council for
the international community to address the gap in funding of the consolidated
humanitarian appeal.
14. To commend the Government of Mali for its chairmanship, for the coming two
years, of the coordination platform, as an outcome of the ministerial meeting on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, held in Bamako on 5 November
2013; to reiterate the call of the Security Council on States of the Sahel, West Africa
and the Maghreb to enhance interregional cooperation in order to develop inclusive
and effective strategies to address the transnational challenges in the Sahel region,
including to combat terrorist activities and transnational organized crime in the
region; to reaffirm the commitment of the Council to addressing the complex
security and political situation in the Sahel region, which is interrelated with
humanitarian and developmental issues.

4/4

14-22295
