V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the heads of other relevant agencies to continue their efforts to assist developing countries in establishing centres for the transfer and
development of technology at the national and regional
levels and in providing extension services, and, in this
context, to bear in mind the possibilities of the network
concept;
8. Endorses Industrial Development Board decision V (XI) regarding the pilot operation of an industrial and technological information bank;
9. Recommends that work on the network, as well
as on the bank, should take into account their interrelationship and also the preparations for the United
Nations Conference on Science and Technology for
Development;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a progress report
on the work requested in the present resolution, with
a view to submitting a final report to the Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/179.

Role of the public sector in promoting
the economic development of develop•
ing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3488 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which, inter alia, it recognized the
important and vital role the public sector in developing
countries could play in achieving the over-all economic
and social development goals in accordance with their
national development plans,
Recognizing the necessary and important role of the
public sector, including public administration, finance
and management, in enhancing national capacities for
the full and effective realization of national development
objectives,
Recalling its resolution 2845 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1977 (LIX) of 30 July 1975 and 2018 (LXI) of
3 August 1976 on public administration and finance
for development,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development
and Co-operation, 133 adopted by the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization at its Second General Conference, held at Lima from 12 to 26 March
1975, which, inter alia, recognized the importance of
133 See

A/10112, chap. IV.

111

ensuring an adequate role for the public sector in the
expansion of the industrial development of developing
countries,
Recalling the pertinent provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions which reaffirm the right of every
State to exercise full and permanent sovereignty over
its natural resources for the benefit of its people,
Bearing in mind that every State has the sovereign
and inalienable right to choose its economic and social
system in accordance with the will of its people, without outside interference,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the role of the public sector in promoting the economic development of developing countries, 134 prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3488 (XXX);
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council decision 274 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977, in which the
Council recommended to the General Assembly, inter
a/ia, the continued study of the subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue
studying the role of the public sector in promoting the
economic development of developing countries, as provided for in Economic and Social Council decision 274
(LXIII), through the fullest utilization of existing possibilities and resources and existing Secretariat departments;
4. Recommends that the competent United Nations
organs should take into account the studies on the role
of the public sector in promoting the economic development of developing countries in formulating a new
international development strategy;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, in his study on
the role of the public sector in the socio-economic development of developing countries, to take into account
especially the following aspects:
(a) Capital formation and full realization by developing countries of their natural resources for the
benefit of their entire population;
( b) Role of the public sector in implementing the
long-term strategy of industrialization;
( c)
Role of the public sector in promoting agricultural production;
(d) Role of the public sector in developing an
effective national potential in research and development
in the fields of science and technology;
( e) Attainment of the aims of a unified approach
to economic and social development, including the
achievement of an equitable distribution of income and
wealth in the nation;
(f) Creation of broader employment opportunities
and reduction of unemployment;
(g) Role of the public sector in the expansion of
the share of developing countries in international trade,
including the improvement of their export and import
capacity and balance of payments;
(h)
Role of the public sector in adjusting to changing economic circumstances and undertaking necessary
structural and other adjustments;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to identify, based
on national requirements, international measures re1:a E/5985 and Corr. I.

112

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

quired to support national public administration, finance
and management for the development of the developing
countries;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a progress report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
and thirty-fourth sessions through the Economic and
Social Council at its sixty-fifth and sixty-seventh sessions, respectively;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine the progress reports and to make appropriate
recommendations on this subject to the General Assembly.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/180.

Economic co-operation
oping countries

among

devel-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3177 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973, 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
3442 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/119 of
16 December 1976 and resolution 92 (IV) of 30 May
1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development135 relating to measures of support by developed countries and international organizations for
the programme of economic co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-Vl) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-Vll) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting the programme of economic co-operation
among developing countries, adopted at the Third
Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventy-seven, held
at Manila from 26 January to 7 February 1976,136
Noting also the decisions taken by the non-aligned
countries on economic co-operation among developing
countries and, in particular, the Action Programme for
Economic Co-operation and other relevant resolutions
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, 137
Noting further the measures set out in the report of
the Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to
22 September 1976,138
. Noting !hat economic co-operation among developmg countries, based on the concept of individual and
collective self-reliance, has been identified by them as
a major strategy to promote their development and as
an important means of consolidating their unity and
solidarity,
1 3 5 See

Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.ll.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
1 3 6 /bid., annex V, annex I, resolution 1.
13 7 See A/31/197, annexes III and IV.
ms See A/C.2/31 /7, part one.

Recognizing that, in the context of international
economic co-operation, the achievement of the goal of
greater co-operation among the developing countries is
an important contribution to the establishment of the
new international economic order,
Stressing that fundamental structural changes in existing international economic relations on the basis of
equity and justice are essential for an enduring solution
to the world economic problems and the promotion of
international peace and security,
Reaffirming that efforts by the developing countries
to promote co-operation among themselves do not diminish the responsibilities of all other countries to establish just and equitable economic relations between
them and the developing countries and to contribute
to the development of the developing countries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on economic co-operation among developing countries; 139
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure,
through the appropriate machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, effective co-ordination of activities within the United Nations system in
support of measures of economic co-operation among
developing countries, as identified in the relevant decisions of the United Nations on the subject, including
those based on the Programme of Action adopted at
the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventyseven, 140 the Action Programme for Economic Cooperation adopted at the Fifth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, and
the report of the Conference on Economic Co-operation
among Developing Countries;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the medium-term plan of the United
Nations an intersectoral presentation of the activities
envisaged to implement the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations on economic co-operation among developing countries and to secure the same kind of intersectoral presentation on a system-wide basis;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance
with their established procedures and practices, to support measures of economic co-operation among developing countries, including, as and when requested, the
continued provision of the necessary secretariat support services and other suitable arrangements to facilitate the holding of meetings by the developing countries
in pursuance of the objectives of economic co-operation
among developing countries;
5. Takes note of Trade and Development Board
decision 161 (XVU) of 2 September 1977, 141 by which
the Board adopted the terms of reference for the Committee on Economic Co-operation among Developing
Countries and endorsed the work programme of the
Committee;
6. Urges developed countries to provide appropriate support, as and when requested by the developing
rnn A/32/312 and Add. I.
Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), annex V, part two.
141 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysccmzd Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/32/15). vol. II, part
one, annex I.
140 See
