S/2003/951

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 6 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the text of the Quartet statement that was
issued following the meeting of the Quartet principals — representing the United
States of America, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the United
Nations — at United Nations Headquarters on 26 September 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-54561 (E)

081003

*
0
3
5
4
5
6
1
*

S/2003/951

Annex
Quartet statement
New York, 26 September 2003
Representatives of the Quartet — United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov, Italian Foreign Minister Franco
Frattini, United States Secretary of State Colin Powell, High Representative for
European Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana and European
Commissioner for External Affairs Chris Patten — met today in New York.
The Quartet members view with great concern the situation in Israel, the West
Bank and Gaza, which has stalled implementation of the road map. The Quartet
reminds both parties of the need to take into account long-term consequences of
their actions, and the obligation for both parties to make rapid progress towards full
implementation of the road map for peace. They reaffirm their commitment to
President Bush’s vision — shared by Russia, the European Union and the United
Nations — of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security; and call on both Israelis and Palestinians to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities under the road map and the commitments both sides made to
President Bush at the Red Sea summit meeting in Aqaba.
The Quartet members remind all sides that they have obligations and
responsibilities to each other that must be performed. Each party must do more to
immediately and simultaneously address the core concerns of the other, as described
in the road map. The Quartet members reaffirm their commitment to the road map
and to resumed progress by the parties towards its rapid implementation.
They condemn the vicious terror attacks of August and September carried out
by Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade. They again affirm that
such actions are morally indefensible and do not serve the interests of the
Palestinian people. They call on Palestinians to take immediate, decisive steps
against individuals and groups conducting and planning violent attacks. Such steps
should be accompanied by Israeli supportive measures, including resumption of full
security cooperation. They further call on all States to end the harbouring and
support, including fund-raising and financial assistance, of any groups and
individuals that use terror and violence to advance their goals.
The Quartet members affirm that the Palestinian Authority security services
must be consolidated under the clear control of an empowered Prime Minister and
Interior Minister and must be the sole armed authority in the West Bank and Gaza.
Noting that the first Palestinian Prime Minister has resigned his post, they urge that
the new Palestinian Prime Minister form a cabinet as soon as possible, and ask that
Cabinet to recommit itself to the pledges made in the road map and at Aqaba. The
Palestinian Authority must ensure that a “rebuilt and refocused Palestinian Authority
security apparatus begins sustained, targeted, and effective operations aimed at
confronting all those engaged in terror and dismantlement of terrorist capabilities
and infrastructure”.
The Quartet members recognize Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence in the
face of terrorist attacks against its citizens. In this context and in the context of
international humanitarian law, they call on the Government of Israel to exert

2

S/2003/951

maximum efforts to avoid civilian casualties. The Government of Israel must “take
no action undermining trust, including deportations, confiscation and/or demolition
of Palestinian homes and property, destruction of Palestinian institutions and
infrastructure; and other measures specified in the Tenet Work Plan”. The Quartet
members call on the Government of Israel to take immediate steps to ease the
humanitarian and economic plight of the Palestinian people, including through
easing the movement of people and goods and ensuring access to international
humanitarian organizations. The Quartet members reaffirm that, in accordance with
the road map, settlement activity must stop, and note with great concern the actual
and proposed route of Israel’s West Bank fence, particularly as it results in the
confiscation of Palestinian land, cuts off the movement of people and goods and
undermines Palestinians’ trust in the road map process, as it appears to prejudge
final borders of a future Palestinian State.
The Quartet calls upon the international and regional community to continue to
provide well-coordinated assistance to the Palestinian Authority for the
implementation of reforms and institution-building and to consider steps that could
be taken with respect to the socio-economic development of the region. The Quartet
members will continue to follow closely the implementation by the parties of their
obligations. The Quartet members will coordinate their efforts through regular
meetings of Quartet representatives, as well as through discussion among the
Quartet principals. The principals will next meet prior to the end of the year.
The Quartet members look forward to continuing to work closely together, as
well as in association with regional parties, to help achieve progress, both between
Israelis and Palestinians and towards the goal of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

3
