76

General A11embly-SeYenteenth Se11ion

Confident that an appropriate way of celebrating the
twentieth anniversary of the United Nations is through
a year of increased international co-operation and joint
efforts and undertakings,
Convinced that a designated period may serve both
to direct attention to the common interests of mankind
and to accelerate the joint efforts being undertaken to
further them,
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to nominate a Preparatory Committee of up to twelve
Member States to meet at United Nations Headquarters;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee to consider
the desirability of designating 1965, the twentieth year
of the United Nations, as International Co-operation
Year, and to report to the General Assembly at its
eighteenth session on the feasibility and financial implications of this proposal;
3. Requests the Preparatory Committee to report
to the General Assembly at its eighteenth session on
measures and activities that might be undertaken by
Member States and by and through specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, in
pursuance of the present resolution and in furtherance
of its objectives;
4. Invites non-governmental organizations having
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and any other appropriate
organizations in Member States, to begin making plans
for special efforts and projects for the International
Co-operation Year, and to render all assistance to the
Preparatory Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Preparatory Committee with all the necessary facilities
for the accomplishment of its tasks.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962. ~·

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of paragraph 1 of the above resolution, appointed the fallowing members
of the Preparatory, Committee on the International Co-operation
Year: CANADA, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, CEYLON, CYPRUS,
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FINLA.'.'!D, INDIA, !RE.LAND, p ARAGUAY, PERU,
THAILAND and UNITED ARAB REPUBLic,26

1845 (XVII). Improvement of the methods of
work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having established on 30 October 1962 an Ad Hoe
Committee on the Improvement of the Methods of
Work of the General Assembly, 27
Having received from the Ad H oc Committee a report28 in which the Committee stated that it would
not submit a final report to the General Assembly at
its present session,
1. Decides to continue the Ad H oc Committee on
the Improvement of the Methods of Work of the General Assembly, with its present membership and terms
of reference, and requests the Committee to transmit
to the Secretary-General by 31 May 1963 a report,
with recommendations or suggestions, for circulation
to Member States;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its eighteenth session an item entitled "Report of the
Ad H oc Committee on the Improvement of the
Methods of Work of the General Assembly", and
recommends that priority should be given to the consideration of this item.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
2 6 See A/5399.

27 See note on item 86 below.
2 B Official

Records of the General Assembly, Sevente~th
Session, Annexes, agenda item 86, document A/5370.

•••
Notes
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article
12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations (item 7)
At its 1129th plenary meeting, on 24 September
1962, the General Assembly took note of the communication dated 17 September 1962 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly.21l
Appointment of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Improvement of the Methods of Work of the
General Assembly (item 86) 30
At its 1162nd plenary meeting, on 30 October 1962,
the General Assembly decided to refer this item to
an ad hoe committee to be constituted as follows : the
thirteen Vice-Presidents of the seventeenth session
(the Chairmen of the delegations of AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, CHINA, COLOMBIA, FRANCE, GUINEA, HAITI,
JORDAN, MADAGASCAR, ROMANIA, UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA) ; the three past Presidents of the Asn Ibid., agenda item 7, document A/5224.
ao See resolution 1845 (XVII).

sembly who were members of their delegations to the
seventeenth session (Mr. Padilla Nervo (MEXICO),
Mr. Belaunde (PERU) and Mr. Boland (IRELAND) ;
the President of the seventeenth session, Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan (PAKISTAN); and the Chairman
of the delegation of TUNISIA.
Confirmation of the appointment of the Managing Director of the Special Fund ( item 95)
At its 1183rd plenary meeting, on 5 December 1962,
the General Assembly confirmed the reappointment of
Mr. Paul G. Hoffman as Managing Director of the
Special Fund for a period of four years beginning on
1 January 1963.
Report of the Economic and Social Council ( chapters VII (sections I to III) and X to XIII)
(item 12)
At its 1190th plenary meeting, on 8 December 1962,
the General Assembly took note of chapters VII (sections I to III) and X to XIII of the report of the
Economic and Social Council. 81
3 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sroenteenth
Session, Supplement ,\'o. 3 (A/5203).
