42

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

Expresses its fincere appreciation to Mr. Schnyder
for his ~ork durmg the years he has served as United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2057 (XX). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57 (I) of 11 December 1946,
417 (V) of 1 December 1950, 802 (VIII) of 6 October
1953, 1773 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 1919
(XVIII) of 5 December 1963,
l. Applauds the award of the Nobel Peace Prize for
1965 to the United Nations Children's Fund which
~einforces understanding of the importance fa'r peace
m the world of the welfare and rearing of children in a
spirit of friendship among nations;
2. Endorses the policy of the United Nations
~hildren's Fund in supporting the importance of view~ng th~ needs of the child as a whole, and of making,
m national programmes for economic and social development, adequate provision for children and young
people and thereby preparing them for their future
participation in their country's development;
3. N ates with approval the programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund which now include
assistance to Governments in the fields of maternal and
child health, disease control, nutrition, social welfare,
education and vocational training, and which are carried
out in close co-operation with the technical agencits
concerned in the United Nations family;
4. Welcomes the emphasis of the United Nations
Children's Fund on assistance to young children of
pre-school age, and on the improvement and extension
of elementary education;
5. N ates with satisfaction the decision of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund that
in seeking the most effective uses of Fund aid stress
sho~ld continue to be placed on developing the basic
s:rv1ces which _bene~t children, on priority programmes
dir~cted at their mam problems and on the training of
national personnel as an essential element of programmes, and the decision that full advantage should
be taken of the relevant experience of all countries in
seeking ways of meeting the problems of children and
youth ;17
6. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Children's Fund to hold the next regular session of its
Executive Board in Africa in May 1966 ;18
. 7._ Urge~ Governments an_d private groups to intensify their efforts substantially to increase the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund.
1397th plenary meeting.
16 December 1965.
2058 (XX). Town twinning as a mean@ of international co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1028 (XXXVII) of 13 August 1964,
Considering that experience in recent years has
shown the great value of town twinning practised
without any discrimination,
'
17 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (E/4083/Rev.l)'.

para. 74.

18 Ibid.,

para. 237.

C: onsidering that to:Vn twinning promotes the
achievement of the great ideals enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Constitution of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Considering that the first African Conference of
World-wide Inter-Community Co-operation, held at
Dakar from 1 to 3 April 1964, laid special emphasis on
"twinning co-operation",
l. Considers town twinning to be one of the means
of co-operation which the United Nations should encourage, both in connexion with the International Cooperation Year and on a permanent basis;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
collaboration with the appropriate non-governmental
organizations in consultative status and taking into
consideration the decisions of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on town
twinning, to prepare a programme of measures through
which the United Nations and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization might
take concrete steps to encourage further the achievement of the largest possible number of twinned towns ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit to the General Assembly at its twentv-second
session a report on the programmes of action that have
been taken to comply with the present resolution ;
. 4. Requests the Secretary-General to take, through
his offices, all suitable measures to encourage this form
of co-operation.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2059 (XX). United Nations assistance for the
advancement of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
771 H. (XXX) of 25 Juiy 1960 and General Assembly
reso\ut10n J509 (XV) of 12 December 1960 concerning
spe~ial ass1sta1;ce by the United Nations and the specialized agencies for the advancement of women in
developing countries,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1777
(XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 1920 (XVIII) of 5
December 1963,
Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution
1?68 A (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the Council took note of the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women on its eighteenth session, 111 which
was held at Teheran from 1 to 20 March 1965,
Recognizing the importance of the work accomplished
by the Commission on the Status of Women
. Recognizing the contribution of the special{zed agencies and the non-governmental organizations in the
matter of improving the status of women,
Belie_ving that the co-ordination and development of
the vanous programmes concerning the status of women
should be implemented through a unified long-term
United Nations programme for the adva~cement of
women,
. Recognizing that it is appropriate to draw the attention ?f ~orld p1;1blic opinion to the imf)ortance of the
contnbut10n which women can make to national development and to the consequent need to solve the
problem of the status of women and their emancipation,
19 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 7 (E/4025).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 E (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council recommended to Member States, and especially
to those making use of technical assistance, that they
give greater priority to projects and programmes directed towards the advancement of women, and invites
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
executive heads of the specialized agencies to encourage
the participation of women in projects submitted by
Member States;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 C (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council emphasized the importance of training appropriate cadres, especially in the developing countries,
in order to enable women to participate fully in the
economic, social, cultural and political life of their
respective countries ;
3. Welcomes the support given by the Economic
and Social Council to the other recommendations made
b¥ the Commission on the Status of Women at its
eighteenth session;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the international non-governmental organizations to continue their
efforts for the improvement of the status of women;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study especially the possibility of expanding the assistance which can be rendered for the advancement of
women in developing countries ;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Commission on the Status of Women to these ends;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly informed on developments in this respect, especially with regard to the possibility of establishing
a unified, long-term United Nations programme for
the advancement of women;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Iran for its generous invitation, which enabled the
Commission on the Status of Women to hold its
eighteenth session at Teheran in conditions that were
particularly favonrnblr for its work.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2060 (XX). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Noting that proposals have been made to hold an
international seminar on apartheid in 1966,
Recalling that these proposals were brought to the
attention of the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-ninth session, 20
Requests the Secretary-General to organize in 1966,
in consultation with the Special Committee on the
Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa and the Commission on Human Rights,
an international seminar on apartheid and authorizes
him to use such funds as may be necessary for the
purpose, making appropriate readjustments within the
budgetary allocations approved for section 14 (Human
rights advisory services), part V (Technical programmes), of the United Nations budget.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentirth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6003), para. 549.

43

2061 (XX). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
ll/ oting that the heavy agenda of the Third Committee
at the twentieth session has not allowed the Committee
to consider rither the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information or the draft Declaration on Freedom of
fnformation which was snhmitted to it by the Economic
and Social Council,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms, to thr promotion of which the Unitrd Nations
is dedicated,
Derides to devote, at its twenty-first session, as much
time as it deems necessary to the consideration of the
ikrn on frerdom of information.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1065.
2062 (XX). Creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the agenda of its twentieth session
included the item entitled "Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissionrr for Human
Rights",
Considering that owing to other priorities the proposal relating to this question could not he considered,
Convinccd that it would be useful to obtain the
opinion of the most appropriate United Nations organ
to dral with the matter.
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit to the Commission on Human Rights the
proposal for the creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for study of
all aspects of thr matter and for report, through the
Council. to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
pertinent documents concerning that proposal to the
Commission on Human Rights.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2080 (XX). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Third Committee, owmg to its
heavy agenda, has not been able to consider the draft
International Cov('.t'lants on Human Rights at the
present session,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1075
(XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 on organizational and
procedural arrangements for the implementation of
conventions and rrcommendations in the field of human
rights,
1. Derides to defer to its twenty-first session the
further consideration of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights ;
2. Invites Governments of Member States to consider the measures of implementation and the final
clauses of the draft International Covenants on Human
Rights prepared by the Commission on Human Rights,
the explanatory paprr preparrd by the Secretary-
