General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

76

activities with a view to determining the appropriateness
of supplementing such law with provisions relating to the
use of nuclear power sources in outer space";
(d) Continue to include in its agenda the item entitled "Other matters";
7. Notes that the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its sixteenth session:
(a) Continued to consider both the current preoperational/ experimental phase of remote sensing as
well as possible future operational satellite remote sensing systems;
(b) Continued to consider the United Nations programme on space applications and matters relating to the
co-ordination of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Continued to examine the physical nature and
technical attributes of the geostationary orbit;
(d) Considered technical aspects of and safety measures relating to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer space and adopted the report of the Working
Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer
Space; 20
(e) Considered questions relating to space transportation systems;
(f) Achieved significant progress, in its capacity as
advisory body to the Preparatory Committee for the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in its detailed consideration of questions relating to the preparation and
organization of the Conference;
8. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific
and Technical Sub-Committee at its seventeenth session should:
(a)
Consider the following priority items:
(i) Questions relating to the United Nations programme on space applications and the coordination of space activities within the United
Nations system;
(ii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the
earth by satellites;
(iii) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(iv) Co-ordinating role of the United Nations in the
use of space science and technology, particularly in the developing countries;
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Space transportation systems and their implications for future activities in space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical attributes of the geostationary orbit;
9. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications for 1980 proposed to the Scientific
and Technical Sub-Committee by the Expert on Space
Applications; 21
10. Approves a continuing sponsorship by the
United Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station in India and the CELP A Mar del
Plata Station in Argentina;
11. Endorses the recommendation that the existing
five regional remote sensing centres in Africa should
receive from the United Nations the technical assistance

and co-operation which could be made available for
such a purpose;
12. Requests the specialized agencies to continue to
provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space with progress reports on their work relating to the
peaceful uses of outer space;
13. Takes note of the report submitted by the World
Meteorological Organization on its tropical cyclone project, 22 in response to General Assembly resolution
33/16, and requests the World Meteorological Organization to continue submitting annual status reports on
the project;
14. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments
which acted as hosts to, offered fellowships for, or otherwise assisted in the holding of, international training
seminars and workshops on space applications, particularly for the benefit of developing countries;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with
the present resolution and previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new
projects in outer space activities and to submit a report
to the Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, including its
views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979

34/67.

Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Recalling that it has been more than a decade since
the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was held at Vienna, in
1968, and that this period has seen rapid progress and
growth in space exploration and the development of
space technology and its applications,
Considering that there is a need to assess these developments, to exchange information and experience on their
present and potential impact and to assess the adequacy
and effectiveness of institutional and co-operative means
of realizing the benefits of space technology,
Recognizing the importance of wider participation of
Member States in the activities of the United Nations in
outer space matters,
A ware of the need to increase the benefits of space
technology and its applications and to contribute to
orderly growth of space activities favourable to the socioeconomic advancement of mankind, in particular of the
peoples of the developing countries,
Taking into account new developments in space science and technology which are being projected and envisaged in the coming decade as well as the new
applications emerging therefrom and their potential
benefits and possible implications for national development and international co-operation,
Conscious of the need further to increase the awareness of the general public with regard to space technology and its applications,
Desiring to stimulate an enhanced co-ordinating role
of the United Nations, which is eminently suited to bring
about increased international co-operation and assistance to the developing countries in the field of exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Recalling its resolution 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
in which it decided to convene a second United Nations

Al

20
AC.105 /238, annex II.
2 1 A/AC.105/233, sect. III.

22

See A/AC.105/245.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Polltlcal Committee

Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and to designate the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space as the Preparatory Committee for the Conference,
Having considered the part of the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space28 concerning
its work in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for
the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee, in its
capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Conference,
has submitted detailed recommendations on the preparation and organization of the Conference,
1. Endorses the detailed recommendations submitted in paragraphs 84 to 115 of its report 28 by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in its
capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Second
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Adopts the provisional agenda for the Conference as set out in paragraph 99 of the report of the
Committee;
3. Endorses in particular:
(a) The recommendation of the Committee that the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should be held in the
latter half of 1982;
(b) The recommendations ,of the Committee concerning the preparation and organization of the Conference, including the secretariat, bureau and form of the
Conference;
(c) The recommendation of the Committee on the
ceiling for the cost of the Conference;
4. Requests the Committee to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a recommendation on
the venue of the Conference;
5. Requests the Committee to continue with its preparatory work for the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make, within
the ceiling for expenditure established for the Conference, the necessary organizational and administrative
arrangements, as set out in the relevant paragraphs of
the report of the Committee.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979

34/68.

Agreement Governing the Activities of States
on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in the field of the exploration and peaceful
uses of outer space, including the moon and other
celestial bodies, and of promoting the rule of law in this
field of human endeavour,
Recalling its resolution 2779 (XXVI) of 29 November 1971, in which it requested the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Legal SubCommittee to consider the question of the elaboration
of a draft international treaty concerning the moon, as
well as its resolutions 2915 (XXVII) of 9 November
1972, 3182 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3234
(XXIX) of 12 November 1974, 3388 (XXX) of 18 No28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20), sect. 11.C.

77

vember 1975, 31/8 of 8 November 1976, 32/196 A of
20 December 1977 and 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
in which it, inter alia, encouraged the elaboration of the
draft treaty relating to the moon,
Recalling, in particular, that in resolution 33/16 it
endorsed the recommendation of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Legal SubCommittee at its eighteenth session should continue as
a matter of priority its efforts to complete the draft treaty
relating to the moon,
Having considered the relevant part of the report of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 24
in particular paragraphs 62, 63 and 65,
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, on the basis of the
deliberations and recommendations of the Legal SubCommittee, has completed the text of the draft Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies,
Having considered the text of the draft Agreement
Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies, 25
1. Commends the Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
the text of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to open the
Agreement for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Agreement.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979
ANNEX
Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies

The States Parties to this Agreement,
Noting the achievements of States in the exploration and use
of the moon and other celestial bodies,
Recognizing that the moon, as a natural satellite of the earth,
has an important role to play in the exploration of outer space,
Determined to promote on the basis of equality the further
development of co-operation among States in the exploration
and use of the moon and other celestial bodies,
Desiring to prevent the moon from becoming an area of international conflict,
Bearing in mind the benefits which may be derived from the
exploitation of the natural resources of the moon and other
celestial bodies,
Recalling the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 26 the Agreement on the
Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space, 27 the Convention on
International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, 28
and the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space, 29
Taking into account the need to define and develop the provisions of these international instruments in relation to the
moon and other celestial bodies, having regard to further progress in the exploration and use of outer space,
Have agreed on the following:
Ibid., sect. 11.A.7.
Ibid., Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20), annex II.
26 Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
2 1 Resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.
28 Resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.
29 Resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex.

24

25
