S/PV.7606

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7606th meeting

Tuesday, 19 January 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cancela. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Gracia Aldaz
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2015/453)
Letter dated 6 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Uruguay to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/22)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01104 (E)
*1601104*

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Seventieth anniversary of the first meeting of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we begin
our consideration of the topic of today’s open debate,
I would like to take a few minutes to commemorate a
very important date, namely, the seventieth anniversary
of the first meeting of the Security Council, which was
held on 17 January 1946.
Days after the holding of the first meeting of the
General Assembly, on 11 January 1946, the Security
Council met to elect its first non-permanent members.
As a result of those elections, Australia, Brazil, Egypt,
Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland joined the five
permanent members at the Council meeting a week
later. At that historic meeting it was decided that the
presidency of the Security Council would rotate each
month among the members in alphabetical order.
Therefore, Australia became the first country to assume
the presidency of the Council.
In 1946, this body was composed of 11 members,
which represented 22 per cent of the Organization’s
membership. Uruguay was part of the Security Council
for the first time in 1965. It has returned this year to be
a member of this organ after a 51 absence. Today, the
Security Council’s 15 members represent 8 per cent of
the 193 States Members of the United Nations.
What is truly important today is to ask ourselves
to what extent, throughout its 70 years of existence, the
Security Council has fulfilled its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout its
history the Council has mounted some 70 peacekeeping
operations, the vast majority of which successfully
implemented their mandates. In other situations, the
Council has used measures within its scope, pursuant
to Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, to put a halt to
conflicts. However, situations of grave conflict, which
continue to be on the Council’s agenda, testify to the
work that remains to be done for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

2/91

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2015/453)
Letter dated 6 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/22)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Armenia, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor at Oxfam.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. João Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.
I also propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in that regard.
I further propose that the Council invite the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations to participate in this meeting,
in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure
and the previous practice in that regard.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/453, which conains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

must all work to achieve solid political commitments
to refrain from using explosive weapons in populated
areas, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, which is now so often neglected.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/22, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 January 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

We have all seen the horrible reality in Madaya,
Syria, where thousands of people have been denied food
and medical treatment for months, leading to starvation
and death. Let us remember that Madaya is just one
place where, shamefully, this is happening today,
in the twenty-first century. Sieges were a medieval
phenomenon, and now we see them happening in the
contemporary world. A siege that denies people access
to the basic necessities of life is one of the gravest
violations of international law and an affront to our
shared humanity, which the Secretary-General has,
in the clearest of terms, condemned during these past
days, naming such violations war crimes. Such crimes
simply must stop, and they must do so immediately.

I warmly welcome Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I warmly welcome
Uruguay’s initiative to hold today’s debate. The number
of speakers is a clear sign of the urgency and importance
of today’s subject.
Over the past 40 years, progress has been made
in establishing international norms to enhance the
protection of civilians and to make sure that perpetrators
of violations are brought to justice. The Security
Council has played a central role in that regard, which
we deeply appreciate. Despite that, the reality on the
ground is grim and bleak. In conflicts around the world,
great numbers of civilians are deliberately or recklessly
killed, maimed, tortured and abducted. Sexual violence
is rampant.
Hospitals must be treated as sanctuaries in
wartime. But recently we have seen a surge in attacks
on hospitals and health centres. In Afghanistan, an
air strike destroyed a surgical ward with devastating
consequences. In Yemen, hospitals have been attacked,
and children who were not killed by bullets and bombs
are now dying from the lack of medicine and health
care.
Today, I echo the words of the Secretary-General
and of the President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), Peter Maurer — and I am glad
the ICRC Vice-President is present here today — who
last October called for an end to such blatant violations
of international law. They said: “Enough is enough.
Even war has rules. It is time to enforce them.”
In 2014, civilians madeup 92 per cent of the people
killed or injured by the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas in situations of armed conflict. That
carnage of innocent people must not continue. Only
today, we learned that 19,000 civilians were killed
in Iraq between January 2014 and October 2015. We

The barbarity of non-State extremist armed groups,
such as Daesh, Boko Haram and others, present new
challenges. Those groups brazenly and brutally murder
thousands of people, kidnap young girls, systematically
deny women their rights, destroy cultural institutions
and undermine the peaceful values of religions. Their
aim is obviously to instil fear and to divide and destroy
the social fabric of our societies. I urge members
to do everything possible to address this threat in a
determined, comprehensive and rights-based manner.
In the face of such violations and developments,
what can the international community do?
First, we must consistently remind parties to armed
conflict of their obligations to uphold international
law and to respect and protect all civilians and civilian
objects, including humanitarian workers and facilities.
The loss of life is mounting among humanitarian
workers, who courageously are striving to gain access
to people in need. We must all unequivocally condemn
violations and use all the tools at our disposal to bring
about compliance with international humanitarian law.
For that, we need the Council’s leadership.
Secondly, we must do much more to prevent
conflicts and situations that place civilians at risk. That
requires consideration and action on the part of the
Security Council and careful monitoring of violations
of human rights law and international humanitarian
law. Generally, the whole United Nations system must
continuously seek to resolve tensions and conflicts
through mediation and other peaceful methods to settle

16-011043/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

disputes, as listed in Articles 33 and 34 of Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, which members
have before them to check.
Thirdly, where violations persist, there must be
accountability. Governments should adopt robust
criminal legislation and strengthen their judicial
systems in order to prosecute perpetrators. They need to
establish national fact-finding mechanisms and, where
deemed necessary, set up independent commissions
of inquiry. Judicial bodies such as the International
Criminal Court are to be used when national prosecution
options are not available. All States should accede to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
When violence erupts and the threat of conflict
is growing, we all have a responsibility to act. The
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative
requests all United Nations staff to react early and with
courage in the face of escalating risks of large-scale
violations. We are committed to bring situations of
concern to the attention of Member States. The failure
to give early warning so as to ensure accountability is
in itself a threat to peace and security. The resulting
impunity emboldens perpetrators to escalate their
brutality, as we have seen in several cases. It contributes
to the erosion of international human rights and
humanitarian law and to further loss of civilian lives.
Fourthly, Governments must do more to protect
people displaced by conflict, particularly those who
are vulnerable, primarily women and children. Policies
and legal frameworks aimed at protecting refugees and
internally displaced people must be strengthened and
strictly implemented. The high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants, to be held on 19 September
2016, will also be an opportunity to focus on those
issues.
The report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, entitled
“Uniting our strengths for peace: politics, partnership
and people”, pointed to a significant gap between
expectations and reality when it comes to the ability of
missions to protect civilians. The Secretary-General’s
subsequent report (S/2015/682) announced several
measures to close that gap. Peacekeeping operations
must respond with speed and determination in the face
of threats to civilians. The opening of mission gates to
desperate people in South Sudan is one example of such
determination in practice. Missions must also report

4/91

19/01/2016

directly and frankly on obstacles and failures to act.
Missions are to advocate strongly for the protection
of civilians. They should support host Governments’
efforts to protect their people by strengthening human
rights, the rule of law and inclusive institutions.
Dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries is critical. Each must ensure that the United
Nations never stands idly by in the face of attacks on
civilians. States should build on the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, inter alia through
peacekeeping, which were agreed last year. Zero
tolerance for cases of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel must be strictly adhered to.
The recommendations of the panel set up after reported
abuses in the Central African Republic are being
taken seriously by the Secretary-General. We are now
working on a robust programme aimed at strengthening
prevention, enforcement and remedial action in the
area of sexual exploitation and abuse. I welcome the
Security Council’s presidential statement of November
2015, which recommitted the Council to address the
protection of civilians as a core issue (S/PRST/2015/22).
When civilians are under violent attack, often from all
sides, as we now see far too often, it is particularly
important that the protection of civilians be at the
centre of the Council’s deliberations.
In conclusion, let me say that protecting civilians
in armed conflict will be one of the central themes of
the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul
on 23 and 24 May. We must seize the opportunity of
the Summit to make progress on the serious challenges
that we face today. Respect for the norms established
to safeguard our humanity will be one of the priorities
of the Summit. We must redouble our efforts and take
ever more concrete action to ensure the protection
of civilians and enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law. It is time to
restore knowledge, to restore awareness and to restore
faith in those instruments and demonstrate in practice
that we are serious about placing human beings at the
centre of our work at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Beerli.
Ms. Beerli: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
to address the Security Council on the subject of the

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians, a subject that the Council has
put at the centre of many of its resolutions, including on
Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Iraq, the Central African
Republic and the Lake Chad region.
In 2015, ICRC operations reached more than
40 million people, including more civilians than ever
before in its history. Regrettably, we see the underlying
trend of increasing humanitarian needs as likely to
continue over the next year.
International humanitarian law on the protection of
civilians in international and non-international armed
conflict is clearly established and binding on all parties
to armed conflict, State and non-State alike. The ICRC
continues to believe that the current legal framework
for the protection of civilians remains relevant and that
the main challenge in protecting civilians centres on
greater compliance with international humanitarian
law by all parties to armed conflicts.
For the ICRC, working on the ground with the
victims of armed conflict, it is obvious that political
action ultimately determines the fate of civilian
populations. If there no political solutions to armed
conflict can be reached, then many millions of people
will continue to endure the personal tragedy and
humanitarian consequences of armed conflict for years,
decades or even lifetimes.
This year, we will mark the fifth anniversary of
the Syrian crisis. Syria has in many ways become an
emblematic conflict, with immense suffering on the
part of the civilian population. In terms of violations
of the law, that conflict is emblematic of a restrictive
interpretation of humanitarian space, of the illegal use
of weapons and of the use of illegal weapons, all of
which have led to dramatic displacements of people,
in turn putting pressure on neighbouring States’ basic
services and their social fabric.
The link between the suffering and the lack of
respect for international humanitarian law could not
be clearer, when you talk to the severely malnourished
people of Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya, as my colleagues
have done over the past weeks. Women, men and
children have died, and unless full compliance with
international humanitarian law is assured, many
more are at risk of dying. Today, the overwhelming
humanitarian needs necessitate that the sieges be lifted
immediately. The Security Council has the possibility
to support and practice confidential engagement for the
respect of the law, in Syria and elsewhere. On behalf of

S/PV.7606

the civilians that the ICRC serves in armed conflicts
around the world, I urge the Council to do so.
All the foregoing suggests that much more needs to
be done to resolve armed conflicts. In that regard, the
emphasis in last year’s High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations on the primacy
of politics and the need for political solutions to be in
the driver’s seat of United Nations efforts is important
and timely. The ICRC welcomes the Panel’s recognition
that the protection of civilians is a core obligation of
the United Nations. We also recognize that the single
greatest contribution to ending the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict is always the effective prevention and
resolution of armed conflict.
With that in mind, the ICRC urges the Council
to find consensus wherever it can and to build the
necessary political strategies that will prevent and end
armed conflicts. Where there is no end to an armed
conflict and when international humanitarian law
applies, compliance with international humanitarian
law is critical to ensuring the protection of civilians.
The conduct of hostilities — the way armed
conflicts are fought — is the key determinant of
civilian suffering. The misuse of weapons, direct
attacks against civilians and civilian populations and
indiscriminate attacks, starvation and displacement
that become part of a military strategy and attacks
against health-care facilities all too often combine to
create civilian suffering that involves serious violations
of international humanitarian law.
In the ICRC’s experience, much widespread harm
and suffering caused by armed conflict is wrongly
seen as an inevitable consequence of war when in
fact it is frequently a violation of law. Far too much
civilian suffering in these last years has resulted from
a failure of the parties to a conflict to take into account
the protection of civilians in the conduct of military
operations and to strike the appropriate balance between
military necessity and humanitarian imperatives as
required by international humanitarian law.
Yet violations of international humanitarian law
occur daily: explosive weapons are used indiscriminately
in populated areas; civilian populations and civilian
objects are deliberately targeted; civilian communities
are forcibly displaced, trapped in lengthy sieges and
deprived of the means of survival; women and men, girls
and boys are regularly the victims of rape and sexual
violence; schools are attacked or used for military

16-011045/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

purposes, leading to their loss of protection against
attack; detainees are summarily executed, tortured,
kept in inhumane conditions and denied due process
of law. Such violations of international humanitarian
law are well known to members of the Council and are
often referred to explicitly in the Council’s resolutions
with an evident determination to end them.
The use of explosive weapons in populated areas
is one example that raises serious concern in terms of
compliance, especially in urban environments. These
weapons are prone to indiscriminate effects, with
often devastating consequences for civilians. Many
civilians are killed or injured by such weapons. Critical
infrastructure on which civilians depend for their
livelihoods and survival, such as power stations, water
treatment plants and hospitals, can be continuously and
cumulatively damaged so that they cease to be able to
provide essential services to meet people’s basic needs.
Precisely for those reasons, the ICRC has urged that
the use of explosive weapons with a wide impact area
should be avoided in densely populated areas.
To address this humanitarian issue, States should
make known their policies on the use of such weapons
and explain how their use of explosive weapons
in populated areas complies with international
humanitarian law. We also ask that the upcoming
third United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development, which will address
the development of a new urban agenda, take account of
the risks faced by many millions of people threatened
by armed conflict and other situations of violence in
today’s densely populated and fast-growing cities.
The second main aspect of compliance that the ICRC
would like to emphasize is the necessity for States and
non-State armed groups to comply with their obligation
to meet the basic needs of the population under their
control and, if unable to do so, to allow and facilitate
rapid and unimpeded passage of relief for civilians in
need, subject to their right of control. If these basic
needs are not met, parties to armed conflict shall
positively respond to offers of service made by impartial
humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC and shall
authorize their humanitarian activities, which include
protection and assistance. Humanitarian activities
are all those aimed at preserving life and security or
seeking to restore the mental and physical well-being of
victims of armed conflict. In this process, a concern to
protect the dignity of a person is fundamental.

6/91

19/01/2016

Questions of humanitarian access necessary to
carry out protection and assistance activities is an
aspect of international humanitarian law for which the
Council has continued to express significant concern
in 2015. These questions will be particularly relevant
in 2016 as States prepare to make new commitments on
humanitarian action at the World Humanitarian Summit
in Istanbul in May. At the Summit, the ICRC very much
wants to see a significant and practical recommitment
by States to their obligations to protect and assist the
civilian population in armed conflicts. Clear recognition
of the complementary albeit essential and lawful role
that impartial humanitarian organizations — local and
international — can play in meeting this humanitarian
objective also needs to emerge from the Summit.
Practical recommitments to the rules of international
humanitarian law on access, protection and assistance
will be particularly important in 2016 because of the
unprecedented number of internally displaced people,
refugees and vulnerable migrants that are fleeing and
moving because of the humanitarian consequences
of armed conflict. The ICRC welcomes the United
Nations summit on managing large-scale movements of
migrants and refugees due to take place in September
this year, and we are committed to playing a significant
role in its process and debate. At the same time, we ask
that a sharp focus of the Council’s attention remain on
the millions of internally displaced persons affected by
armed conflict, many of whom die as a result of armed
conflict.
The need to respect and ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law is urgent. States and
non-State armed groups must comply with these laws,
and close the existing implementation gap. The mere
existence of obligations and prohibitions is not sufficient
to prevent or put a stop to suffering or to deter future
violations. The rules of international humanitarian law
must be known, understood and implemented by the
parties to an armed conflict if its purposes are to be
fulfilled. This is a multifaceted process which requires
that appropriate action be taken by actors at the national,
regional, and international levels.
I thank you, Mr. President, for giving the ICRC this
opportunity to speak at this important debate. I hope
members have heard us encourage the Council’s efforts
to protect civilians and urge all States to find whatever
consensus is possible to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts as the single best way to protect civilians.
Meanwhile, as armed conflicts go on, respecting the

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law is the single most impactful choice States and
non-State groups can make to avoid civilian suffering.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Beerli for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rooijmans.
Ms. Rooijmans: This meeting today is an extremely
important one, as it serves as a way for the Security
Council — and the global community — to take stock
of their performance on the protection of civilians.
Sadly, the report card is bleak.
I speak today on behalf of Oxfam, a humanitarian
and development organization. Two out of every three
women, men, and children we work with are affected
by violence and conflict, and the protection of civilians
is at the heart of our mission. In our experience, what
people we work with call for is not just relief; it is
protection. Yet every day — from Yemen to South
Sudan — we witness the failure to protect civilians and
its human impact.
Yemen, for example, has seen more than 8,000
civilian casualties since the start of the conflict. Some
14.4 million people are food insecure, and this is not
because of natural circumstances but because of the
fighting and insecurity. Rabab, a 33-year-old woman
who now lives in Amran with her eight children, told
Oxfam recently:
“Our kids are scared, we are tired and homeless
and we keep moving without knowing where we
will end up. We need the foreign Governments that
are supporting this war to work together to end it.
Enough blood! Innocent people are dying daily,
and for what? In the name of what, exactly?”
In Syria, every month, every day, there are reports
of more barrel bombs and mortar and missile attacks,
and of starving civilians in besieged towns. Close to
300,000 people have been killed since 2011, and more
than half of the population have fled their homes.
In South Sudan, deadly fighting has left tens of
thousands dead, more than 2 million people displaced
and even more going severely hungry. At the same time,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is facing
difficulties in implementing its mandate of protecting
civilians across the country.
These are just three of the many places around
the world where civilians are under threat, trapped in
conflict every day. Let us keep those civilians at heart

S/PV.7606

and in the forefront of our minds today as we discuss
protection and as we find ways together to bridge the
gap between rhetoric and reality, and between what
the international community has already committed to
doing and what is actually happening.
Let me share a few examples. World leaders must
recommit to upholding international humanitarian law.
We urge parties to conflicts to refrain from bombing or
shelling populated areas. Member States should support
the process under way to negotiate an international
instrument to clarify international humanitarian law
with regard to the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas.
We cannot reiterate often enough the importance
of prevention. When civilians face violence, such as in
Burundi currently, it is critical that the Security Council
act upon the early warnings in a timely manner.
The Security Council must implement the
resolutions that already exist. On Syria, for example,
it has condemned indiscriminate attacks, besiegement
and deliberate blocks to life-saving assistance; it must
now ensure that these demands are heeded.
World leaders must also implement the Arms Trade
Treaty. Adhering to this Treaty means that Member
States make all arms transfers subject to observance
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Failure to protect civilians has forced nearly
60 million people to flee their homes, more than at any
other time since the Second World War, often taking
risky and at times fatal routes as they search for safety.
All countries have commitments under international
law to provide assistance and protection to those
seeking asylum, no matter where they are coming from.
Where there are peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians, troop- and police-contributing countries must
fully subscribe to and implement their mandate, and be
willing and allowed to act, and use force if need be, in
the face of threats to civilians.
Peace operations must also take a more
people-centred approach, as recommended by both the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General’s
action plan. For this people-centredness to become
a reality, a fundamental transformation in terms of
approach, action and culture needs to happen. A critical
element thereof is engagement with communities, in

16-011047/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

particular with the women, in a safe and respectful
manner. A people-centred approach in peace operations
also means employing more women, in particular
among uniformed staff — that rate currently stands at a
poor 4 per cent — and in leadership positions.
In fact, many of the elements that are needed to
protect civilians have already been agreed, whether it is
international humanitarian law, the Arms Trade Treaty,
Security Council resolutions condemning violations in
Syria, the women and peace and security agenda, or
peacekeeping mission mandates.
A critical missing piece is implementation, the
action that world leaders need to take to turn the
rhetoric into reality. Without the follow-through by the
Security Council and by Member States, resolutions
and agreements ring hollow and civilians such as Rabab
feel abandoned — and rightly so.
We must also continue to find opportunities
for civilian voices to be heard by those in power: at
Arria Formula meetings, when the Security Council
visits conflict-affected countries, and here in this very
Council Chamber.
Just yesterday, a Syrian woman sent me this
message: “There is nothing dignified in what is
happening to my family and my friends right now,
except that we are still here and have not given up”. Her
resilience is enormous. However, she and all those in
conflict-affected countries, need concrete measures. It
is action that we need now more than ever.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Rooijmans for the information that she has
provided.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
First of all, I should like to stress that it is an honour
for Uruguay to convene this Security Council open
debate to address an issue of such vital importance
as the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It
is of vital importance because it concerns the most
elementary human right, that is, the right to life, and
also because it has a bearing on the very credibility
of the Organization and the hopes placed in it by the
millions of people living in situations of conflict.
This topic and this debate have a very broad and
deep scope. They can be approached from different
angles and can find each and every one of us playing

8/91

19/01/2016

different roles and focused on different priorities, be it
as members of the Security Council, where, for example,
protection-of-civilians mandates are established for
United Nations peacekeeping operations; countries
suffering from internal conflict; troop-contributing
countries; or humanitarian actors, among others.
But in spite of these differences, there is something
essential that we all share: the moral and legal duty to
do everything within our means to ensure that in such
situations all possible efforts are made to guarantee the
highest possible level of protection and to minimize
civilian exposure and risk.
Regrettably, despite the courageous efforts and
significant progress made, we are still falling far
short of our best. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/453) highlights in paragraph 4 the fact
that “shocking levels of brutality and casual disregard
for human life and dignity have come to characterize
most of today’s armed conflicts”. Death, torture, the
recruitment of child soldiers, forced disappearances,
sexual and gender-based violence, summary and
extrajudicial executions, attacks against schools and
hospitals and the misuse of those facilities, and attacks
against humanitarian personnel: these are just some
of the tragic situations that today continue to affect
civilians, especially women and children.
As a direct result of that escalation of violence,
today we are witnessing an unprecedented humanitarian
and refugee crisis. There are currently over 60 million
refugees, internally displaced persons and asylumseekers around the world, the highest number ever
known. There is therefore no doubt that the protection
of civilians remains one of the greatest challenges
facing the United Nations system. It is a comprehensive
issue with important corollaries such as the situation
of children in armed conflict; sexual and genderbased violence; and the women and peace and security
agenda. To address those challenges it is essential to
ensure the basics, among which are respect for, and the
implementation of, international humanitarian law, in
particular the four Geneva Conventions and the two
Additional Protocols, wherever armed conflict exists
and those instruments are applicable.
Another basic issue is that of prevention. Preventing
mass human rights violations is a complex issue, but
it would appear to be the most advisable. The proper
use, improvement and strengthening of early warning
mechanisms, as well as improved coordination among

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the various actors on the ground, are some of the
fundamental tools of prevention. In that regard, we
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General entitled
Human Rights Up Front, which focuses on the need
for a prompt response to human rights violations, a
preventive action plan for the protection of civilians,
and better organizational preparedness to address
any situation. The initiative’s plan of action places
improved system preparedness and preventive action to
ensure respect for human rights at the centre of United
Nations efforts to prevent conflict, while reaffirming
the central role of human rights in the Organization’s
work.
But since each State has the primary responsibility
to protect its population, it is in strengthening the rule
of law, the institutions responsible for protecting and
promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
social inclusion, non-discrimination and tolerance,
that the chances of systematic violations against
human rights will be significantly reduced. Acting in a
coordinated manner with local authorities, it can be said
that the international community has a responsibility to
prevent situations that lead to attacks on civilians. Also,
combatting impunity, which the perpetrators of the
worst acts of violence continue to enjoy, is our shared
obligation. We wish to emphasize the importance of
accountability as a key element for prevention. We
should make use of the various bodies established for
that purpose by the international community, such as
the International Criminal Court. Crimes must never
be tolerated, nor can they go unpunished, regardless of
their perpetrators.
When the threat is imminent, the response should
be timely, decisive and legitimate. It is necessary to
step up efforts to ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches those in greatest need. We must facilitate its
rapid, safe and unhindered access to the affected
territory. It should be recalled that, for more than
15 years, this body has recognized that the deliberate
targeting of civilian populations or other protected
persons and the systematic, flagrant and widespread
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law in situations of armed
conflict may constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
Finally, and in line with what was said and stressed
earlier with regard to the various angles and priorities of
each of us, as a troop-contributing country committed
to the protection of civilians, allow me to briefly bring

S/PV.7606

attention to the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
It is important to recognize the achievements we
have obtained in recent years. No one is questioning
whether the protection of civilians should be a
component of peacekeeping organizations; what is
basically at issue here is “the how”. Uruguay, aware that
peacekeeping is a multidimensional activity involving
many stakeholders, has made its modest contribution for
several years in order to achieve the broadest possible
consensus on the issue because, as we have always said,
in order for protection to be effective, every link in the
chain must be strong. In particular, we are proud of the
work our Blue Helmets are doing in the field, and of the
frank, open and constructive debate that, together with
Australia, we have promoted since 2009 to the present.
However, despite progress, as stated in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations, results in the
field have been mixed, with a growing gap between
expectations and implementation. Fittingly, the
challenge of creating realistic and achievable mandates,
which was already recommended in the Brahimi report
(see A/55/305), remains valid 15 years later.
Uruguay believes that the General Assembly
and all the relevant bodies, including the Security
Council, should conduct a thorough discussion of
the recommendations contained in the report of
the Independent Panel led by President and Nobel
Prize laureate Ramos-Horta, and of the subsequent
implementation report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/682), with a view to implementing those
measures that, for example, could result in the approval
of sequential mandates, would help make a qualitative
leap towards effective implementation and, especially,
to live up to the expectations not only of those affected,
but those that we generate ourselves.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), Ms. Beerli, and Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam
International for their briefings. It is really good to
have them both in the Chamber with us today.

16-011049/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In the period since we last held a debate on this
particular issue (see S/PV.7450), the change that has
happened during that period has been change in the
wrong direction, as the briefers have shown very clearly.
We have seen the tragic continuation and worsening of
several trends on the protection-of-civilians agenda.
Barrel bombs continue to fall, and human rights and
international humanitarian law continue to be violated
and abused. Women and children continue to be
abducted, trafficked or worse. There are also disturbing
new trends, such as the targeting of medical staff and
facilities, the increasing use of siege and starvation as
a method of warfare, and the distressing allegations
of abuse committed by United Nations peacekeepers.
Against that backdrop, the central issue that we should
all be addressing today is what will be different next
year. In that connection I took three particular things
from what our briefers all said today.
First, Vice-President Beerli of the ICRC said that
respecting the law is the single most impactful choice
that States and non-State groups can make to avoid
civilian suffering. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam said
that many elements to protect civilians have already
been agreed on but what is missing is implementation.
As the Deputy Secretary-General said, the bottom
line is that even wars have rules. You, Mr. President,
said to us that nobody discusses anymore whether the
protection of civilians should be a part of peacekeeping.
What we are discussing nowadays is the “how”. And
that is what I wish to focus on today.
This year needs to be the year that we end the
most challenging issue with regard to the protection of
civilians, namely, the crisis in Syria. And I am not trying
to make a political point there. We must have a list of
priorities, and that must be at the top of it. The millions
of civilians fleeing their homes and the thousands
risking everything to cross the Mediterranean are all
doing so in search of the protection and security that has
been denied to them for too long. Whether at the hands
of Daesh or, more likely, at the hands of Al-Assad, the
brutality that they have fled is only being exacerbated
by the shortfall in the international response. We all
know that a political solution is the only way to end the
fighting, but until one has been found, more must be
done to protect those still caught up in the crisis.
That is why, on 4 February, the United Kingdom will
be hosting a conference in London, along with Kuwait,
Germany, Norway and the United Nations, to support
Syria and the region. The conference will not just be

10/91

19/01/2016

the moment to address the funding deficit in the United
Nations appeal, although that is very important in itself.
It will also be the moment to address the long-term
needs of those affected by the crisis by supporting job
creation, providing education and, crucially, by putting
ever more pressure on all the parties to protect civilians
and respect international humanitarian law. We need a
comprehensive approach. In doing so, we hope to drive
improvements in daily life and increase the confidence
that is needed to underpin the political process. But let
me make just one thing clear: respecting international
humanitarian law is not in itself a confidence-building
measure. It is an obligation, and it is an obligation on
us all.
Secondly, let me look beyond Syria to the second
step that we need to take this year, which is to ensure
greater compliance with international humanitarian
law and respect for human rights more broadly and
to ensure accountability for those who have failed to
do so. Others have listed other key crises at the top of
the Security Council’s agenda, and I think that they
bear repeating. Whether it is in Yemen, South Sudan
or Burundi, protecting civilians will improve the
prospects for political solutions, not be a substitute
for them. When national authorities refuse to comply
with international humanitarian law, when they fail
or are unable to prosecute individuals who commit
international crimes, we must ensure accountability
through domestic, regional or global mechanisms,
as appropriate. We should make better use of the
International Criminal Court, and we call on all States
to cooperate fully with it. When the Council has referred
a situation to the Court and States violate Council
resolutions by failing to cooperate, the Council must
follow up. The Council should also consider referring
more situations to the International Criminal Court.
We have failed on both counts in the past, we cannot
continue that failure in 2016.
Thirdly, there are the other tools at our disposal that
we must use more fully this year. The United Kingdom
is proud to support the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and we are actively involved, along with
the Swiss, in its initiative to support and strengthen
mechanisms of compliance with international
humanitarian law. We support a new meeting of States
to address that issue, and we encourage all States to
participate in the initiative. We also look forward to
the World Humanitarian Summit as an opportunity
to remind the world of the importance of protecting

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians, ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and putting humankind at the centre
of decision-making. Closer to home, we should use the
tools of the United Nations itself to protect civilians
to the full. That would mean implementing the
recommendations on protecting civilians contained in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews that you,
Mr. President, mentioned.
As Ms. Rooijmans has just stressed, people and
the protection of civilians must play a central role in
mission-planning, mission-resourcing and activities
on the ground. The United Kingdom supports the
Secretary-General’s commitments to inform the Council
of escalating risks to civilians and of any incidents
where peacekeepers have failed to implement their
mandate to protect civilians. We also look forward to
more frank assessments and recommendations on what
peace operations can deliver and how they can improve
reporting so that transparency and accountability are
both increased. At a time when the United Nations is
rightly being scrutinized because of the disturbing
allegations of abuse against those operating under its
mandate, we must demonstrate that we will do even
more this year to protect those who are in our care.
Above all, I wish to emphasize one point: protecting
civilians in armed conflict is at the core of the work
of the United Nations. It is the issue on which we are
most often judged by the world outside of the Council
Chamber and yet, it is the hardest on which to make
progress. We know that the challenges we face are
huge, but we cannot keep holding such debates year
after year, without taking concrete steps to stop the
suffering. This is the year to take action.
Mr. Gracia Aldaz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain associates itself with the statement that will be
delivered subsequently by the observer of the European
Union.
We thank Uruguay for having convened today’s
very important debate. We believe that it is extremely
important to promote conflict prevention and
strengthen the United Nations response in addressing
emerging conflicts, as the Organization plays a key
role in settling disputes by peaceful means. The use of
weapons to settle disputes has its most adverse impact
on the weakest in conflict situations. We believe
that mediation is key to maintaining international
peace, and it is a hallmark of our foreign policy.
Banning attacks on civilian populations and the use

S/PV.7606

of starvation as a weapon of war, protecting medical
and humanitarian personnel and ensuring unimpeded
access for humanitarian aid constitute the very essence
of international humanitarian law.
All parties to an armed conflict, whether States or
non-State actors, whether it is an inter-State or intra-State
conflict, must respect that law. However, today’s
conflicts, almost without exception, have exacted a very
high toll among civilians. We are concerned about the
increasing number of attacks on hospitals and doctors
in conflict areas. Such attacks contravene the basic
norms of international humanitarian law. We are all
aware of the very important work being carried out by
organizations such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Doctors without Borders. Spain, along
with Egypt, New Zealand and Uruguay, is working on a
specific initiative to provide medical assistance during
armed conflicts, which we will submit to the Security
Council as our contribution to ending such attacks, to
ensuring that medical personnel, facilities and vehicles
are protected and to ensuring access to medical
services in situations of conflict. Spain also welcomes
the adoption, last May, of resolution 2222 (2015), which
took note of the threats and attacks against journalists.
We recognize the very important role that journalists
play in protecting civilians in times of conflict. During
our presidency of the Security Council in December we
will be celebrating the tenth anniversary of resolution
1728 (2006), giving us an excellent opportunity to
continue to promote our efforts in this area.
Over the past several years, we have also seen an
increasing trend in the use of explosive weapons in
densely populated areas, such as the use of barrel bombs
in Syria, which has resulted in over 30,000 deaths this
past year. Spain categorically condemns those actions.
It is important that States express their support for an
international commitment in order to put an end to the
use of those explosive weapons in populated areas and
better protect civilian populations in the future.
Such attacks against civilians are being carried out
in an atmosphere of impunity, highlighting the absence
of respect for international humanitarian law. Spain has
actively supported the initiative of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross with regard
to strengthening compliance with the international
humanitarian law. If the States involved do not want
or are not able to bring to justice those responsible,
we have a very important tool at our disposal — the
International Criminal Court, which can ensure that

16-0110411/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those crimes do not go unpunished. The Council has
an important role to fulfil in referring cases to the
Court, but today we are not filling that role. The failure
to refer to the Court the situation in Syria, as well as
to follow-up the two situations referred to it to date,
namely, those in Darfur and in Libya, serve to cast
doubt as to the real scope of our commitment to combat
impunity. With regard to the responsibility to protect,
we agree that protecting civilians falls mainly on the
State. Nevertheless, when a State lacks the ability
or will to do so, that responsibility is also shared by
the international community, and specifically to the
Security Council acting on its behalf.
Recognizing the importance of political solutions
in preventing conflicts does not mean that urgent
attention should not be provided to operational aspects
of protecting civilians, as was highlighted in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. In that regard, my country highly
values the fact that the Secretary-General has stated
in his report on the review of peacekeeping operations
that a senior adviser on the protection of civilians
should be established in all missions, with a specific
mandate in that regard and located within the office of
the Special Representative. Spain stands ready to fulfil
its part in that joint effort at improving the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations. With regard to the summit that
took place in New York last September on peacekeeping
operations, Spain was among the countries to assume
new commitments to give peacekeeping operations
means, including training aspects.
Furthermore, women and children suffer a
disproportionate impact in conflicts. Spain will never
tire of pointing out that all forms of violence against
women and children increase during times of conflict.
We are also weeing an alarming increase in efforts
to systemize the use of sexual and gender violence in
times of conflict. That is sometimes used not just as
weapon of war, but also one of terror. The fact that, last
June, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
stated that her office had received the largest number
of allegations of sexual abuse in Darfur in connection
with armed groups is but one example. Violence against
women can also constitute a clear early indicator of an
impending crisis. The protection of women depends
on the prevention of conflicts, in addition to being
necessary in stabilizing a country in armed conflict.
The global study on the review of resolution 1325
(2000) that was published last October also calls

12/91

19/01/2016

attention to the importance of women’s participation in
conflict resolution, particularly if a stable and lasting
peace is the ultimate goal. Moreover, the violence
committed against children in armed conflicts takes
on many forms, such as abductions, forced recruitment,
sexual abuse, illegal trafficking, slavery, mutilation and
murder. We will also not tire of repeating the absolute
importance of respecting the most fundamental
rules of humanitarian law. Likewise, it is important
that peace agreements clearly include the needs of
children who are victims of conflicts — in the areas
of protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. With
regard to accountability, we will continue to advocate
for the strengthening of national judicial systems and
cooperation between the International Criminal Court
and the Secretary Council. The fight against impunity
will not only restore dignity to the victims, but it will
also serve as deterrence.
I would like to conclude by thanking the President
for having convened this most important debate, which
adds new impetus to the fight against barbarism,
which affects the most vulnerable populations. Spain
remains resolutely committed to protecting civilians
in particular, as well as to strengthening international
humanitarian law in general.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
his opening remarks at today’s debate. I also listened
carefully to the briefings made by the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of
the representative of Oxfam.
Ukraine appreciates Uruguay’s initiative to hold
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Ukraine continues to be fully committed to
improving the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In particular, we fully support the attention given by
the Council to the situation of women and children
affected by armed conflict — an issue concerning
which Ukraine has adopted specific political directives.
We highly appreciate the report of the SecretaryGeneral of June 2015 (S/2015/433) on the protection
of civilians and his report (S/2015/446) on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations. As stated
in the reports, the reality on the ground continues to
be characterized by a frequent lack of willingness
on the part of the parties to armed conflict to fulfil
their obligations to respect and protect civilians in

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

accordance with humanitarian law, human rights and
the rights of refugees. We call upon all parties to armed
conflict to fully assume their obligations.
Recent events make today’s debate even more
relevant. Only last Friday, the Security-Council held
an important meeting on the desperate humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.7505). That situation
requires the adoption of measures to protect civilians,
so as to save human lives. Ukraine fully shares the
serious concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his reports on the situations in the Central African
Republic, Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iraq, Afghanistan, South Sudan, Libya, Mali
and other countries in which the civilian population, in
particular women and children, continue to be targets
of various forms of extreme violence, resulting in a
grave humanitarian crisis and enormous displacement
of the population.
In particular, we share the concern over the
ongoing attacks directed against health care personnel,
facilities and transport. We are also concerned about
the increased threats against journalists in situations
of armed conflict. We reaffirm our commitment to the
conclusions that were drawn on that issue in the debate
that took place last May at the initiative of Lithuania
(see S/PV.7450). We fully support resolution 2223
(2015), which was adopted as a result of that debate.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict must do their utmost to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including
cargo and materials. We continue to be very concerned
about the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. We must engage in greater
international cooperation in order to establish stricter
norms to protect civilians from the impact of explosive
weapons in such areas. The protection of civilians is
an obvious objective for the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations.
The success of a peacekeeping mission is often
determined by its ability to protect civilians. At the
same time, we recognize the need for fundamental
reform aimed at further strengthening peacekeeping
operations in order to respond to the evolving threats
and security challenges of today. We must ensure
that the missions have adequate resources and that
due priority is given to civilian protection activities.
The mandates should be realistic and not create false
expectations. In return, we hope that the missions can

S/PV.7606

ensure that those resources are utilized with maximum
effectiveness for the protection of civilians. The strict
application of a zero-tolerance policy with regard to
peacekeeping forces is another vital and necessary
element for the protection of civilians, particularly
women and children, in conflict situations.
Ukraine also wishes to emphasize the need to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear mandates
to protect civilians. The clarity of those mandates is
essential, but it is not enough. Three other key elements
must be considered. They are strong operational control
over peacekeeping mission activities, clear strategies
for the troops and good working relationships between
the peacekeeping missions and the humanitarian actors
on the ground.
During this debate on the protection of civilians,
I cannot remain silent on the issue of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, which has claimed the
lives of thousands of innocent civilians in many towns
and cities in eastern Ukraine during the past two years.
I wish to express gratitude to the Secretary-General for
having highlighted the situation in the occupied areas
of Ukraine in his June report (S/2015/453). The findings
presented in that report with regard to the protection
of civilians show that Ukrainian civilians have faced
numerous challenges resulting from foreign military
aggression. The bombing of Volnovakha, Mariupol and
Kramatorsk by multiple-rocket-launch systems, known
as Grad, Smerch and Uragan, has killed and wounded
a great number of civilians, including children, thereby
demonstrating the heinous crimes carried out by
militants and irregular armed groups controlled by
the Russian Federation directed against the civilian
population. Given that those cities are far from the
conflict zone, we can conclude that civilians were being
deliberately bombed.
Those promoting the conflict are determined
to make the lives of ordinary people impossible and
to permanently block the activities of international
and Ukrainian humanitarian organizations based
on an illegal demand for the certification of those
organizations. At the same time, so-called Russian
humanitarian aid convoys are crossing the Ukrainian
border without the consent of, or inspection by, the
Ukrainian authorities and without coordination with
the International Committee of the Red Cross. While
the content of those convoys, essentially contraband
since they can’t be inspected, is largely unknown, the
arrival of almost every convoy is followed immediately

16-0110413/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

by a new escalation of attacks by the separatists in the
region.
While the situation in the occupied territories
remains unstable, the Ukrainian Government is
working hard to alleviate the suffering of the people
affected; in particular, it has made every effort to
increase social and security guarantees for internally
displaced persons. The legislation on humanitarian
aid has been considerably simplified so as to allow
easier access to people in need. In the current difficult
circumstances, the Ukrainian Government is doing
everything possible to provide humanitarian assistance
to the civilian populations in the occupied regions of
Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as to internally displaced
persons. On 20 October 2014, the Parliament of Ukraine
adopted a law on the rights and freedoms of internally
displaced persons. At the same time, the Cabinet of
Ministers is working to implement the State programme
for the support, social adaptation and reintegration of
Ukrainian citizens who were forced to flee from the
temporarily occupied Ukrainian territory.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
has become an increasingly complex challenge.
Nevertheless, that complexity cannot be allowed to
diminish in any way our collective efforts to effectively
address the current horrific state of affairs in my country.
Ukraine will continue to play a strong and active role
in that process. We also express the sincere hope that
those who have violated international humanitarian law
will be brought to justice.
In conclusion, I wish to express my profound
gratitude to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for its very fruitful
cooperation in helping to meet the immediate needs of
the internally displaced persons in Ukraine.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Uruguay’s initiative to hold this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and welcomes Uruguay’s Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affair to New York to preside over our meeting. I
wish to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing, and I listened carefully to the statements
by Ms. Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and the representative of
Oxfam.
Protecting civilians in armed conflict, especially
women and children, has become an important part of the
mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping

14/91

19/01/2016

operations. The question of the safety and security of
humanitarian workers has also attracted ever-greater
attention on the part of the international community.
China supports the international community in its
efforts to take practical and effective measures to
promote the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In that connection, I wish to emphasize the
following four points.
First, all parties to an armed conflict should
fulfil their responsibility to protect civilians. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting innocent civilians from the harm caused by
conflicts and wars. Conflicting parties should exactly
follow international law and international humanitarian
law, as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and commit themselves to protecting civilians. As
for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed during armed conflicts,
the countries concerned should investigate and punish
such acts pursuant to those laws.
Secondly, it is necessary to strengthen conflictprevention and resolution, so that civilians will
not suffer from armed conflicts. The international
community should pay great attention to resolving the
root causes that breed conflicts and to easing tensions,
controlling conflicts and lessening contradictions,
realizing socioeconomic development and advancing
inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation
in order to try to create an environment of peace and
stability. At the core of our collective security system,
the Security Council should strengthen preventive
diplomacy, prevent armed conflicts and curb their
escalation. It should also work energetically to push for
political settlements, so as to minimize the impact of
armed conflicts on civilians.
Thirdly, in protecting civilians, peacekeeping
operations should strictly abide by the mandates
assigned to them by the Council, maintain objectivity
and neutrality and avoid becoming a party to the
conflicts. The implementation by peacekeeping
operations of their mandates to protect civilians
should be aimed at assisting the countries concerned
in strengthening the protection of civilians, and it
cannot replace the national Governments and parties to
conflicts in their efforts to fulfil their responsibilities
and obligations to protect civilians. In formulating
protection-of-civilians mandates, the Council should
take into consideration, in a comprehensive manner, the
situation on the ground and the capacity and conditions

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of peacekeeping missions, in order to ensure that the
mandate is clear, realistic and achievable and provides
sufficient and strong guarantees in terms of resources
and equipment.
Fourthly, humanitarian relief operations in armed
conflict should be carried out in an appropriate manner.
All parties to conflict should strictly abide by their
obligation to protect humanitarian workers and avoid
attacking them or other acts that might harm them. In
carrying out humanitarian relief operations in armed
conflict, the United Nations and other international
agencies should follow the Charter of the United
Nations and the guiding principles on humanitarian
relief operations, fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned and
work to enhance communication with the countries
concerned and engage in dialogue and consultation
with them on humanitarian access. All parties to armed
conflict must ensure the timely access to assistance for
affected civilians.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Humanitarian
Policy Advisor at Oxfam; and Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their statements and their commitment.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this essential meeting. This first open debate
of 2016 on the protection of civilians has never seemed
more timely and necessary. Permit me to underscore
three points that will allow me to explain why.
First, the briefings we heard show that the protection
of civilians is being tested as never before. The Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 1949, which is an integral
part of international humanitarian law, was inspired by
a draft preamble by the French and Finnish delegations,
which was ultimately not retained, on “the eternal
principles of that law which is the foundation and the
safeguard of civilization”. Evoking the protection of
civilians in 2016 is to return to that origin at a time
when the unbearable images of starving civilians come
to us from the siege of Madaya. As we know, the regime
is using the heinous tactics of siege and starvation there
and in many other places. Those reprehensible acts must
end in order for a dialogue among Syrians to begin. At
the same time, in Syria, Daesh continues to carry out
summary executions and abduct women and children.
In the face of such unspeakable acts, France will always

S/PV.7606

call for mobilization, as it did on Friday, during an open
meeting on the situation of besieged cities in Syria (see
S/PV.7605).
Sadly, it would take too long to recall all the dire
situations in Yemen, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Lake
Chad basin and in many other crises, but we must
recall that the protection of civilians, which is above
all the primary responsibility of each State, is neither
a concession nor a favour by the parties concerned, but
rather an absolute obligation. Attacks that deliberately
or indiscriminately target civilians and medical and
humanitarian personnel must be unconditionally put to
an end in their various theatres.
Strengthening respect for international humanitarian
law, where the protection of civilians is a key component,
is at the heart of the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement. France supported that initiative and
would like to thank the Conference for its unwavering
commitment throughout the four years of consultations
among States. France reiterates its commitment to that
issue and its willingness to actively continue with those
consultations.
Secondly, bearing that in mind, I would like to
emphasize that the protection of civilians remains for
France both a moral commitment, but also something
without which there can be no lasting peace and
security. In is thus a key challenge for the Security
Council. Let me give some examples, among many.
In Mali, the intervention of French forces, in
coordination with African and Malian forces, helped
to put an end to the jihadist stranglehold over the
population. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali was then able
to deploy with a robust mandate to protect civilians,
which helped stabilize the country and restore the rule
of law. In the Central African Republic, the intervention
by the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic, supported by French forces,
helped avoid mass atrocities. France commends the
efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which provided its support to the creation
of the Special Criminal Court and arrested persons
suspected of serious crimes. Its mandate reflects its
innovative approach to supporting essential action for
France in its fight against impunity, namely, in the
International Criminal Court. By contributing to the

16-0110415/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

stabilization of situations that remain fragile, its actions
show the connection between the fight against impunity
and the protection of civilians. France reiterates its
support for the International Criminal Court in its task
of trying the most serious crimes in places where the
willingness or ability for justice to be served is lacking.
Thirdly, given those challenges, more than ever
we must maintain the protection of civilians at the
heart of the Security Council’s agenda through an
approach of constant improvement. The SecretaryGeneral’s plan of action for the protection of civilians
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) have stressed that.
Although we must never forget that the protection of
civilians is a State responsibility, it is inseparable from
peace. In that regard, France supports tangible action,
such as strengthening the capacities for action of the
human rights and protection of civilians components
of peacekeeping operations, the establishment of early
warning systems, the training of police and gendarme
contingents and the list could go on. However, efforts
will be effective only if peacekeeping is exemplary in
practice and does not let down the people they are in
charge of protecting. To that end, France fully supports
the two priorities of the Secretary-General, the first
of which is the zero-tolerance policy against sexual
abuse and exploitation. Recent allegations of sexual
abuse committed in the Central African Republic
have shown that it is vital for the United Nations, as
well as for contributing countries, to respond quickly
and without concessions to the perpetrators of crimes
if they are confirmed. France is determined, for its
part, and within the framework of the ongoing legal
proceedings, to shed light and impose exemplary
penalties if necessary. With regard to the due diligence
policy, the United Nations must be prepared to reassess
its support for some armed forces when the protection
of civilians is ignored and human rights violations have
been proved. We also share the recommendation of the
High-level Panel to strengthen the investigation and
information efforts when a military or police mission
fails in its protection mandate.
The year 2016 opens with immense challenges
for the protection of civilians. We have to be specific
and resolute in our pressure on the parties to enable
true progress for the civilians on thе ground in Syria
and to reinvigorate the political process established
by resolution 2254 (2015). With regard to our on
presence on the ground, the Security Council mission is

16/91

19/01/2016

preparing to visit Burundi again to promote an inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue at a time when the worst
tensions seem to be increasing at an alarming rate and
the Arusha Accords must remain more than ever the
guide for the actors concerned. We have to be specific
and show resolve in ensuring the absolute protection
that we owe to health and medical personnel and their
facilities. This is also vital because since October 2015
three Médecins Sans Frontières facilities have been
bombed in Yemen, as well as one of its hospitals in
Kunduz, Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians, which is the priority
concern of my statement, must, now more than ever,
remain at the heart of the Council’s priorities and its
agenda in 2016. That is why we must take inspiration
from the exemplary commitment, courage and
professionalism of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, non-governmental organizations like
Médecins Sans Frontières and Oxfam, as well as so
many other volunteers on the ground. The stakes are
high and crucial in themselves. Similarly, the credibility
of our entire Organization is at stake.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Once again, I wish
to welcome you to New York, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you and the delegation of Uruguay on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I also take this opportunity
to acknowledge the presence of the high-level
representatives of Spain and Ukraine. Malaysia deems
the convening of this open debate to be timely for
the reasons outlined in the informative concept note
(S/2016/22, annex) circulated by the presidency.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the briefers, namely, Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, International Committee of the Red Cross
Vice-President Christine Beerli and the civil society
representative, Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam. Their
briefings have brought much valuable insight to the
topic at hand.
I also wish to associate my delegation with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned that the
deliberate targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks
against, civilians are increasingly common features of
the situations and conflicts under consideration by the
Council. The fact that incidents of deliberate attacks

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

against humanitarian actors, medical personnel and
medical facilities in conflict zones have increased
is particularly deplorable. The growing scale of such
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, coupled with the unprecedented levels
of brutality and barbarism committed by parties
to the various conflicts around the world, indicate
the concerning trend of flagrant disregard for longestablished humanitarian norms and standards. That
recent level of impunity must not be left unchecked.

the mandated tasks effectively. My delegation takes
this opportunity to pay tribute to the brave men and
women who risk their lives daily to uphold and promote
that important mandate. In line with the principles of
inclusivity and national ownership, we also see value in
the Secretary-General’s recommendations with regard
to expanding the involvement of local communities and
non-governmental organizations, as well as enhancing
the role of unarmed protection actors in implementing
civilian-protection mandates.

Civilians caught in conflict zones are subjected to
added suffering and trauma through displacement and
the denial of basic necessities. Women and children
are particularly at risk from sexual and gender-based
violence. The culture of impunity serves only to further
poison the already toxic animosity of conflicts. There is
no lack of international laws or other applicable norms
to regulate the behaviour of States and non-State actors
in conflict situations, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians. What is lacking is compliance
with such standards by parties to the conflicts, on the
one hand, and the necessary political will on the part of
the international community, on the other, to decisively
address threats to the safety and security of civilians.
In that connection, we believe that the challenges
outlined in the report of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the
report (S/2015/682) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel remain valid.

For the past five years or so, the Council and
the international community have been seized of the
deteriorating situation in Syria. In that time the Council
has taken certain innovative steps to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches civilian populations,
including through the adoption of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014). In that regard, my delegation
has noted the proposals by Spain and New Zealand
concerning the issue of medical neutrality, which, as
we understand it, seeks to ensure that the principle
of neutrality extends to the medical personnel and
facilities that provide critical services in conflict
situations. We believe that those proposals constitute an
important and particularly relevant initiative with the
potential for broader application and implementation
across conflict situations. Malaysia stands ready to
work closely with Spain and other Council members
towards the realization of such an outcome. That serves
as a response to the United Kingdom’s call for concrete
action.

As the primary organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has risen to the challenge by pursuing
a robust normative agenda and framework for the
protection of civilians. The Council’s focus on thematic
agendas, including the framework set up regarding
civilian protection, particularly children in armed
conflict and conflict-related sexual violence, reflect its
commitment and resolve in that regard.

In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its
belief that the vigour with which the Council pursues
the protection of civilians in conflict must hold true
for all situations. In that regard, we wish to recall
and highlight the plight of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, who seem to be perceived as
being less than worthy of protection by the Council.
Palestine and its people cannot remain the Council’s
Achilles heel indefinitely. Malaysia reiterates its call for
United Nations protection of the occupied Palestinian
territory, in line with international humanitarian law,
particularly the Geneva Conventions. Such protection
would go a long way towards ending impunity in the
occupied territory and towards peace and security in
the region, pending a final comprehensive settlement
aimed at ending the Israeli occupation. The Council
must send a clear message that impunity must cease
and that all parties, including State and non-State

At the same time, we also wish to acknowledge
the response shown by the United Nations system,
particularly the fact that an increasing number of United
Nations peace operations now include civilian-protection
mandates. On that note, we fully endorse the view that,
in mandating its peacekeepers with the obligation to
ensure the protection of civilians, the United Nations
must ensure that peacekeepers are adequately trained
and equipped and receive the necessary logistical
and technological support to enable them to carry out

16-0110417/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

actors, should be held accountable for violations of
international humanitarian law.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the President and Uruguay for its leadership on the
issue of the protection of civilians, both here in the
Security Council by convening this debate and also in
peacekeeping, where Uruguay has played such a strong
regional and international role. I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Beerli and Ms. Rooijmans for
their briefings. Let me offer my profound respect and
admiration for the heroic, lifesaving work that Oxfam
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, as
well as their volunteers, perform every day in Syria and
in other conflict-areas around the world.
Last Thursday, the UNICEF representative in
Syria, Ms. Hanna Singer, managed to penetrate into
the besieged area of Madaya and was brought to the
basement of a makeshift hospital. Two teenage boys
were sharing a bed. Singer recalled that their bodies
were skeleton-like. A UNICEF doctor approached one
of the teenagers, a 16 year-old named Ali. He looked
particularly weak. When the doctor checked his pulse, it
turned out there was none. The doctors started trying to
resuscitate him, but saw that it was hopeless. According
to Singer’s account, given to Agence France Presse, the
other young man lying next to him became frantic: “Did
he die? Did he die?” he asked. Ali’s family, themselves
malnourished and sitting nearby, wept silently. They did
not even have the energy to wail aloud upon realizing
that their boy had died.
Ali was one of at least 35 people who have starved
to death in the town of Madaya since 1 December,
eight of them in the past nine days alone. Um Sultan, a
resident of Madaya, told Amnesty International,
“Every day, I hear that someone is sick and unable
to leave their bed. My husband is now one of them.
He can’t leave his bed, and when he does, he faints.
I don’t recognize him any more; he is skin and
bones. I have asked for help with food, but no one
can help. We are all in the same mess.”
Convoys of food and medical assistance were just
recently permitted to reach the 40,000 people suffering
in Madaya and the 20,000 people besieged by armed
opposition groups in Fu’ah and Kafraya. Evacuations of
some of the hundreds of people reportedly near death
have finally begun. It goes without saying that this is
absurdly overdue. These aid convoys must continue
these evacuations; they must be urgently allowed to

18/91

19/01/2016

proceed, but, above all, the sieges, the daily sieges of
these communities, must be lifted. I speak of Madaya
as others have done today because the crisis there is far
from over for the people living there. As we enter the
United Nations today, all of us, we experience the first
truly bitter cold day of the winter. Now imagine burning
the wooden fixtures and fittings in one’s home for some
respite from that bitter winter. Imagine burning plastic,
as those who have run out of wood to burn have started
to do. Imagine surviving for weeks on leaves and grass
and then imagine winter coming and taking with it the
leaves and grass on which you relied. Imagine being
the mother or the father of a teenage boy like Ali, and
watching your child die without the means of helping
him or her.
We have to try to put ourselves here in the shoes of
others. We have to. These families love like our families
love. They are human beings, and they need us to do
more than we have done up to this point. They need
the medical evacuations that the United Nations has
asked for, which are being agreed to at a trickle. That is
unacceptable. There are 15 besieged areas: two of them
besieged by armed opposition groups; one besieged
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL); and
the rest, 12 of the 15 besieged areas, besieged by a
Member State of the United Nations. Think of that. The
United Nations was created to prevent crimes against
humanity, to prevent atrocities, to prevent images of
emaciated children and civilians from being projected
out of areas in need. Twelve of 15 by a Member State of
the United Nations.
Now I speak of Madaya also because it exemplifies
what this debate is about. It reminds us of the human
stakes when we talk about the protection of civilians.
And it shows why we have to talk about the protection of
civilians regardless of whether or not peacekeepers are
deployed in a particular area. And it reminds us, above
all, of the growing disregard for granting humanitarian
access, which used to be a principle that was observed
as a general rule, even though there were always
exceptions, the disregard for international humanitarian
law and, most fundamentally and most disturbingly, the
apparent disregard for human life. That is what we are
dealing with — a numbing that would allow people to
inflict that kind of harm willfully on civilians and on
children.
More than 4 million Syrians now live in areas where
the United Nations struggles to deliver assistance.
Time and again the Syrian regime has promised to

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

uphold its most basic responsibilities to its citizens.
Time and again it has agreed to allow lifesaving aid to
reach starving people, and time and again the Syrian
regime has failed to follow through. Throughout last
year, Damascus did not even bother to respond to
more than half of United Nations requests to deliver
assistance across conflict lines. And those coutries in
the United Nations that have influence over the Syrian
regime, who are partnering with it now in the conflict,
who are coming in some places to its rescue, please
use that influence to get it, in the first instance, to
respond to United Nations requests and, above all, to
grant those requests. The United Nations estimates that
if the regime approved the outstanding requests — the
requests outstanding just today — 1.4 million people
would receive assistance.
It bears stressing that, while we have all rightly
talked about the use of starvation as a weapon of
war here today, that use of food as a weapon of
war is happening right alongside other horrific
tactics — barrel bombs, chemical weapons use and
systematic torture against civilians by the regime, and,
of course, when it comes to ISIL, some of the most
barbaric and gruesome tactics that we have ever seen
employed, including the use of children to execute their
parents, including the summoning of civilians, as we
saw over the weekend in Deir ez-Zor, with somewhere
between 100 and 300 people executed in cold blood,
and the sexual enslavement of women like Nadia,
whom we heard from in December at our meeting on
human trafficking, Where is the sanctity of life? Where
is the respect for the human dignity of the person in
conflict today? Yemen, South Sudan, Central African
Republic, Burundi — the list goes on and on. Civilians
are not just going unprotected, but often are coming
under deliberate attack.
Let me briefly suggest three areas in which
we — and by we I mean the Security Council, the
United Nations and we each as Member States — can
and must seek immediate improvements.
The first should be straightforward. It is on the
transmission of information. When United Nations
staff leaders and experts, or when any of us as Member
States through our partners on the ground, recognize
looming threats or anticipate potential crises, they
or we must immediately inform the Council. When
something shocks the conscience of someone who
works for a non-governmental organization or for the
United Nations or for a Member State, come forward

S/PV.7606

again, jump up and down, sound the alarm. The Council
must also hear immediately from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) when peacekeeping
contingents that are tasked with protecting civilians do
not fulfil that component of their mandate. As has been
documented, that happens too often. In that instance,
we in the Council can try to use our leverage, our
leverage in capital in terms of our bilateral ties and our
leverage as a Council, to ensure that appropriate action
is taken.
Building upon the Secretary-General’s implementation
report on the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/682), DPKO should also work to
more systematically bring to the Council’s attention
the most pressing protection challenges and strategies
needed to address them. Shine the spotlight back on us,
rather than internalizing the constraints that may well
exist; put it back on the Council, where it belongs.
The second area is peacekeeping performance
and accountability. With nearly all peacekeepers now
mandated to protect civilians, they represent one of our
most powerful tools in this effort, even if they cannot
be, and are not, everywhere. It is incumbent upon the
Council to ensure that all contingents are appropriately
prepared and sufficiently trained and equipped, and
that they are held accountable if they fail to uphold their
mandate.
From the outset, we must ensure that the mission
planning process takes full account of the protection
of civilians. This priority should inform strategy
development and resource allocation. We must also
ensure that the troops being deployed are adequately
prepared. Others have touched upon the importance of
the Kigali Principles, and we share the appreciation for
the initiative taken by Rwanda. The United States is
prioritizing support for troop-contributing countries
that have committed to the Kigali Principles, or who
have otherwise demonstrated a commitment to fully
implementing mission mandates. Once deployed, the
United Nations leadership must be prepared to replace
any contingents that are not effectively protecting
civilians, and certainly also any that would harm
civilians, including through sexual exploitation and
abuse. The additional 50,000 soldiers and police pledged
at the September peacekeeping summit gives the United
Nations new choices and the ability to replace failing
units. This option must be exercised, and, in that regard,
we welcome the United Nations decision to remove the
Democratic Republic of the Congo peacekeepers from

16-0110419/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Central African Republic, as an important signal of
zero tolerance on abuse. Full accountability is needed
across that and other missions for all the allegations
that have surfaced.
Thirdly, and finally, this Council and this
Organization must also recognize that its responsibility
for the protection of civilians is not limited to those
countries hosting peacekeeping missions. From
Madaya to Burundi, when civilians come under threat,
the Council must consider every appropriate action at
its disposal. We may disagree on what the perfect tool
is, but we must agree that we need to open the toolbox
and try to put as many tools in place as have a chance
at achieving influence. That could include sustained
bilateral pressure, the development of mediation
and peacekeeping options, and the consideration
of sanctions against those who are perpetrators or
organizers of attacks against civilians — or attacks
against peacekeepers.
We need to think of how many peacekeepers were
attacked in 2015 and ask how many of those who
attacked United Nations peacekeepers — the very
people sent by the Security Council — were ever held
accountable, ever. And we need to look at that record
over a decade. The answer is a show of the impunity
that the perpetrators of attacks against peacekeepers
feel, and we can imagine, if that is the case for those
coming from Member States of the United Nations sent
by the Council, what it is like for the average civilian
who has been attacked.
We can also increase, as I think we have been doing
lately, Security Council engagement with regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Individual Member
States, each with its particular bilateral relationships
and capabilities, must also consider all the relevant
tools in our respect toolboxes.
Member States and all parts of the United Nations
must also embrace the Secretary-General’s Human
Rights up Front initiative, which means recognizing
once and for all that mainstreaming human rights across
the Organization is not a luxury, it is a necessity. It is
not something that is nice to do, as some Member States
and some within the Organization have suggested, it is
an absolute need — if we are serious about protecting
civilians.
In conclusion, today’s open debate is an opportunity
to discuss how to better protect civilians, which is an

20/91

19/01/2016

urgently needed conversation. But through it I hope we
also send an equally urgent message: no matter how
frequent, heinous or blatant the assaults on civilians,
whether in Syria or elsewhere, the Security Council
will never accept them as the new normal, as somehow
inevitable. Starving civilians, burning villages,
sexually enslaving women: these are not the costs of
war or the inevitable consequences of war; these are
heinous, wilful, barbaric acts. They are the acts that
the Organization was created to prevent. The Council
must remain committed to combating them. It must do
more to combat them. We must do better at ensuring
accountability for those who inflict harm upon civilians
or those tasked with aiding civilians.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome the
President of the Security Council back to New York.
We congratulate Uruguay on organizing today’s debate.
I also want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Beerli of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam for
their briefings.
As others have said, the grim context for our
discussions today is a world in which civilians in
conflict are at greater risk now than at any time in the
Organization’s history. Today’s meeting is a chance to
talk frankly about the challenge of protecting civilians
as well as how the Security Council is meeting
that challenge. The protection of civilians has been
included as a separate thematic item on the Council’s
agenda since 1999. We recognize the normative value
of this process and the significant effort invested in
carrying the discussion forward. But after more than
15 years of reports, debates, thematic resolutions and
presidential statements, we have to acknowledge that
the on-the-ground conditions that bear on the real life
circumstances of civilians in conflict zones are still
dreadful.
In New Zealand’s view, the Council’s focus on the
protection of civilians must shift from words to actions
towards making a meaningful improvement in the
protection of real people in real life situations. I want
to highlight three areas in which we consider that the
Council needs to translate its rhetoric into reality.
As we often say in the Chamber, preventing conflict
is far preferable to dealing with its consequences. Yet
this reality is recognized fitfully at best by the Council,
which regularly resists taking action before real trouble
starts, even when the warning signs are apparent. For

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

over six months, New Zealand has been calling on
the Council to address the growing risk of conflict in
Burundi. We are pleased that agreement has at last been
reached and that a Council mission is departing for
Bujumbura tomorrow. It is important that the Council
listen as well as speak to the Burundian parties. We need
the Government and opposition to commit to reversing
the current slide into conflict and to undertake inclusive
and meaningful reconciliation efforts.
We believe the Council can do much better in
developing nimble and pragmatic responses to emerging
and re-emerging conflict risks, in cooperation with
regional partners. A clear case in point is the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where elections are scheduled later
this year. We know that violence has accompanied past
elections. We know the uncertainties around the coming
elections and the tensions to which they are giving rise.
The Council, in consultation with the African Union,
needs to start thinking now about how to engage the
Democratic Republic to address these risks and how to
respond if the situation goes awry.
In the area of peace operations, countless lives are
saved by the presence and actions of United Nations
peacekeepers, and we pay tribute to the skill and
courage of United Nations personnel in carrying out
this vital role. But, as others have noted, we can do
more to ensure that protection-of-civilians mandates
are implemented more effectively.
Mandates need to be clear, realistic and adequately
resourced. They need to be crafted and adjusted to
changing circumstances. They need to take into account
the views of troop- and police-contributing countries.
Over the past year, New Zealand has promoted more
meaningful engagement among the Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries
on mandate formation and renewal, prefiguring the
triangular consultations called for in the report (see
S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. In our view, such consultations
should be a more consistent feature in Council
practice. Their value was recognized in the December
presidential statement adopted upon the initiative of
Chad (S/PRST/2015/26).
Last March, the Council adopted New Zealand’s
proposal for regular informal Secretariat briefings to
keep the Council informed of key developments in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That was a

S/PV.7606

positive step that could usefully be applied to other highrisk situations on the Council’s agenda, particularly
those involving protection mandates.
Current decision-making lacks the situational
awareness that comes from real-time, highquality information on emerging risks and ongoing
implementation challenges. While the Council is
not the body to make operational decisions about the
disposition of peacekeeping forces, we do need a better
appreciation of the risks and threats facing peacekeepers
and the civilians they are seeking to protect. This is an
obvious area for improvement and one in which we will
continue to press for greater openness.
Effective protection means ensuring civilians have
access to essential humanitarian assistance as required
by international humanitarian law. This has been the
focus of efforts led first by Australia, Luxembourg
and Jordan, and then New Zealand, Jordan and Spain,
to try to improve humanitarian access to civilians in
Syria, particularly in besieged and hard-to-access
areas. Resolution 2258 (2015), adopted unanimously
last month, gave particular attention to this question.
Regular reports from Madaya, Fu’ah and Kefraya
have graphically shown the failures of the Syrian
Government and armed opposition groups with
respect to their people and their responsibilities under
international law. We are encouraged that desperately
needed access and aid have at last gotten through to
these towns over the past week. It is imperative that
they be allowed to continue and that similar unimpeded
access is allowed to the 14 other Madayas across Syria.
We are deeply disturbed by the reports of brutality
on the part of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Deir ez-Zor, and would welcome further information on
this episode from the Secretariat. In addition to access
difficulties, as the Secretary-General has highlighted,
attacks on health-care personnel, health-care facilities
and medical vehicles are also occurring in many of the
conflicts on the Council’s agenda. These are further
contraventions of international humanitarian law that
demand attention. New Zealand and Spain, together
with Egypt, Uruguay and others, intend to take forward
an initiative aimed at increasing practical protection for
health care in situations of armed conflict.
It is axiomatic that United Nations personnel
cannot be a threat to the civilians they are mandated
to protect. Yet we continue to hear reports of sexual

16-0110421/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

abuse and exploitation against populations traumatized
already by appalling conflict situations.

actors, for their obligations under international law
with regard to the protection of civilians.

We acknowledge the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse, and
we commend him for making good on his undertaking
to require the removal of contingents that continue to
transgress and whose Governments fail to take effective
enforcement and remedial action. The Council must
be kept informed of the steps taken, both to prosecute
alleged offenders and to require contributing countries
to account for the performance of their personnel.

The Senegalese delegation believes that prevention
and mediation are the least costly approaches, including
in terms of loss of human life, to ensure the protection
of civilians, and that the promotion of a lasting peace
is the most sustainable way of creating such an
environment. Prevention must be based on a system of
rapid analysis and early warning, allowing us to carry
out more nimble actions.

Finally, I thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report on the protection of civilians. New Zealand looks
forward to discussing with Council members the next
annual report later this year and how we can ensure that
it is considered in a structured and timely manner and
that we respond appropriately.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
the delegation of Senegal warmly welcomes the initiative
taken by your country to convene this important open
debate, which gives us an opportunity to reiterate our
deep collective commitment to the protection of civilian
populations in times of armed conflict. The fact that
you yourself, Mr. Vice-Minister, have travelled to New
York to preside over the debate is to be commended.
The Senegalese delegation also wishes to congratulate
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor at Oxfam.
The bleak picture painted by the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2015/453) reminds us that despite the
progress achieved in the normative field, the struggle
for the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict is far from having been won. The truth is that
the strong support of the international community
for the relevant legal instruments and mechanisms is,
sadly, far from having become translated into action on
the ground, where the realities remain very troubling.
What is therefore required is a genuine mobilization and
greater proactivity on the part of the Council to ensure
a more effective protection of civilians in general and
of women and children in particular.
In that respect, the Security Council must increase
its vigilance and its efforts to ensure respect by all
parties to conflict, Governments as well as non-State

22/91

In that respect, strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, which tend to
have a better understanding of the factors involved in a
conflict and of local socioeconomic dynamics, as well
as the involvement of political, religious and community
leaders, can have a positive impact on the protection
of civilians. Cooperation with the non-governmental
organizations deployed in conflict areas also seems
essential to us.
In any event, the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, must play a vital role in this respect,
as it bears primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and therefore for
protecting human security throughout the world. That
is why the Council’s actions should focus more sharply
on the creation of a genuine culture of prevention of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Concerning the fight against impunity, the
existing criminal Tribunals, especially the International
Criminal Court, must be strongly supported in that
respect.
The Council has an array of tools ranging from
preventive deployment to the dispatch of peacekeeping
or peacebuilding forces. The report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) highlights the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping operations contribute significantly to
protecting, on a daily basis, thousands of civilians
through the monitoring and upholding of human rights;
their physical presence; deterrence and protection
measures; and support for the development of the rule
of law, in a context of political engagement with the
parties to a conflict.
At the operational level, peacekeepers should be
provided the means and capacities required to properly
and effectively implement their mandates, particularly
given the fact that missions are being deployed to
increasingly hostile and demanding environments,

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

which, naturally, can make the implementation of their
obligations difficult in terms of providing protection.
Senegal has adopted a number of provisions in the
framework of the protection of civilians, on which I
will elaborate.
First, Senegal began very early the process of the
harmonization of its national legal framework with the
relevant international standards, and has also adopted
a national strategy for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.
The 2016 action plan of the Chiefs of Staff of the
Senegalese armed forces, which is geared towards
training troops in the area of the rights and protection
of civilians, states: “Within and beyond national
borders, the Senegalese armed forces have a duty not
to perpetrate abuses. Moreover, they must be protective
of vulnerable groups such as women and children”. In
other words, the protection of civilians in theatres of
deployment is a pre-eminent reason for the presence
of Senegalese troops. Senegal’s support for the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians is part of the
same dynamic.
To give shape to this vision, my country has
committed to bolstering the capacities of its armed
forces in the field of armed-conflict law by placing the
emphasis on training and the planning and conduct of
operations, with the goal of allowing Senegalese men
and women involved in armed conflict, at whatever
level, to be more familiar with and, above all, strictly
to discharge their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
I should like to give two examples of the actions
taken by the Senegalese security and defence forces.
First, the Senegalese security and defence forces
maintain ongoing cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which has
allowed army schools and training centres to receive
education on international humanitarian law, which
is regularly provided under the auspices of the ICRC.
Two teacher-training seminars were held in 2012 and
2014, respectively, for some 30 Senegalese officers, and
conference cycles geared to peacekeeping contingents
have been drawn up for the next year.
A second example is the close cooperation of the
Senegalese armed forces with the Save the Children
non-governmental organization, which has resulted in,
inter alia, the creation, at the level of Chiefs of Staff,

S/PV.7606

of a committee — the Child Rights and Protection
Section — responsible for the implementation and
coordination of troop-training activities in the area of
the rights and protection of children before, during and
after conflicts. The second outcome of the collaboration
with Save the Children was the adoption of a plan of
action for 2016 to train officers about the rights and
protection of children.
With regard to punishments that could be imposed,
a range of strict disciplinary measures has been
envisaged in the event of confirmed violations of
international humanitarian law — violence, abuse, rape,
et cetera — by one or more members of the Senegalese
armed forces. Those measures include imprisonment
for high-level military officers; the arrest of
non-commissioned officers and officers; repatriation;
disciplinary action with the possibility of dismissal;
or trial before a civil and/or military tribunal. In any
event, for the Senegalese armed forces, information and
training in international humanitarian law are major
priorities based on the pursuit of two goals. The first
is to comply with our legal texts and our international
obligations; the second is to protect the image of our
army, the professionalism and republican character of
which are recognized around the world.
All of that contributes to the implementation by
my country of the zero-tolerance policy. The notion
of the “army-nation” is the ideal of the Senegalese
armed forces, whose motto is “They may kill us, but
they cannot dishonour us”. That ideal and motto were
embodied to the highest degree by the courageous
late Captain Mbaye Diagne, who, throughout his
professional career, embodied the ideal of the protection
of citizens, sadly at the cost of his life. After many
dangerous missions, the late Captain Mbaye Diagne
lost his life during the genocide in Rwanda in his efforts
to save hundreds of unprotected, innocent people from
certain death. In recognition and in memory of that late
Senegalese officer, the United Nations took the historic
decision to establish the Captain Mbaye Diagne Medal
for Exceptional Courage, which is awarded each year
to men and women who, like him, have distinguished
themselves in the various theatres of engagement by
their commendable commitment to the vulnerable.
In 2015 the medal was not awarded owing to a lack
of deserving candidates. It is that model of the late
Captain Mbaye Diagne that the Senegalese delegation
would like to offer to peacekeepers, Blue Helmets,
wherever their noble duty calls them, so that they, as

16-0110423/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

United Nations forces, may be able to call upon and be
deserving of the necessary trust of the populations of
the countries in which they serve. That trust underpins
peacekeeping, strengthens social ties and alleviates the
tensions born of conflict that are inherent to all life in
society.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of
Uruguay for having taken the initiative to organize
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for having prepared the concept
note to inform our discussion (see S/2016/22, annex). I
would also like to express our appreciation to Mr. José
Luis Cancela, Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Uruguay, for presiding over this debate. And I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for
their briefings.
The conflicts in the world today and the plight of
civilians, in particular in the Middle East and Africa,
are unprecedented; they challenge us in our efforts to
enforce the principle of the responsibility to protect
civilians in conflict, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, including women and children. The urgency of
that issue is perhaps best illustrated by the atrocities
suffered by civilians in Syria as a result of the conflict
that has been taking place there for the past five years,
as well as the violations suffered by the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected to occupation for more
than 60 years.
The protection of such groups falls within the
purview of the Security Council. Many United Nations
meetings have been held to discuss the concept of
the protection of civilians. In that respect, it is worth
noting the Human Rights Council resolutions proposed
by Egypt and adopted by that Council in 2011 on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That issue
falls within the scope of the Security Council, which
is why the protection of civilians at imminent risk
has become part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Fifteen years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), and yet the optimum way for
peacekeeping operations to implement their mandates
with regard to the protection of civilians remains
unclear. United Nations States Members have yet to
reach consensus on the scope and feasibility of the use
of force by peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.

24/91

19/01/2016

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
given an active mandate that included an unprecedented
military component in the form of the Intervention
Brigade. Although there were some successes, the
mandate failed to provide sufficient protection for
civilians in that country, who continue to suffer
atrocities at the hands of armed groups.
In South Sudan, the United Nations provided for
the direct protection of civilians in United Nations
compounds; however, the direct protection method,
despite being a moral necessity, is very costly and
unsustainable. It also does not provide protection to
the hundreds of thousands of civilians who are at risk
outside those compounds, a group that continues to
grow in number.
Egypt stresses that peacekeeping operations are
but one tool for the protection of civilians. They are
not necessarily the optimal or most effective way to
address the risks faced by civilians. In that respect, we
stress that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with the country concerned and that the
objective of peacekeeping operations is to enhance the
capacity of States to fulfil their obligations.
Peacekeeping missions should respect the principles
of sovereignty and national ownership and the cultural
specificity of the host countries. Furthermore, the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict
should not be limited to physical or bodily protection.
It should also focus on providing political solutions
to end conflict and prevent its recurrence, and should
address the root causes of the conflict. We should adopt
a more comprehensive approach that addresses poverty
and socioeconomic marginalization, and enhances
the role of the national institutions and mechanisms
concerned with the prevention and management of
conflicts, in particular the justice and security sector.
That is perhaps the most important message to take
away from the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture. In the
future, more attention should be paid to the emerging
challenges faced by civilians, first and foremost
international terrorism.
In conclusion, success in implementing the
principle of protecting civilians in armed conflicts
hinges on achieving global consensus on the concept.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It has to be based on relevant concepts and frameworks
that gain broad consensus here at the United Nations
without addressing any controversial concepts.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are honoured to
see a brother Latin American country presiding over
the Security Council. We take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which
your country has been conducting the affairs of the
Council during the month of January and for having
convened today’s important debate. We welcome
the briefings made by Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian
Policy Advisor of Oxfam, and Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We acknowledge and congratulate the
briefers on the outstanding relief work they carry out
worldwide.
In accordance with the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, civilians
and people who do not take part in combat cannot,
under any circumstances, be victims of attacks
or violence. Particular attention should be paid to
children, women, the elderly, people with disabilities
and displaced persons. Unfortunately, in many of
today’s armed conflicts, the loss of life among civilians
far exceeds that among combatants. Civilians who
are in the midst of armed conflict require protection,
in particular when those involved in the conflict are
terrorist groups that operate outside the agreed norms
and conventions of international law. The level of
brutality and pure disregard for human life and dignity
that we see today in many conflicts in which terrorist
groups are involved — especially in the Middle East
and in Africa — is alarming. Groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Boko Haram and
the Al-Nusrah Front indiscriminately target civilians.
They torture, kidnap, disappear and recruit civilians
by force, driving them from their homes, separating
them from their families and denying them access to
the most basic human rights. The human cost of such
actions is devastating over time.
Venezuela condemns the siege against civilians
in the armed conflict in Syria, regardless of who the
perpetrators might be. We call attention in particular
to the situations in Madaya, Kafraya and Fu’ah,
which constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. However, the conflict in Syria is
brutal and the main enemy is terrorism, which continues

S/PV.7606

to show contempt for human life. One example of such
contempt was the attack perpetrated in August last year
in Palmyra, when ISIS forces entered the city, killed
all of the prisoners, murdered eminent archeologist
and 81-year-old Khaled al-Asaad, and destroyed world
heritage sites. Another example was the attack in Deyr
ez-Zour last Saturday, when ISIS forces entered the
city and murdered 300 people, most of them women,
children and the elderly, simply because they were
relatives of Syrian combatants.
Those examples serve to highlight the complete
lack of humanity with which that terrorist organization
operates and the threat to people under their siege. No
one, no civilian, is safe from the demented violence
perpetrated by ISIS and other terrorist groups. We must
therefore work together and act decisively to eliminate
the scourge. This new phenomenon means that the
Security Council must adjust the mechanisms it uses to
protect civilians.
The number of persons who have been displaced as a
result of conflict is at its highest since the Second World
War. It is estimated that 38 million people are displaced
within their own countries, and 19.5 million people live
as refugees abroad. In the case of Afghanistan, there
were more civilian casualties in 2014 than in any other
year since 2009. In Iraq, the number of people requiring
humanitarian assistance stands at 8.2 million. In Libya,
violent confrontations between armed groups and
militias has had a disproportionate impact on children.
More than 400,000 people have been displaced from
their homes and hundreds of thousands do not have
access to humanitarian aid.
Israeli attacks against the Palestinian population in
Gaza in 2014 left more than 1,500 Palestinians dead,
500 of them children, and more than 1,100 injured. Five
hundred thousand Palestinians were displaced from
their homes and tens of thousands had their homes and
livelihoods deliberately destroyed. The case of Palestine
continues to weigh on the conscience of the Security
Council because it is the most irrefutable situation
illustrating the need for civilian protection — this, the
long-standing Israeli occupation of the territories of the
Palestinian people.
In the conflict in Yemen, it is estimated that up to
15.9 million people — 60 per cent of the population — are
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.

16-0110425/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In Syria, the number of displaced persons stands at
6.6 million, while over 4.6 million civilians are living
as refugees.
In the Central African Republic, between 6,000
and 10,000 children have been recruited by armed
militias in the past year, more than a fifth of the
population has been displaced and 430,000 refugees
live in neighbouring countries.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
2.8 million people have been displaced and almost
450,000 are living as refugees.
Wherever we look, we see an alarming and
devastating, crushing reality that requires our attention
and decisive action.
When United Nations peacekeeping operations are
present in conflict areas, they could play a key role in
protecting civilians — all the while acting impartially
to ensure their own safety and complying with their
mandate, and with the consent of the host State.
Strategies that do not involve the use of weapons must
be at the forefront of United Nations efforts to protect
civilians. Peacekeeping operations, as inherently
political tools, can protect civilians more effectively and
help build trust among the parties, ending conflicts and
facilitating peace agreements. The quest for a political
solution must guide the planning, deployment and
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations
on the ground.
In addition, peacekeeping operations are committed
to starting an open and impartial discussion with
all the parties to a conflict in an effort to explore
all other options that can be used as alternatives to
violence, thereby promoting respect among all actors
on the ground, regardless of their political ideology,
ethnicity, religion or military affiliation. Humanitarian
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, play a fundamental role in that regard.
The Organization’s success with the strategies that
do not involve the use of weapons in the protection of
civilians depends on, to some extent, on its ability to
forge strong alliances with such actors and work closely
with local communities. Many non-governmental,
national and international organizations that are
committed to using strategies that do not involve the
use of weapons to protect civilians are also working
assiduously on the ground.

26/91

19/01/2016

In that regard, the United Nations should make
use of such important resources, paying attention to
the practices and capabilities of local communities and
humanitarian organizations on the ground to create
an environment that is conducive to the protection
of civilians. Likewise, the Security Council and the
Secretariat must step up efforts to start inclusive
and substantive consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries, ensuring that they fully
participate in the tasks of planning and implementing
mandates. We stress that such consultations should take
place at the highest level, including with specialized
personnel, experts and senior military officials in
capitals in all operational phases of peacekeeping
missions.
In addition to the actions I have already mentioned,
peacekeeping operations can also make an important
contribution to protecting civilians by acting as
deterrents. A mission’s presence on the ground plays an
important role in that regard. Military patrols and the
deployment troops constitute one of the most tangible
guarantees of security that can be offered to local
communities.
All the activities I have just described, as a
whole, can contribute significantly to the protection
of civilians. However, in situations where the civilian
population is under the imminent threat of attack,
peacekeeping troops must always be ready to act
assertively. Accordingly, they must always have the
forces, equipment and necessary training to deal with
those situations.
In conclusion, the reality is that, as long as our
Organization continues to devote insufficient political
attention and resources to prevention and greater
attention and resources to respond to crises — while,
once again, giving little in the way of political attention
and resources to the reconstruction and recovery phase
of States — we will be failing those civilians who
are suffering from the brunt of the violence. We must
move beyond the status quo and focus all our efforts on
preventing conflicts in the first place and ensuring they
do not recur.
The Security Council must focus more on preventing
conflicts rather than on fanning them. It should refrain
from getting involved in them in pursuit of the national
positions of its members. The Council should ensure
the inviolability of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. The conflicts in Iraq,

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Libya, Syria and Yemen have become veritable human
tragedies linked to the collapse of States, the use of
terrorism to overthrow Governments and the violation
of the principles of non-interference and respect for
sovereignty. The Security Council must increase its
focus on a political solution to those conflicts as the
most effective way of protecting civilians, who are
caught up in them.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming back to New York. We
welcome you here. I also thank the Uruguayan
presidency for having convened this open debate on the
critical issue of the protection of civilians.
We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his briefing and recommendations, as well
as Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian Policy
Advisor of Oxfam for their respective briefings and
for bringing to the Council accounts of real situations
that we sometimes just discuss here. They have brought
those situations closer to us within this Chamber, which
is an important thing.
Angola shares the view that protection is the most
effective tool in addressing potential conflict situations.
States bear the responsibility for the protection of their
civilian populations. The international community
has a subsidiary but very important role to play in
addressing the very serious problem of threats against
civilians in armed conflicts. Let us also be clear that
the responsibility-to-protect agenda, on which the
protection of civilians is based, should not be used for
agendas that run contrary to the very concept of the
protection of civilians.
According to the latest report (S/2015/453) of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians, by the
end of 2014 the number of internally displaced persons
had reached a record breaking more than 38 million,
owing to conflicts and violence, while 30 million had
sought refuge abroad. Those numbers were surpassed
in 2015, with approximately 59.5 million refugees,
internally displaced persons or asylum-seekers
throughout the world. According the Office of the

S/PV.7606

United Nations High Commission for Refugees, in 2015
more than 950,000 refugees arrived in Europe through
the Mediterranean Sea alone, fleeing war and violence
in their countries. That has also been referred to several
times during our debate this morning.
The sheer brutality and disregard for human life
and dignity characterize today’s conflicts. Massive
human rights violations and abuse continue to occur
in a context of widespread insecurity and neglect
for international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Civilians are killed both via targeted and
indiscriminate attacks. They are tortured, maimed,
taken hostage, forcibly recruited into armed groups or
simply vanish. People are expelled from their homes,
separated from their families and denied access to
their most basic needs. Despite the establishment of a
robust normative framework by the Security Council,
the United Nations and other international bodies, the
fact that the protection of civilians features in various
resolutions and presidential statements of the Security
Council, and despite the strengthening of protection
in peacekeeping operations, human rights mandates
have not been translated into significant improvements
where conflicts are rampant.
Angola stresses the primacy of international law
in this regard — namely, the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Conventions and, in particular, the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and its Additional Protocols — and yjr
standards set out in international legal instruments on
human rights.
Pertaining to the subject matter under consideration,
we are particularly concerned with three critical issues.
First, humanitarian access remains a key challenge
in many situations of armed conflict, along with
worrying practices of obstructing the delivery of
assistance as a tactic of war, which puts additional strain
on civilians. Attacks against humanitarian workers and
civilian facilities, such as schools and hospitals, and
depriving civilians of basic needs constitute violations
of international humanitarian law, which we also utterly
condemn.
Secondly, the brutalizing of civilians, the targeting
of civilian infrastructure and lack of accountability
have become an endemic feature in ongoing conflicts,
further aggravating the plight of civilian populations.
It is disturbing how such violations of international
law meet with widespread impunity, while victims are

16-0110427/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

deprived of any semblance of justice — a situation that
must not be allowed to prevail.
Thirdly, the widespread use of explosive devices is
having a devastating humanitarian impact on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s view, expressed in his latest report, on the
development of policy standards to limit the use of
explosive devices in populated areas, as a means to
significantly strengthen the protection of civilians.
We acknowledge the crucial role of peacekeeping
missions in protecting civilians and as an important
component of the global commitment to preventing
and settling conflicts peacefully. The High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations rightly identified
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts as a core
principle of international humanitarian law and a moral
responsibility of the United Nations. Furthermore, the
Panel reiterated the need for strengthened partnerships
and cooperation with regional organizations, in
particular with the African Union, taking into account
that most peacekeeping operations are deployed in
Africa. The Council will have an opportunity to engage
with the African Union within a few days when we
travel to Africa, and especially to Burundi, in regard to
the protection of civilians.
In conclusion, Angola fully endorses the highlevel recommendations on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and its call for sustained, predictable
and flexible funding mechanisms in support of African
Union peace operations. Finally, we recall the United
Nations fundamental purpose to apply preventive
diplomacy to reduce the risk of armed conflicts and the
core principle of international efforts to prevent, settle
peacefully and protect civilians under threat.
This open debate today, judging from the wide
support and response of the membership, is a clear
sign that we are not yet doing what is required of
the Security Council and that there is a wide gap
between policy and practice. Let us use this debate and
opportunity to rededicate ourselves to the Council and
to take advantage of the great opportunity it affords the
Council.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to welcome His Excellency Mr. José Luis
Cancela, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

28/91

19/01/2016

(spoke in English)
My gratitude also goes to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the
representative of OXFAM for their briefings. I add
my voice to others to praise the humanitarian workers
of the United Nations, the ICRC, OXFAM and other
humanitarian non-governmental organizations for their
tireless efforts, often made at the risk of their lives, to
help those who are suffering in armed conflicts.
Today’s topic, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, is one of the most pertinent subjects that
the Security Council has to deal with. The appalling
situation in Syria, which the Council has been
discussing intensively for years, illustrates vividly the
importance of this issue. Japan associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. Since the
Swiss statement will cover many aspects mentioned
in the President’s concept note (S/2016/22, annex), I
would like to focus my statement on two points only:
compliance and accountability.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/453), submitted in June 2015, points out,
ensuring compliance in armed conflicts remains a
challenge to the international community. The thirtysecond International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent, which took place just one month ago in
Geneva, was a real opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its commitment to
strengthening
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law. One of the important outcomes
that many of us expected to see was the adoption of
comprehensive mechanisms and the strengthening of
the normative framework of international humanitarian
law. Very regrettably, however, we failed to reach an
agreement. Mechanisms that strongly encouraged
relevant parties to comply with international
humanitarian law are more than ever awaited. Member
States should strive ceaselessly and in a more inclusive
manner to establish such mechanisms. On that issue,
Japan will continue to engage in discussions with other
Member States.
When compliance fails, accountability must play its
role. Effective accountability deters non-compliance.
I believe that we have a unique tool to enhance
accountability when national judicial systems are

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

not sufficient; we all know that is the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Recently, we have witnessed a
case in which the ICC completed its first judicial cycle
of crimes committed against civilians, which includes
the issuance of arrest warrants, the surrender of the
defendant, a trial, a judgement and, finally, a sentence
served. In this case, it took more than eight years to
complete this cycle.
I am fully aware that States Members of the United
Nations have varying views and perspectives on the
ICC, but it is the first permanent international criminal
court. It is not an ad hoc court. It is the first permanent
international criminal court that can hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
With 123 States parties, which is very close to twothirds of the entire membership of the United Nations,
the ICC can be the most effective tool available to
ensure accountability. Therefore, I would like to
strongly encourage Member States that have not done
so to become States parties to the ICC. Let us make the
Court more universal so that we can effectively deter
crimes committed against civilians. I believe that the
Security Council, on its part, can do more to enhance
cooperation and communication with the ICC. To those
ends, Japan is willing to work together with the Member
States in and outside the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the importance
of promoting human security while protecting civilians.
In my view, it is not sufficient to simply protect civilians
from physical harm. Their human dignity must also be
protected. Vulnerable people in armed conflicts cannot
recover their dignity if they are left in extreme poverty
and fear. They need to be empowered to become
constructive actors in their communities by such means
as improving health-care systems and education. Japan,
being a strong advocate of human security, will further
strengthen humanitarian and development assistance to
address such needs.
(spoke in Spanish)
Finally, it is nearly 1 p.m.; we began this debate
three hours ago. There still remains one Council
member to speak and a lot of people are waiting. We
have 77 speakers today. I think that we, the Security
Council, need to put a little order into all of this and
to set a time limit so that all Member States, not just
members of the Council but all Members of the United
Nations that desire to take the floor to speak will be
able to do so before 5.30 p.m.

S/PV.7606

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Japan for his kind words, and we will
definitely take the necessary measures to integrate
efficiency into the work of the Council.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Uruguayan
presidency for its initiative to return to the issue of
the protection of civilians in times of armed conflict.
We thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the other
speakers for their assessments and useful information.
The issue of protection of civilians is on the
Security Council’s agenda as one of the key elements
for the resolution of armed conflicts and the
maintenance international peace and security as a
whole. Unfortunately, cruelty and disdain for human
life are characteristic of a number of contemporary
armed conflicts. Civilians are killed and maimed by
the indiscriminate use of force or deliberate attacks,
and subjected to torture and other cruel and inhuman
treatment and punishment and to various forms of
violence. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and
other groups allied to that criminal terrorist structure,
which are running rampant in Iraq, Syria and other
countries, are committing horrific atrocities against
civilians, including women and children.
The protection of civilians remains the priority
responsibility of the parties to a conflict. An important
role in the success of national efforts in that sphere
can be played by assistance to Governments from
the international community. Military response is
possible only with the authorization of the Security
Council and in strict compliance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations. We agree with the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations,and the Secretary-General on the
need for political dialogue as a priority instrument in
settling conflict situations, including in the context of
the protection of civilians. We consider that task to be
one of the elements of the activities of United Nations
peacekeeping missions mandated under Chapter VII of
the Charter.
Key benchmarks in that sphere should be the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
basic principles of the United Nations peacemaking. We
cannot agree with the periodic calls for their flexible
interpretation, depending on changing circumstances
on the ground, above all in the context of the use of force
by Blue Helmets. Undoubtedly, what is unacceptable is

16-0110429/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

any crime against civilians by peacekeepers themselves,
such as the egregious cases of sexual violence that have
surfaced in recent months.
We attach great importance to the establishment of
conditions conducive to the proper and timely provision
of humanitarian assistance to populations in need. We
note the efforts of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations
in that sphere. The Council has repeatedly called on
parties to armed conflict to unswervingly abide by
the provisions of international humanitarian law with
regard to respect for and protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel working in armed conflict zones.
Nevertheless, the situation in that sphere leaves much
to be desired, and the lives and well-being of those who
provide assistance to victims continue to be exposed to
unwarranted threats. In October 2015, dozens of people
were killed in an air strike on a hospital run by the
international non-governmental organization (NGO)
Médecins Sans Frontières in Kunduz. Very recently, an
air strike was also carried out on a medical centre run
by the same NGO in Yemen.
Contemporary armed conflicts are accompanied
by the massive displacement of civilians. The
unprecedented increase in the number of people who
have been forced to leave their homes — the largest
number since since the Second World War— and the
continuous rise in humanitarian needs is a serious test
of the United Nations mettle.
It will be possible to overcome the modern
migratory and humanitarian crises caused largely by
conflicts provoked from outside in the Middle East and
North Africa only through political settlement and the
socioeconomic stabilization of situations in migrant
countries of origin. Special attention needs to be
given to issues of providing and protecting their rights
in host countries, taking into account the specifics
and traditions of various cultures and religions, and
ensuring that forced migrants are not automatically
equated with potential terrorists.
The guarantee for success in sparing civilians the
brunt of the suffering caused by conflicts in their midst
lies in unflinching compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations, the norms of international humanitarian
law and relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as in eschewing politicized, selective and unilateral
approaches to that issue. Only in that way will the

30/91

19/01/2016

decisions taken be truly effective and ensure genuine
protection for civilians during armed conflict.
One cannot help noting that the importance and
relevance of the theme of protecting civilians, and its
often highly emotional resonance, makes its susceptible
to unscrupulous exploitation for dubious political ends.
Unfortunately, that has happened today. Clearly, the
thinking is that using this discussion as a vehicle to trot
out another slew of unsubstantiated accusations against
Russia will give it some kind of legitimacy.
Civilians, including women and children, make
up a significant part of those who have died and been
injured as a result of the conflict in Ukraine. That
is the tragic result of the refusal in 2014 by the Kyiv
authorities to engage in dialogue with the East and
their attempt to resolve the problem by carrying out
a mass military operation that they cynically dubbed
“counter-terrorist”. The solemn vow made by President
of Ukraine on 1 July 2014 never to use force against
civilians and not to target residential areas was followed
by mass shelling of settlements in the Donetsk and
Lugansk regions, and the number of civilians continues
to grow with each passing day. Kyiv’s continued
economic blockade of the region continues to take its
toll on the region.
The most reliable way to end the suffering of
residents in the Donbas is the timely settlement of the
crisis on the basis of the clear implementation of all
provisions of the Minsk agreements. The parties to the
conflict, above all the Ukrainian authorities, must find
the political will to implement the decisions enshrined
in the Minsk package of measures.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to join others
in thanking you, Sir, and your delegation for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing, which reaffirms his unwavering

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

commitment to the protection of civilians agenda,
especially in promoting a culture of prevention.
Additionally, I would like to acknowledge Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Oxfam
Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor, for being here
with us today and for their work, despite the challenges
and the risks involved.
Our history has informed our resolve to advocate
for and contribute, where possible, to the protection of
civilians entangled in today’s armed conflicts. One life
lost is one too many. We can all agree on that point. We
believe that you, Sir, also hold this conviction, Uruguay
being one of the first signatories of the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.
May I start by sharing how I view the protection
of civilians mandate is understood among the
international
community.
Some
troopand
police-contributing countries believe they are deployed
to protect by their presence — an idea that suggests
a more static approach to protection of civilians.
Other troop- and police-contributors adhere to a more
proactive approach to the protection of civilians, by
implementing a robust approach in the implementation
of their mandate. However, those differing views on
the protection-of-civilians mandate are not new. Since
the establishment of the United Nations, some 70 years
ago, the Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions and strategies to protect civilians in armed
conflict, including landmark resolution 1265 (1999).
However, in 1994 more than 1 million were killed
during the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. That
was one of the darkest moments in the modern history
of humankind and of peacekeeping.
Today, more than 20 years since the genocide
against the Tutsi, we keep asking ourselves — why?
Why did the United Nations do little to nothing to protect
Rwandans? Why did the international community not
step in and prevent the fastest-moving genocide of the
twentieth century? To this day, we still have no clear
answer. In my own region, the Great Lakes region, we
have a peacekeeping mission that is supposed to provide
protection to civilians entangled in armed conflict,
but we have seen time and again that it has struggled
to deliver on that crucial promise to protect. Despite
the presence of the largest peacekeeping force — the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Force Intervention Brigade — which are

S/PV.7606

equipped with all types of equipment and enablers,
we are still facing roaming predators against civilians,
mainly the so-called Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, the former genocidal forces in Rwanda.
While we understand that the responsibility to
protect civilians lies primarily with the host country,
our main source of frustration today is the continued
inability of the international community, in a timely
manner, to rapidly respond to conflicts that may
turn violent, which could serve to effectively protect
civilians.
I would like to now take the time to touch upon
some challenges that we believe significantly impact the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandates
in today’s peacekeeping missions.
First, we are still divided over what the use of force
entails. That is worrisome, considering the thousands
of peacekeepers entrusted with saving the lives of
civilians throughout the world. We need to clearly and
thoroughly confirm what is entailed, particularly when
the threat to civilians may arise from groups that claim
to be affiliated with the host Government. We seek a
common mindset.
Secondly, we must achieve sound and effective
rapid deployment. Even if we are to obtain the
necessary number of troops, the required contingentowned equipment and more, none of it matters if we
cannot rapidly deploy. As the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations noted,
“Truly rapid and effective deployment
capacities will always come at a cost, but a more
reliable system for responding quickly to save lives
and arrest emerging conflicts can potentially avoid
a larger, more costly response later.” (S/2015/446,
para. 197).
Thirdly, we must avoid template approaches that
constrain protection-of-civilians mandates and the
respective peacekeeping mission. Now is the time
for us, the international community, to act boldly,
strategically and flexibly. Applying tailored approaches
means assessing the situation on the ground and the
capabilities needed to properly protect civilians, and,
as highlighted by the High-level Panel, to “build upon
existing sources of resilience and local protection”
(ibid, para. 94). Template mandates and missions must
be left in the past.

16-0110431/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

Fourthly, while a lot has been done by troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
to improve the protection of civilians, the increasing
violence against civilians has tested the fundamental
principles and capabilities of our operations and
demonstrated that much remains to be done. Our
experience on the ground has proved that peacekeeping
operations that are ill-prepared, with no adequate
means to address large-scale violence directed against
civilians, will falter and may even collapse.

Allow me to also emphasize the role of regional
and subregional organizations, which we believe could
enhance the implementation of protection-of-civilians
mandates due to their cultural and regional proximity
and local knowledge of conflict dynamics, as well
as their ability to deploy quickly. It is my hope that
this organ will continue to maximize the use of their
comparative advantages, involving them throughout
the process of missions deployment, including
consultations on mandate design.

Fifthly, we must understand the root causes of the
conflicts we face so that we can thoroughly protect
civilians. Such an understanding will, in turn, allow
us to understand the “hows” and “whys” of attacks
on civilians, which, as the High-level Panel noted,
that allows for identifying proper responses to threats
against civilians.

In conclusion, I wish to share the following words
of President Paul Kagame:

Lastly, there often exists a gap between the
expectations surrounding civilian protection and the
actual capabilities possessed by peacekeepers. Both
must be considered in the design of mandates. We
believe that threats to civilians and solutions to them
should inform mission mandates, strategies, structures
and resources allocation, as set out in the benchmarks
outlined in the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. As the Council will recall, the Principles
were the outcome of the high-level international
conference that we hosted in May 2015. As the concept
note (S/2016/22, annex) rightly puts it, the benchmarks
set out in the Kigali Principles offer proactive, practical
ways that could lead to addressing current challenges in
implementing protection-of-civilians mandates.
We thank the Member States that endorsed the
Principles at an early stage, including your country,
Sir, Uruguay. We encourage others to join us in that
endeavour. In collaboration with the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations and other
Member States, we hope to streamline the Principles
into the core of the protection-of-civilians agenda. That
will help us overcome the challenges we face in the
protection of civilians and the implementation of that
mandate.
In the coming months — in April, I think — we
will co-host an international conference with the United
States Africa Command and the Netherlands, which
will serve as a follow-up to the protection-of-civilians
conference held in Kigali last year. We look forward to
Council members’ participation.

32/91

“We cannot turn the clock back, nor can we undo the
harm caused, but we have the power to determine
the future and to ensure that what happened never
happens again.”
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for having convened this meeting and
having drafted an excellent concept note (S/2016/22,
annex).
(spoke in English)
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the representative of Oxfam for their
enlightening briefings. Let me express my appreciation
for the courageous work carried out by the Red Cross
and the Red Crescent Movement, even under extremely
dangerous circumstances.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
We stand at the crossroads of three ambitious
reviews on international peace and security, all
of which are highly relevant to our debates on the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. There
are clear convergences among the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446), the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (see
S/2015/490) and the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace nad
security. Those three documents, which have been
well received by the membership at large, emphasize

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the primacy of politics and encourage the adoption of a
more integrated approach towards “sustaining peace”.
All three reviews endorsed the fundamental notion that
preventing and resolving conflict through peaceful
means is the most effective way to shield civilians from
the miseries of war.
Conversely, the ill-advised notion that the
protection of civilians is better guaranteed through
the use of force finds no evidence in reality, and more
often than not exacerbates the suffering of innocents
and leads to negative humanitarian consequences.
The stark lessons of Libya must not be ignored: once
unleashed, the spiral of war and destruction cannot
easily be contained. The basic ethical precept of
medicine since Hippocrates — “do no harm” — should
be applied to multilateral discussions as a basic tenet
for the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict.
Moreover, Brazil has consistently advocated that
the use of force, if and when authorized by the Security
Council as a last resort means of protection, should be
employed responsibly. That means that action should
be judicious, proportionate and strictly limited to the
objectives of the mandate. In order to achieve that, we
believe that two practical steps, both of them based on
existing mechanisms in the Security Council, could
be taken. First, we should borrow from the procedures
related to the peacekeeping system practice of reporting
to and briefing delegations. Secondly, we should create
monitoring mechanisms by establishing panels of
experts modelled after the United Nations sanctions
committees. The international community has a right
to expect full accountability from those to whom
authority is given to resort to force.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2015/453)
depicts a bleak scenario. Non-State actors, including
terrorist groups with no regard for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
deliberately target civilians, and vulnerable populations
in particular, as a military tactic. Such violations
deserve the strongest condemnation.
At the same time, it is of the utmost importance
that national Governments make all the necessary
efforts to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including, among others, preventing
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
and protected sites, such as schools and hospitals. As the

S/PV.7606

concept note circulated by the delegation of Uruguay
points out, one of the main objectives of today’s debate
must be to enhance humanitarian compliance and legal
accountability. This meeting should also reaffirm
the universal and binding character of the Geneva
Conventions, as well as other obligations set forth by
relevant customary law.
In order to ensure that civilians in situations of
conflict will be safe, we should continuously strive to
enhance our legal, political and diplomatic framework
aimed at strengthening compliance with, and ensuring
the implementation of, international humanitarian law.
During the thirty-second International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held last month in
Geneva, Brazil supported the creation of a voluntary
and non-politicized meeting of States to share
international humanitarian law expertise and discuss
humanitarian trends and challenges. We must ensure
that the intergovernmental process launched by the
Conference will contribute to a future agreement in
that regard.
The forthcoming World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, to be held in May, will be another auspicious
occasion to reaffirm our commitment to international
humanitarian law, including the imperative to protect
civilians from the consequences of armed conflict, and
to improve international coordination. Likewise, the
high-level plenary meeting on refugees and migrants,
to he held prior to the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session next September
will discuss concrete measures to safeguard these
particularly vulnerable populations.
The dialogue on humanitarian Partnership,
co-chaired by Brazil and Sweden, has established a
productive informal venue for the examination of how
to improve global responses to key humanitarian issues
and challenges among Member States, the United
Nations and specialized agencies.
Lastly, the Security Council, in exercising its
prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
should continue to address emerging humanitarian and
protection issues as a matter of priority. We welcome
the Council’s request to the Secretary-General to
increase the frequency of the reports on the protection
of civilians, now to be submitted every 12 months, and
encourage the Council to hold regular meetings on the
issue.

16-0110433/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand congratulates Uruguay for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. My delegation would also like to express
its appreciation to the delegation of Uruguay for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2016/22, annex), to the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as to
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam, for
their substantive briefings.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement of the
Human Security Network, to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Slovenia.
Thailand shares the international community’s
serious concern about the rising number of civilian
casualties in armed conflict. There are no legitimate
reasons that can justify deliberate attacks against
innocent civilians, including humanitarian actors, for
either military or political purposes. Please allow me
to highlight pertinent points that Thailand deems very
important.
First, the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of host Governments. In cases where
Governments have the political will but lack the
capacity, the international community can provide
capacity-building support in addressing root causes of
conflict and in the area of preventive measures, namely,
the rule of law, good governance, social justice, security
reform, social and economic development and equality,
for instance.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations with protection
mandates are very crucial when the host Government
fails to live up to its responsibility to protect. A
mission’s mandate needs to be clearly endorsed by the
Security Council. It is also important for peacekeepers
to have a clear mandate, responsibilities and chain of
command. The protection of civilians guidance and
the code of conduct under specific circumstances,
particularly when the use of force is necessary, need
to be put in place to ensure a mission’s credibility
and success. Comprehensive predeployment training
and periodic in-mission training are necessary, as
recommended by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. Peacekeepers must also be well
equipped with knowledge of international law.

34/91

19/01/2016

Thirdly, the allocation of resources for peacekeeping
missions needs to be adequate and predictable to enable
missions to fulfil their mandates efficiently.
Fourthly, the changing nature of conflicts
necessitates the protection of civilians. The Security
Council needs to assess the situation on the ground
and review the scope of the mandates of peacekeeping
missions on a regular basis based on the situation and
risk assessment provided by the Secretariat. That will
enable the Council to employ the right tool at the right
time. It is also crucial that the Council work closely with
troop-contributing countries to enhance coherence and
coordinated responses.
Fifthly, Thailand strongly supports the inclusion
of the protection-of-civilians advisers, as well as
protection officers for children and women, in
peacekeeping operations with protection mandates.
The early detection of human rights violations and
other tactics of war will save more innocent lives.
Sixthly, the increased number of civilian
casualties is a clear indication of non-compliance with
international law and universal principles. The strong
and repeated calls of the international community
on parties to conflicts, including non-State armed
groups, to uphold international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, as well as to implement
all the relevant Council resolutions have been ignored.
Thailand therefore supports the work of fact-finding
missions and commissions of inquiry, which will help
to end impunity and to hold accountable those who
have committed serious crimes against civilians.
Lastly, we see the urgent need to strengthen
coordination among relevant United Nations bodies to
protect civilians, as well as to address the root causes of
conflict. Thailand also underscores the indispensable
role of regional and subregional organizations, local
communities and civil society in that respect. Their
insights and understanding of specific situations on the
ground can contribute to the Council’s swift response
to imminent threats to civilians.
In conclusion, Thailand will continue our
constructive role and close cooperation with the
international community in the important endeavour to
protect civilians and alleviate their sufferings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Hungary.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Always thinking the
unthinkable, expecting the unexpected, being totally
vulnerable and living the solitude of the global
world — this is what it means to be a non-military,
ordinary, private citizen in armed conflict.
I wish to thank Uruguay for having convened
today’s open debate. Hungary aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union.
We believe that thousands of civilians are not only
suffering from the impact of armed conflicts but are
becoming subjected to the military strategies of various
parties to conflict. The international community
must step up all its efforts to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law. Hungary hopes that
the International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent will reach an agreement on the mechanism to
strengthen compliance with international humanitarian
law, although discussions will continue on the issue. We
must also take into account that the lines that separate
international and internal armed conflicts have become
increasingly blurred, which may lead to uncertainty
regarding applicable rules and their interpretations. For
that reason, we think that it is of utmost importance
that we continue the dialogue on current international
humanitarian law issues.
Hungary attaches especially great importance
to the protection of women and children. We support
international initiatives aimed at combating sexual
violence in conflict, particularly against the most
vulnerable, and we have contributed to United Nations
projects for the elimination of all forms of such
crimes. The Hungarian Government has also provided
assistance to international projects aimed at protecting
children affected by armed conflict and humanitarian
crises, including children in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq,
the Sudan and the Central African Republic.
The protection of civilians should be integral to
the whole United Nations peace operation having such
a mandate. It is important to maintain continuous
consultations and enhanced communication among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and contributing
countries about possible gaps in mission mandates. As
we have always stressed, we agree that accountability
and ending impunity are key to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Hungary wishes to actively
contribute to the initiative on a multilateral treaty for
mutual legal assistance and extradition in the domestic

S/PV.7606

prosecution of atrocity crimes — an initiative that is
supported by the International Criminal Court and a
number of States and aimed at enhancing and making
horizontal cooperation among States more effective in
the process of prosecuting war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.
Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. The United
Nations should use all available tools for early warning
and for political mediation in order to prevent the
outbreak and reverse the escalation of hostilities.
We would also like to reaffirm the relevance of the
responsibility to protect in today’s discussion. To
ensure a more timely and decisive response on the part
of the Security Council, we actively participated in
the drafting of the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes.
As my closing remark, I wish to strongly encourage
those Member States that have not yet done so to join
the initiative, which represents not only a unique chance
to improve the Security Council’s ability to prevent and
respond to atrocities, but also an opportunity to preserve
the Council’s legacy and legitimacy as a guardian of
international peace and security.
As this is the first time that we are speaking this
year in the Security Council, I wish to congratulate the
presidency and all Council members.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Mr. President, I thank you
for continuing the tradition of offering an opportunity
early in the year to articulate views on the important
subject of the protection of civilians.
The Security Council has, in the post-millennial
world, stretched the canvas of mandates and broadened
the ambit of action to include the requirement to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
in most United Nations peacekeeping operations
established since 1999. We therefore see today’s debate
as an ongoing lessons-learned exercise. Permit me to
encapsulate our views on this important subject.
First, India condemns the oppressive use of
violence against civilian populations, regardless of who
commits it. That malaise is not new. Wars in pursuit of
imperial ambitions testify to a history of scant respect
for civilian lives in times of military campaigns.

16-0110435/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

However, the nature of threats faced by civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping situations has undergone
significant changes in recent years.
Secondly, we believe that the protection of civilians
is primarily a national responsibility. Contributions to
national capacity-building, rather than intervention
mechanisms, should therefore be the priority. Local
societies have developed coping strategies for protection
before the deployment of a United Nations mission
and will apply them after the withdrawal of a mission.
Approaches that are drawn up during peacekeeping
should therefore be built on an appreciation for the
social capital of host communities to manage their own
protection.
Thirdly, solutions to threats of violence to civilian
populations should be sought within the framework
of international law. The response of the international
community must be based on the use of appropriate
methods in proportion to the perceived threat.
It is our experience that peacekeepers often rise to
the occasion when required. Let me recall the example
of Captain Salaria who led an Indian infantry brigade in
November 1961, as part of the United Nations Operation
in the Congo (ONUC) in operations against the
Katangese Gendarmerie Forces, for the establishment
of a neutral zone in North Katanga to restore peace
for the civilian population of Elizabethville. Captain
Salaria and the majority of 45 Indian peacekeepers
who died in ONUC paid with their lives, even though
the notion of the protection of civilians was not part of
that mandate. Yet, in 1962 India recognized that effort
of a Blue Helmet to protect civilians by posthumously
awarding its highest award for gallantry, the Param
Vir Chakra. Alas, it took the United Nations more than
35 years to decide on and confer the Dag Hammarskjöld
Medal for the same deed of protecting civilians.
As a developing country with years of
peacekeeping experience, we feel that frequent and
regular consultation among the Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries will enhance the
credibility and effectiveness of the Council in protecting
civilians. The absence of consultation hurts everyone:
the country hosting the peacekeeping mission; the
troop-contributing countries that put their troops’ lives
at risk in the service of the United Nations; the Council
as an institution; and the United Nations. It is ultimately
the United Nations as a body that gets a bad name when
the Council’s decisions go wrong.

36/91

19/01/2016

Finally, by definition, peacekeeping is a
temporary and transitional measure. The time has
therefore perhaps come to consider disaggregating the
complex, multidimensional nature of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates and address issues confronting
the protection of civilians in armed conflict situations
through focused peacebuilding activities, so that the
transition to a post-conflict society can be sustainable.
Efforts at peacebuilding should be initiated at the
beginning, and the cause of the armed conflict
addressed through national reconciliation and inclusive
political processes, giving all sections of society a stake
in peaceful coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country Sweden. My full
statement will be made available through other means,
and I will limit myself to some — in our view — key
elements for the sake of brevity.
First of all, I would like to express my recognition,
respect and admiration for Oxfam, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other humanitarian
actors for the work they do every day, and I urge
everyone to give them our full support.
The besieged town of Madaya in Syria provides
the most recent image of the horrifying and totally
unacceptable suffering inflicted on civilians in armed
conflict. Reports of staggering numbers of civilian
victims at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham is another. The protection of vulnerable
populations is a core task of the United Nations, and
we must ensure that the United Nations lives up to that
task, as laid out in the Charter. Therefore, the debate
today is both timely and necessary.
Currently, 10 out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations have the protection of civilians at the core
of their mandates. While host States bear the primary
responsibility to protect their population — as has been
stated numerous times today — United Nations peace
operations must be able to assist States in fulfilling
that responsibility. Peacekeeping operations, as well
as many other parts of the United Nations system, also
play a preventive role, and they need to report to the
Security Council if civilians are at risk. Timely briefings
by the Special Advisers to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in contributing to early awareness of potential crises,
in line with the Human Rights Up Front initiative, are
instruments that need to be fully utilized. I would like
to highlight three particularly important aspects related
to the protection of civilians.
First, a zero-tolerance policy must be applied
against gender-based violence, including sexual abuse
and exploitation. The United Nations should never be
seen as failing to act in holding those responsible to
account, regardless of the perpetrators. The special
protections needs of women and girls must be addressed.
Secondly, the flow of arms to conflict areas further
increases the risks for civilians. The Arms Trade
Treaty, with its humanitarian goals, provides a tool for
addressing those problems, and we urge all countries
to join the Treaty. We also support the call of the
Secretary-General on parties in conflict to avoid using
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas. Attacks on education centres and the military
use of schools and universities are on the increase.
Special efforts are needed to ensure the safe education
for children and young people in countries affected by
conflict.
Thirdly, international humanitarian law has been
established to protect civilians in conflict. We all
have a responsibility to ensure that that is upheld,
that violations are prevented and that accountability
is ensured when the law is violated. The importance
of the provision by all actors of rapid, unimpeded and
sustained passage of humanitarian relief for civilians
in conflict zones is not only a moral obligation; it is a
legal obligation.
The role of United Nations peace missions
in protecting civilians when Member States and
armed groups do not cannot be overstated. As troop
contributors, we have a responsibility to stay and
deliver. However, we know that this task is not only
challenging, but also dangerous. National caveats
should be avoided to ensure that missions can operate
effectively. We need to improve cooperation with local
and national authorities and provide proper training
and equipment to United Nations troops. The training
of local authorities is often key.
The Nordic States have actively worked on
those issues and gained first-hand experience, most
recently in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The efficient protection of civilians requires close

S/PV.7606

cooperation with other troop-contributing countries,
as well as coordination with local authorities. In
MINUSMA, the creation of a protection of civilians
task force with civilian, military and police personnel
has been set up, and furthermore MINUSMA has been
providing the Malian security forces with training,
enhancing their own capacity to protect civilians.
But ultimately, strengthening the capability of
United Nations peace operations requires realistic
mandates, proper preparation, strong capacity and
adequate resources. We echo the Secretary-General’s
call on the Security Council to provide active, political
and operational support to that end, and we support
his focus on the political settlement of conflicts in his
report on the implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446).
If 2015 was a year of reflection and providing
recommendations, 2016 should be the year of
implementation and concrete action.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Uruguay for having convened this
meeting and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
the representatives of civil society for their briefings.
The protection of civilians is at the very heart of
all that the Council and the Organization are striving
to achieve, and is the measure against which the
United Nations system and its peacekeeping operations
are judged. It is a basic principle of international
humanitarian law and a moral responsibility of all
Member States. However, history has shown us that
moral exhortations and laws are often challenged or
ignored, and are therefore insufficient to prevent or
eliminate armed conflict or ensure the protection of
civilians in such conflicts. The effectiveness of the
Security Council and the United Nations in protecting
civilians has had mixed results; some timely actions
have managed to save lives, but in other cases systemic
constraints arising from the lack of consensus in the
Council or valid concerns about sovereignty have
prevented early action that would have been more
effective.
As we have seen in the prolonged and complex
conflicts in the Middle East and Central and Western
Africa, civilians are increasingly exposed, either
because schools and hospitals have become military
targets, or because hundreds of thousands are denied
timely access to humanitarian assistance. Both

16-0110437/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

cases constitute flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, and we therefore believe that our
responsibility to protect must be supported by our
responsibility to improve our response capacity.

their inherent ramifications for the civilian population.
In that context, we hope that the Council members’ visit
to Burundi in the coming days will be an important
step in that direction.

United Nations peacekeeping mandates have been
strengthened with training, policies and guidance on
the best way to implement the protection of civilians
and human rights. However, the inclusion of civilian
advisers on the protection of children or women has not
yet managed to change the reality on the ground.

We support the recommendations of both the
Independent Panel and of the Secretary-General to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
in the field of protection in areas such as planning,
evaluation, capacity-building and leadership, as well to
give them with realistic mandates tailored to specific
contexts and linked to broader political solutions. We
urge the Council in particular to consider the Independent
Panel’s recommendation that peacekeeping missions
collaborate more closely with local communities and
non-governmental organizations on the ground in order
to establish an effective environment for protection and
provide rapid responses to potential threats.

As the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations has proposed, it is essential whenever possible
to involve and ensure that Governments complement the
development of concepts, standards and deployment of
specialized United Nations personnel, assuming their
competency as the principals responsible for protecting
civilians. The presence of a United Nations mission
does not reduce the host Government’s responsibility,
nor should the State’s responsibility weaken the duty
of peacekeeping missions. We therefore welcome the
updated aide memoire annexed to the presidential
statement on the protection of civilians of November
2015 (S/PRST/2015/23), and emphasize its importance
as a practical tool to improve the Council’s analysis and
diagnostics on the topic of protection.
Threats to international peace and security continue
to arise largely from the proliferation and possession of
weapons of mass destruction and from the notion that
the most powerful countries can choose to position
themselves above international law. In all the Council’s
efforts to fulfil its primary responsibility, disarmament
and non-proliferation remain a dominant need. The
ease with which conventional weapons can be acquired,
especially through illicit trafficking, multiplies the
impact of conflicts on and risks to civilian populations.
Mexico reiterates its call for the implementation of the
Arms Trade Treaty in order to ensure, inter alia, that
arms transfers by Member States are subject to the
compliance of the recipient State with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
As the High-level Independent Panel and the
Secretary-General indicate in their respective reports
(S/2015/446 and S/2015/453), prevention must be at the
heart of all efforts to maintain international peace and
security. If the Security Council is able to anticipate and
better respond to potential threats, we are convinced
that it could also be more effective in preventing crises
from becoming uncontrollable armed conflicts with

38/91

Delays and inaction in the protection of civilians
can often mean the difference between life and death. In
Mexico’s opinion, the multilateral system of collective
security, especially the Security Council, remain the
best option to implement the lessons learned in the
service of our ongoing aspiration to achieve sustainable
peace. The fusion of prevention and political influence
with rapid response on the ground can help us to ensure
that the Organization will no longer leave a place where
it is most needed or abandon the most vulnerable when
their protection is most urgent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Allow me to take this opportunity
to congratulate Uruguay on joining the Security Council
and on acceding to the presidency this month. We are
quite aware of how difficult it is to be a President of the
Security Council, but even more so in one’s first month
of membership. We wish you good luck, Sir, and give
you our thanks.
Let me start by quoting the Force Commander of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda,
Major General Roméo Dallaire, in his haunting account
of the Rwandan genocide:
“[T]he worst eyes that haunt me are the eyes of
those people who were totally bewildered. They’re
looking at me with my blue beret and they’re saying,
‘What in the hell happened? We were moving
towards peace. You were there as the guarantor.
How come I’m dying here?’ Those eyes dominated

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and they’re absolutely right. How come my mission
failed?”
Twenty-one years have passed since the Rwandan
genocide, but the mission of protecting civilians remains
a pressing challenge and a primary responsibility of the
international community. Over the past decade, the
number of people in need of international humanitarian
assistance has tripled. The overwhelming majority of
those people are civilians affected by armed conflict
and other stressful emergencies. Today, men and
women in numerous places around the world are at risk.
Civilians have become pawns in a game in which State
and non-State actors use them to gain political leverage.
Attacks directed at civilians have become depressingly
routine, and we receive daily reports of new atrocities
that shake the human conscience.
Nowhere in the world is the situation more
heartbreaking than in Syria. Al-Assad’s murderous
regime has been attacking and killing civilians by
the hundreds of thousands. Despite the fact that the
Security Council has adopted numerous resolutions
demanding that the Syrian Government allow free
access for United Nations humanitarian aid, attempts
to deliver cross-border and cross-line humanitarian aid
are being impeded because of the challenging security
and operational environment. In the meantime, people
continue to suffer.
We have all witnessed the struggle of the people of
the Syrian town of Madaya, where 42,000 people have
been taken hostage by Al-Assad and his Hizbullah allies.
The town and its people are under siege and surrounded
by barbed wire, land mines and snipers. Left without
basic access to food, men, women and children have
been dying on a daily basis due to starvation and the
harsh winter weather. They find themselves resorting
to eating household pets and making soup from grass.
A Cable News Network report on Syria described the
situation on the ground: “The starvation here is no act
of God — not the result of drought or flooding or crop
failure. This famine is man-made.”
Let me state the obvious. The use of starvation as a
weapon of war is deplorable, and it is a war crime. The
dire situation in Madaya is an example that has captured
public attention, but it is estimated that this is merely
a tenth of the number of those stranded in besieged or
hard-to-reach areas as conditions grow steadily worse.
Hizbullah, the enforcer of Iranian and Syrian orders,
the recruiter of children to fight in Syria, is the prime

S/PV.7606

organization terrorizing the people of Madaya. That
should not come as a surprise. Terrorizing civilian
populations is part of Hizbullah’s modus operandi.
This is what they do. Israel has warned time and time
again that letting Hizbullah’s actions go unchecked will
only result in more death, pain and suffering. Over the
course of years, Hizbullah has been indiscriminately
firing rockets towards heavily populated areas in Israel,
while using the people of southern Lebanon as human
shields.
One example is the southern Lebanese village
of Muhaybib, where Hizbullah has moved military
infrastructure into that and other villages in the
surrounding area. Those villages, where innocent
civilians go about their daily lives, have been
transformed into military bases. Who speaks for these
people? Who protects these people from Hizbullah?
According to recent reports, the village, consisting
of 90 houses in total, contains no less than nine arms
depots, five rocket launch sites, four infantry positions,
three underground tunnels, three anti-tank positions
and a command post. Let me again state the obvious.
Deliberately putting the lives of innocent civilians in
harm’s way is a war crime.
As Uruguay is a new member of the Security
Council, I would like to inform you, Mr. President,
that unfortunately the threat to the lives of Lebanese
and Israeli civilians alike is rarely mentioned in the
Chamber. It is the responsibility of the Security Council
to identify rising threats and to prevent such situations
from escalating. The Security Council should send a
clear message to Hizbullah, as well as to Lebanon, that
this cannot be tolerated. The tactic of taking civilian
populations hostage for political and military advantage
has steadily become a primary method of waging war by
States and non-State actors. Protecting civilians under
such circumstances, while holding non-State actors to
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
is our biggest collective challenge.
Reviewing the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), we are
encouraged that it recognizes that, in cases of imminent
threat, the United Nations must rise to the challenge
of protecting civilians. Furthermore, recognizing
the linkage between a wider political approach and
the United Nations responsibility towards civilians
will enable the setting of realistic mandates with a
possibility of implementation and plan of action.

16-0110439/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to the
brave men and women peacekeepers who have lost their
lives while serving in the most dangerous places on the
globe. To those who continue to serve, let me reiterate
Israel’s appreciation for their work. They have had a
life-changing impact on millions of people that are in
dire need of protection.
Next week the General Assembly will mark the
International Day of Commemoration in memory of
the victims of the Holocaust. We know all too well
the horrors that humankind is capable of. Promises
have been made, yet the international community has
failed at too many junctures. We must fulfil what we
promised 70 years ago — never again. We must not
allow dictators and terrorist organizations to dictate the
rules of the game. Too many lives are at stake. That is
the message the Council should send today.
Mr. Kabentayev (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend the presidency of Uruguay for convening this
debate on the protection of civilians, who are extremely
vulnerable to attacks during the current increasingly
intense conflicts accompanied by an unprecedented
magnitude of human rights violations. Kazakhstan
therefore calls for complete and strict implementation
of the report of the Secretary-General of June 2015
on the relevant recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/453).
The High-level Independent Panel proposed that
mandates to protect civilians should be coherent with
a comprehensive political strategy. Peacekeeping
missions mandated to use force must protect civilians.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s proposals
for the active use of non-military protection tools,
including strong political advocacy, vigilant reporting
and monitoring, together with the introduction of
comprehensive security-sector reforms, the rule of law
and good governance, and an end to all impunity.
Kazakhstan attaches the utmost importance to the
security of civilians, as evidenced in its engagement
in United Nations peacekeeping operations in Western
Sahara and Côte d’Ivoire.
The Conference on Interaction and Confidence­
Building Measures in Asia, initiated by Kazakhstan, has
become a good platform for cooperation and dialogue
in Asia, and it has great potential for contributing to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

40/91

19/01/2016

As proposed by the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, the final document of the
fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, which was held in June 2015 in Astana, calls
on all parties around the world involved in conflicts to
cease violence, declare truce and, through negotiations,
reach an agreement to end hostilities, protect civilians
and find a peaceful resolution to all tensions.
We are convinced that the long-term work of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoys should be
strongly supported by the Council and Member States.
We support the activities of the United Nations regional
offices, which serve as platforms for preventive
diplomacy. Kazakhstan has proposed the establishment
of a United Nations regional hub for sustainable
development and humanitarian assistance in Almaty,
which would complement the work of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in the vast territory of the Eurasian region.
Kazakhstan, as a current Chair of the Gender
Equality Working Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and one of
the sponsors, along with Austria, Finland and Turkey,
of the OSCE-wide action plan on women, peace and
security, calls for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which focuses on putting women’s rights,
gender equality and women’s empowerment at the heart
of global peace and security activities.
Kazakhstan is submitting its candidacy for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
2017-2018 and is particularly committed to prioritizing
the protection of civilians.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Let me start by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on Uruguay’s accession to membership of the Council
and on its assumption of the presidency for this month,
as well as by thanking you for organizing this debate
and for preparing the concept note (S/2016/22, annex).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
June 2015 report (S/2015/453) on the issue at hand and
the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing today.
Events around the world indicate that civilians
are still suffering in massive numbers. Despite all
the efforts at the international level, including those
undertaken by the relevant humanitarian institutions,

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

it is most unfortunate that civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts. As
the latest report of the Secretary-General indicates,
over the past decade the number of people in need of
international humanitarian assistance has tripled. The
overwhelming majority of those people are civilians
affected by armed conflict or complex emergencies,
which account for about 80 per cent of the crises
requiring an international humanitarian response.
Approximately 42 per cent of the world’s poor now live
in conflict-affected and fragile States, and that figure is
expected to rise to 62 per cent by 2030. Direct attacks
on schools and hospitals have become common features
in many armed conflicts.
NAM believes that due priority should continue to
be given to the promotion of the knowledge of, respect
for and observance by States of their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, in particular those of
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols.
NAM calls upon all parties to armed conflicts
to redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations and civilian property and attaching
priority to their responsibility to ensure general
protection against the dangers arising from military
operations to civilian installations, hospitals and relief
materials and the means to transport and distribute
such relief materials.
The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and urges the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations to ensure
respect for the protection of the personnel of United
Nations humanitarian organizations, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law. At the
same time, NAM emphasizes that the principles of the
sovereign equality, political independence and territorial
integrity of all States and of non-intervention must be
upheld. The consent of a country is also imperative
for granting access to humanitarian assistance on its
territory and for its continued operations at all times.
United Nations missions constitute one of the most
significant means at the disposal of the United Nations
to protect civilians in situations of armed conflict. Since
1999, the Security Council has tasked United Nations

S/PV.7606

peacekeeping missions with protection mandates,
which include establishing effective early-warning
mechanisms, ensuring the provision of adequate
resources to monitor, prevent and respond to incidents
and supporting the efforts of host country authorities
to implement their responsibilities in protecting
civilians. Additionally, United Nations missions assist
in creating protective environments by supporting the
establishment of effective rule-of-law and security
institutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular
those with protection-of-civilian mandates, should
be guided by the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Movement underlines that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country. Accordingly, NAM emphasizes
that the relevant peacekeeping missions with a peace
mandate should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government to
protect civilians. We stress that the successful conduct
of tasks related to the protection of civilians requires
the integration of efforts at all levels and a holistic
approach that encompasses the timely provision of
adequate resources, logistical support and required
training, as well as clearly defined and achievable
mandates.
Let me conclude by expressing the hope that this
open debate will provide an opportunity to assess
the ways and means of providing better protection
to civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify
not only the positive developments made so far, but
the challenges ahead. Let me once more reiterate the
Non-Aligned Movement’s firm belief in the importance
of the protection of civilians in conflict situations,
in establishing accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and in ending impunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General and
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their contributions to this important
public debate that the Uruguayan presidency had the
excellent idea of organizing. I would also like to thank
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam for her briefing,
which has informed our debate.

16-0110441/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Luxembourg associates itself fully with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union,
as well as that by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict.
Allow me now to highlight a few points in my
national capacity.
To say that international humanitarian law is not
fully respected in the majority of armed conflicts that
we see around the world is an understatement. The
regularity with which it is being trampled on is a matter
of grave concern. The disdain for the protection of
civilian populations — despite the fact that this is at
the very heart of international humanitarian law — is
an affront to our conscience. But civilians are not only
deprived of their right to be protected. It is much worse
than that: in the conflicts that we see around the world,
civilians are often deliberately targeted in order to
spread terror and force entire populations to leave their
homes.
For nearly five years, the conflict in Syria has
demonstrated in all its cruelty the kind of violations to
which civilian populations can be subject to. On the one
hand, they are trapped between Government forces,
who do not hesitate to indiscriminately bomb densely
populated areas, schools and hospitals, to use barrel
bombs and to try to vanquish besieged cities through
famine, as the images of Madaya bear witness to so
very painfully and, on the other hand, by extremist
bloodthirsty groups like Daesh, which have sprung
up in the course of the conflict and which attach no
value to human life. About two years ago, the Security
Council demanded in resolution 2139 (2014) that all
sieges be immediately lifted; it demanded rapid, secure
and free access to all humanitarian agencies; it recalled
that to use starvation against civilians as a method of
war is prohibited by international humanitarian law.
Alas, almost 400,000 Syrians still live in besieged
areas, over 4.5 million people live in areas difficult to
access and 13.5 million people in Syria are in need of
humanitarian assistance. This should not continue; this
cannot continue.
We all agree that the best way to protect civilians
is to do everything possible to prevent a conflict from
erupting. It is therefore essential that the Security
Council should make use of all the tools at its disposal
in the area of prevention. Timely information should
be provided to the Council by the Secretary-General,

42/91

19/01/2016

by the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and her
colleague, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in line with
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative. All that is extremely
important.
Another key element should be the constant
streamlining of peace operations. We hope that
the review initiated by the Secretary-General will
contribute to strengthening the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping missions, whose role in
protecting civilians is essential. At the same time, a
zero-tolerance policy should be implemented. Troopcontributing countries have an important role to play
in ensuring that their personnel understand their
responsibility in terms of protecting civilians and that
they are properly trained for that task. In that context,
we commend the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians, established in May 2015.
Finally, as we have said more than once in the
Chamber, we must bring to justice those who have
committed the worst types of crimes against civilians.
The fight against impunity must be at the very heart
of our efforts in order to redress past wrongs and to
prevent future atrocities.
The first World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
May in Istanbul, will be an opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to international humanitarian law and to
contribute to strengthening the protection of civilians.
Let us take full advantage of that opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of the members of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, namely, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland.
The Group of Friends thanks the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s open debate, which is crucial to keeping the
protection of civilians high on the agenda. We also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and the representative of Oxfam for their briefings this
morning. We particularly welcome the initiative of
the presidency to invite representatives of those two
very important non-governmental organizations to
participate in today’s meeting.

and the truth about alleged violations, making referrals
to the International Criminal Court and following up
thereon, staying firm on addressing accountability for
past crimes in all situations and tasking peacekeeping
operations, within their respective mandates, to support
the fight against impunity.

As noted by the Secretary-General and by the
President of the ICRC in their joint warning on
31 October 2015, the world is a turning point, and we
must react vigorously to a growing lack of respect for
international humanitarian law and the disregard for the
protection of civilians in many conflicts. We cannot be
indifferent to the immense human suffering caused by
armed conflicts, and its consequences for international
peace and security. The international community must
reaffirm the principles related to the protection of
civilians as enshrined in international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as in
international criminal law. Parties to conflict must be
reminded time and again that even wars have rules and
that those rules apply to all.

The Security Council must demonstrate its
leadership and systematically and vigorously endeavour
to uphold the core protection of civilian standards
whenever the need arises. In that regard, the Group of
Friends welcome the Council’s presidential statement
on the protection of civilians of 25 November 2015
(S/PRST/2015/23), which reaffirms its commitment
regarding the protection of civilians and its intention
to continue to review the issue regularly. The Group
of Friends welcomes in particular the reques madet
of the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
Council every 12 months, which is an important step
towards more frequent reporting about the protection of
civilians to the Council. The aide-memoire contained
in the annex to the presidential statement is an excellent
instrument for the implementation of the protection
of civilians, and should be used in a more systematic
manner by all the relevant stakeholders.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2015/453) is a stark reminder
that we need to continue our collective efforts to address
the challenges posed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians
have become a recurrent feature in many contemporary
conflicts. Schools and medical facilities are not spared.
Complex and dynamic security environments, as well
as access restrictions applied to humanitarian workers,
impede the delivery of humanitarian assistance. A
growing number of parties to armed conflicts openly
disregard the validity of long-established rules of
international humanitarian law. For example, respect
for the obligations governing the conduct of hostilities,
including distinction, proportionality and precaution,
as well as the prohibition on deliberately targeting
civilians and civilian objects, is eroding, including in
situations under the consideration of the Council.
All too often the lack of respect for the most basic
principles of humanity goes hand-in-hand with a
pervasive climate of impunity and utter lack of redress
for victims. We therefore must insist on bringing to
justice those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The Security Council is uniquely
positioned to promote peace and justice. We call upon
the Council to make use of its numerous options to
promote and ensure accountability. That includes
standing up to reported atrocities, establishing facts

Ensuring better respect for international
humanitarian law remains the key challenge for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. At the thirtysecond International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in December 2015,
consensus was reached on a number of pressing issues
and possible ways to address them. They include sexual
and gender-biased violence, the protection of the delivery
of health care, the protection of persons deprived of their
liberty and compliance with international humanitarian
law. With regard to the latter, we regret the lack of
willingness to comit to a more expeditious and more
resolute way forward. However, the International
Conference recognized the gaps and the weaknesses in
the implementation of international humanitarian law
and the need to address them. It paved the way for an
intergovernmental process to find agreement on the
functions and features of a potential forum of States
on international humanitarian law and ways to enhance
the implementation of international humanitarian law
using the potential of the International Conference and
the regional international humanitarian law forums. We
expect all Governments to engage constructively and
in good faith in that intergovernmental process, to be
co-facilitated by Switzerland and the ICRC.

16-0110443/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Group of Friends welcomes the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his report
entitled “The future of the United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/682), as well as the recommendations of the
report of the Panel on peace operations with respect to
the protection of civilians (see S/2015/446). The review
presents a key opportunity to strengthen the capacity
of United Nations peace operations to leverage all
their components, including civil affairs, to effectively
protect civilians. We look forward to engaging on how
to achieve that end. Political engagement and support
for political settlements should be seen as an integral
part of this effort. The best way to protect civilians
is by preventing armed conflict in the first instance
and, failing that, by ending armed conflict through a
negotiated and inclusive settlement.
The Group of Friends fully supports the call by the
Secretary-General for the Council to bring its collective
political leverage to bear on behalf of political solutions.
The Group of Friends also takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, adopted
in May 2015, aimed at reinforcing the protection of
civilians by troop- and police-contributing countries in
the framework of peacekeeping operations. The Group
of Friends highlights the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse as
being ever-more relevant in the light of recent allegations,
particularly in the Central African Republic. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen
the United Nations response and call on Member States,
including troop- and police-contributing countries, to
do the same.
In May 2016, the world will gather in Istanbul
for the first-ever World Humanitarian Aummit. The
Summit should pave the way for more coherent and
vigorous action for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We call upon all Member States to
seize that event as a unique opportunity to reaffirm
the importance of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law. We
further call on Member States and relevant actors
to continue their efforts to ensure the centrality of
protection in humanitarian action, including gender
considerations and the protection of other vulnerable
groups. That will require political commitment, strong
leadership, effective coordination, extensive capacity-

44/91

19/01/2016

building efforts and systematic monitoring, reporting
and follow-up of protection issues by us all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on a topical
issue, and I would like to thank the briefers for sharing
their valuable insights with us.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and with
the statement just delivered by Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
On a daily basis, we are confronted with horrific
news about killed, wounded, maimed, raped and
tortured civilians. Almost 60 million people worldwide
are displaced. Many of them have fled from violence.
It is a sad fact: civilians pay the highest price in any
armed conflict. An aggravating cause of the suffering
of civilians is the shocking disrespect for the relevant
international law by many parties to armed conflicts.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Syria and the
Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab target civilians
on purpose in order to demoralize their opponents.
And in some instances, even States do not refrain from
such abhorrent tactics either, as has been demonstrated
by the Syrian Government’s use of devastating barrel
bombs against its own people.
The deliberate blocking of humanitarian aid,
indiscriminate attacks on residential areas, markets and
schools, starvation of civilians as a method of combat
and even the use of poison gas, the killing and torturing
of prisoners as well as enforced disappearances — all
this has become a cynical trademark of the Syrian
conflict, which for too long has been plaguing the
civilian population. It is not just a question of non-State
armed groups flagrantly violating international
humanitarian and human rights law; States’ awareness
of their obligation to comply with these legal regimes
also needs to be strengthened. The prevailing lack
of accountability further fuels the disrespect for
international law in conflicts.
It has been expressed by other speakers before
me but it cannot be reiterated often enough — the
international community must redouble its efforts to
strengthen compliance with international law by parties
to conflict. With its unique mandate and power, the

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Security Council has a primordial role to play in this
respect. The world expects the Council to take action
when civilians are slaughtered in conflicts or when
their life and health are in danger and to bring those
who are responsible for these acts to justice, if other
mechanisms fail. At the same time, it is evident that our
priority must remain to prevent crimes against civilians
in the first place, and we should continue to spare no
efforts in doing so.
Germany welcomes the efforts to improve the
protection of civilians in conflicts throughout the
United Nations system. The reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the future of peacekeeping, his regular
reports on the protection of civilians and the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) provide valuable guidance to that effect. In
this context, I would also like to express our continued
support for the Secretary-General’s Human Rights up
Front initiative.
Ten peacekeeping missions already have mandates
to protect civilians. In one of them, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), protection of
civilians has become a particularly pressing issue. The
challenges are tremendous, the environment is complex
and the resources are limited. Some 1.6 million people
are internally displaced and around 200,000 have found
protection in the Mission’s bases. Germany welcomes
the comprehensive and inclusive approach by UNMISS
designed to better protect civilians. The promotion of
dialogue and the engagement with local communities
at the grass roots level are crucial elements of
reducing tensions and violence. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the UNMISS staff for their
dedication and tireless work aimed at keeping the
civilian population safe.
A particularly repugnant aspect of many armed
conflicts is the use of sexual and gender-based violence
as tactics of warfare. This is, unfortunately, also the case
in South Sudan. Germany strongly supports the special
attention that UNMISS attaches to these crimes, which
have such a disastrous effect on societies. Assaults on
the physical and psychological well-being of women and
their dignity cannot be tolerated anywhere in the world.
We are glad that, since October 2015, we, Germany,
have been able to contribute highly specialized police
officers to a team that will help UNMISS and the
South Sudanese society fight sexual and gender-based
violence.

S/PV.7606

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the unfailing
German commitment to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. As in the past, it will remain one of
our main priorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Mr. President, we greatly
value the partnership Australia has had with Uruguay
over the past seven years on the protection of civilians,
and we welcome your leadership on this issue in your
first month on the Council.
As the human cost for civilians caught up in conflict
continues to climb, we must take every opportunity to
press for stronger action, both armed and unarmed,
to protect civilians. There is no one solution for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations must use all
of the tools at its disposal to ensure a comprehensive
approach to protection across its security, political and
aid efforts. Australia is deeply concerned by the blatant
lack of compliance with international humanitarian law
by many parties to conflict. Existing mechanisms for
ensuring compliance are insufficient.
Australia was deeply disappointed that States failed
to agree on a mechanism to strengthen compliance at
the 32nd International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent in December. There is an obvious need
for a dedicated forum for an exchange between States
on compliance with international humanitarian law. We
urge all States to work towards this end in good faith.
Central to protecting civilians is the obligation
to provide for their needs, including by ensuring
the provision of humanitarian aid. Systematic and
widespread efforts to impede the delivery of life-saving
aid through the denial of humanitarian access has
become a deplorable feature of today’s conflicts. We
welcome the provision of essential health and food
supplies to four besieged areas in Syria last week as
a positive step. However, full, unconditional and
sustained access to all people in need must be granted
immediately by all parties throughout the country,
in particular the Syrian Government. The practice of
besieging civilians to induce starvation is inhumane
and unlawful. All such sieges must end immediately.
Where peacekeeping missions have an explicit
mandate to protect civilians, uniformed personnel must
play their part, including, where necessary, through
the use of force. Robust peacekeeping is an essential

16-0110445/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

tool at the Council’s disposal to protect civilians. The
Council must receive timely conflict trend analysis and
real-time analysis on the protection needs in country
situations. Unarmed civilian capacities of peacekeeping
operations must be reinforced to support this effort.

“The United Nations must not stand by as civilians
are threatened or killed: missions must demonstrate
the determination to use every tool available
to protect civilians under imminent threat.”
(S/2015/446, para. 92)

As highlighted by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, information-sharing is essential
for developing tailored peace operations mandates,
improving force generation and ensuring that those who
commit serious violations are held accountable. The
international community must also do more to support
effective political processes that promote peaceful and
inclusive societies and enable Governments to fulfil
their responsibility to protect their civilian populations.

Secondly,
Belgium
fully
supports
the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in each
of the areas dealt with in his report of 18 June 2015
(S/2015/453), namely, strengthening respect for
international law; humanitarian access; the use of
explosive devices in populated areas; the identification
and registration of civilian casualties; displaced
persons; and the role of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians.

Finally, ahead of the World Humanitarian Summit,
we call on the Secretary-General to detail clear, precise
actions for all actors to take to enhance the protection
of civilians and compliance with international law.
Action to protect civilians is at the heart of the work
of the United Nations. We must use all the tools at
our disposal — political, humanitarian, security and
economic development — to reinforce the sanctity and
centrality of protecting civilians in conflict.

I now wish to address three specific aspects of
these recommendations.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks Uruguay, President of the Security Council, for
organizing today’s open debate today as well as the
various speakers for their contributions. Current events
have unfortunately shown the relevance of and need for
this debate.
Belgium fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, as well as the statement to be made later by
the observer of the European Union.
I would like to raise two points in my national
capacity. First, Belgium welcomes the recommendations
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations. As part of the open debate today, I wish to
express my country’s full and complete support for the
work of the Secretary-General in implementing these
recommendations, in particular those in relation to the
protection of civilians. In this context, I think it useful
to quote the following passage of the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel:

46/91

First, concerning humanitarian access, the
appalling images and testimony coming out of Madaya,
where hundreds of people are literally starving, are a
reminder to us of just how tragic the situation of the
civilian population in Syria is. In the meantime, the
Syrian authorities have decided to grant humanitarian
access to the city, and initial deliveries of humanitarian
aid are beginning to reach the endangered populations.
We call on the parties to the conflict to ensure
humanitarian access to the entire civilian population
and under no circumstances to use the practice of siege,
in accordance with their obligations under international
law.
Humanitarian access, as well as the protection
of medical infrastructure, must remain a priority of
the Security Council. This message was conveyed by
Belgium during its presidency of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Donor Support
Group in 2015, through support for the Health Care in
Danger initiative, and by its sending, in January 2014,
a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, endorsed
by 28 ministers, reminding all parties to the conflict
in Syria of their obligations to respect international
humanitarian law concerning access to health care and
thereby facilitate the work of humanitarian actors.
Secondly, concerning prevention, Blue Helmets
have a duty to intervene when civilians are at risk,
using force if necessary. Alongside this obligation,
a great deal of prevention work must be done within
United Nations operations in terms of the training
of peacekeepers prior to deployment, and through

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

exchanges with host countries. The United Nations
and its Member States must ensure that the necessary
means are also made available for these essential tasks.
The preventive dimension is multifaceted and
calls for the strengthening of many links in the chain
of operations of peacekeeping missions so that they
can give due attention to the protection of civilians.
The joint action plan developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support provides a solid basis in this regard.
We urge the Secretary-General to report regularly on
the progress made and the difficulties encountered in
the implementation thereof.
Thirdly, concerning the fight against impunity,
we must ensure that the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes against civilians are held accountable
for their actions. I wish to recall the need for the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. Like the SecretaryGeneral, Belgium calls on all States Members of the
United Nations to ratify the Rome Statute. We also call
on them to support the Agreement on the Privileges and
Immunities of the International Criminal Court, which
is an indispensable tool for the proper functioning of
the Court.
On the other hand, I believe it necessary to
acknowledge the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic in setting up a Special
Criminal Court, supported by the United Nations
Development Programme and DPKO. The fact that
the Security Council has mandated the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to
facilitate the operations of the Special Criminal Court,
especially in its operational activities, is a very positive
development. I call on the Security Council and
Member States to continue supporting this instrument
and ensuring support by MINUSCA for the day-to-day
work of the Special Criminal Court.
Finally, we have the issue of the criminal liability
of peacekeepers and of United Nations officials and
experts on mission. On 6 January, new cases of sexual
abuse in the Central African Republic were reported;
this time it appears that they were committed by
MINUSCA soldiers. The United Nations must lead by
example and do its utmost so that this kind of event
does not recur. We welcome the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in this respect, encourage him to

S/PV.7606

continue in this vein, and call on Member States to
provide all necessary assistance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
I would like to begin by congratulating your country,
Uruguay, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and I wish you the
greatest success in your work. I should like also to
thank the delegation of the United States for its work
during its presidency of the Council last month.
The protection of civilians and their property
as well as that of civilian facilities in cases of armed
conflict is a common ethical and legal obligation.
This responsibility entails not targeting civilian
installations during times of war or conflict. Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham fighters are systematically
and intensively targeting innocent, defenceless
civilians in the following ways: summary executions,
sexual violence, kidnapping, trafficking in women
and children, rape, the recruitment of child soldiers
by force, the desecration of religious sites and places
of worship, the sacking and destruction of cultural
property, and attacks on fundamental freedoms. Such
groups use the civilian population as human shields in
fighting the security and military forces.
Iraq and its partners are waging war against
terrorism. But we are also committed to ensuring
the protection of civilians, in other words, respecting
their rights and their property, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We wish to spare
civilians the dangers of war and the impact of combat
operations. We seek to prevent harm from coming to
them by opening safe corridors to evacuate them from
combat zones at opportune times. That is what we did
in Tikrit, Beiji and Ramadi recently, evacuating 3,700
families under siege.
Security, military and air forces are urgently called
upon to target only hostile military targets with the
greatest precision. We are looking to open centres for
displaced persons and provide them with housing, food
and medical care while the areas from which they were
evacuated are liberated from terrorist groups, and to
facilitate their return following reconstruction.
We are committed to protecting civilians, and
the Government of Iraq is working to provide care
to the victims of terrorist operations and compensate

16-0110447/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those who have suffered losses as a result of military
operations.
Daesh has committed reprehensible actions against
women, children, civilians, the elderly, minority
populations, indeed all components of Iraqi society,
to whom the necessary assistance must be extended
during the war against terrorism. Iraq calls on the entire
world and the forces of the international coalition and
their partners in the war against terrorism to help us as
quickly as possible and in a stable manner to counter
terrorist groups. We must also facilitate the return
of displaced persons and the reconstruction of the
infrastructure of those cities that have been destroyed.
Iraq thanks the international humanitarian
organizations for the assistance provided to displaced
Iraqi civilians. Those organizations should continue
to work with Iraq to provide for the humanitarian and
medical needs of wounded Iraqi civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on Uruguay’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to reiterate my congratulations to the
delegations of Uruguay, Japan, Ukraine, Senegal and
the sister delegation of Egypt, which represents the Arab
countries, and wish them all success. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson;
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli; and Ms. Eveline
Rooijmans of Oxfam for their important briefings on a
challenging issue facing the international community,
namely the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The crises in the world today bear troubling witness
to the increased suffering of civilians in conflict. There
are over 60 million displaced persons, in addition to an
increasing number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance, the majority of whom are
civilians affected by armed conflict and complex
emergency situations. We should act decisively to
engage the parties to conflict with respect to their
responsibilities to civilians, in order to make it possible
for humanitarian access to reach the affected civilians
and put an end to the violations of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. We should also work
to strengthen international mechanisms, criminalize
prohibited acts and ensure that the relevant courts are

48/91

19/01/2016

seized of those actions for which perpetrators should be
held accountable. Impunity is not an option; therein lies
the importance of the issue under consideration.
Since the issue of the protection of civilians was
placed on the Council’s agenda in 1999, the Council
has adopted a number of resolutions and presidential
statements on the topic, the most recent of which is
resolution 2249 (2015). Adopted last November, the
resolution reaffirms the Council’s commitment to
resolutions on the protection of civilians. But despite all
of the resolutions, statements and efforts by the United
Nations and its relevant bodies worldwide to protect
civilians, the international community has been unable
to ensure that protection. On the contrary, we have
seen an increase in tragedies, massacres, displacement
and migration. Disagreements among the permanent
members of the Council and the use of the veto have
increased, further complicating the issue, while the
violations continue.
We cannot discuss the protection of civilians without
considering the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian
people. During the more than 60 years of occupation,
aggression, repression, injustice and arrest, all of which
contravene the essential foundations of international
humanitarian law, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued its violations, defying the international
community and international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. That situation calls
for rapid action by the Council with a view to ensuring
international protection for the unarmed Palestinian
people.
The Syrian crisis is the most severe humanitarian
crisis of modern times, with over a quarter of a million
victims and millions of displaced Syrians. Daily news
broadcasts have exposed the plight of the besieged
Syrian city of Madaya as well as other cities where
the Syrian people have been subjected to famine. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations has affirmed
that the use of starvation as a weapon during conflict is
a war crime. The Council must therefore put an end to
that crisis and the human rights violations there.
The protection of civilians requires that we ensure
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The United
Nations is preparing for the fourth conference on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. The conference will
be held in London on 4 February 2016 and will be
co-chaired by the United Kingdom, Norway, Germany
and Kuwait. It is a follow-up to the efforts of the three

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

earlier conferences in Kuwait, at which we were able
to gather $7 billion, $1.3 billion of which were pledged
by Kuwait. The London conference on Syria is a new
challenge, as it presents an opportunity to address the
long-term needs of all those suffering from the conflict
in Syria, to set up new areas for work and education,
and, above all, to promote engagement and encourage
all stakeholders to protect civilians and alleviate their
suffering. We stress the need for active participation
in that conference and hope that that humanitarian
effort will be supported by political will in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), allowing us to resolve that
humanitarian tragedy and bring an end to the suffering
of our Syrian brothers, both domestically and abroad.
The actions of Houthi militias and the partisan
forces of former President Saleh, who insists on using
force to return to power, pose a direct threat to the
security of the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
and have led to the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The ongoing siege of the
Governorate of Taiz is an example of how the delivery
of humanitarian access to civilians has been obstructed
and of how extensive the far-reaching humanitarian
crisis in Yemen is. The Houthi militias and partisan
forces of former President Saleh are contravening
resolution 2216 (2015), which calls for a political
solution to the conflict. In that context, we call for the
re-establishment of peace, security and stability for the
people of Yemen, a brotherly nation, in accordance with
Council resolutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the role
of the United Nations in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in particular through peacekeeping
missions, which must act in accordance with clear
mandates. We stress the importance of this debate, as
the issue is a crucial aspect of the Council’s action.
The Council must take the necessary steps to protect
civilians in armed conflict and hold accountable those
who violate international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): The joint warning
issued by the Secretary-General and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross on
31 October 2015 leaves no doubt that disrespect for the
well-being of civilians in armed conflict has reached
unprecedented levels, reminiscent of the Dark Ages.
Families are starving in besieged towns, patients are

S/PV.7606

being killed by bombs in their hospital beds, and there
have been unprecedented levels of sexual violence and
attacks on humanitarian workers — these are not just
clear violations of international humanitarian law, but
are, simply, barbarities.
Shockingly, not all of such acts and strategies can be
ascribed to extremists, rebels and non-State actors; some
of them fall squarely within the responsibility of States.
How can we expect non-State actors to comply with at
least the basic tenets of international humanitarian law
when even States parties to the Geneva Conventions fail
to do so? The discrepancy between the success of the
Geneva Conventions on paper and the dramatic erosion
of their respect in practice has become intolerable.
Discussions about international humanitarian law
sometimes get stuck in arguments about its relevance
in the light of the technological advances of the arms
industry, yet much of the suffering of innocent civilians
today arises from rather old-fashioned forms of military
action. In all too many cases, there is no need to resort to
sophisticated legal arguments to conclude that a certain
act amounted to a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. Clearly, lack of compliance with the
most basic rules of international humanitarian law is
its greatest problem today. We therefore regret that the
recent International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent was not able to agree on more concrete
measures to improve compliance.
The proposals on the table were already extremely
modest and designed to accommodate the concerns
of some opposing States. We therefore encourage
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, as facilitators of the process, to remain
steadfast. However, we cannot wait another four years
in the current situation of crisis. Complementary
steps for enhancing compliance have to be considered
urgently, both in the Council and outside. We also hope
that the World Humanitarian Summit will give a boost
to these efforts.
In any armed conflict, the protection of civilians is
first and foremost the responsibility and legal obligation
of parties to a conflict, and thus primarily of the States
and non-State actors involved. At the same time,
the Council, and in particular United Nations peace
operations on the ground also have an important role
to play. We generally support the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,

16-0110449/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

but we were surprised that the report stayed clear of one
important dimension — accountability.
Bringing perpetrators of war crimes and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law to
justice is crucial to help deter future crimes, end cycles
of impunity and address the rights of victims. United
Nations peace operations can do much in the fight
against impunity, including by supporting domestic,
hybrid or international accountability and truth-finding
mechanisms. In particular, United Nations peace
operations could do much more to support the work of
the International Criminal Court. That will also require
greater commitment on the part of the Council itself
to the fight against impunity, and more principled,
concrete action, for example by referring situations
such as those in Syria and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the to the ICC, and by ensuring
the necessary follow-up.
Finally, I would like to take the opportunity to
remind Council members, as well as non-members, that
they are invited to join the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. One hundred and
nine States, including eight current members of the
Council have already done so. The code is a strong
expression of the commitment of the supporting States
to actively contributing to timely and decisive Security
Council action to prevent or end mass atrocities. We
are strongly encouraged by the positive response of the
membership to the initiative and are confident that the
list will continue to grow. The code also reflects the
conviction that the protection of civilians is not just
another thematic issue for the Council to deal with, but
a core responsibility of the Council. We therefore call
on all Council members to deploy much greater efforts,
to engage with a greater spirit of cooperation, and to live
up to that responsibility for the sake of innocent men,
women and children trapped in conflict everywhere.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I will deliver a short
version of my statement. However, a copy of the longer
version will be circulated to members of the Security
Council.
We congratulate Uruguay on its membership of
the Security Council and presidency this month, and
on having convened today’s important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

50/91

19/01/2016

We meet at a critical moment witnessing the
immense suffering of millions of civilians in conflicts
around the world, particularly in the Middle East, where
civilians are bearing the highest toll of armed conflict
in all forms, including foreign occupation. That toll has
compelled the largest movement of refugees since the
Second World War, with grave humanitarian, social,
economic, psychological and security consequences for
the children, women and men whose fate it is to become
refugees, as well as for the countries in conflict,
receiving countries and the international community as
a whole.
The Palestinian people — including the 5.5 million
Palestine refugees who constitute the most protracted
refugee crisis in the world — know all too well the pain
and tragedy of such turmoil and dislocation as they
continue to suffer the injustices of the 1948 Nakba and
to endure the brutality of Israel’s illegal, belligerent
occupation for nearly a half century. Their suffering
persists due not only to the failure to achieve a just
solution to the conflict, despite countless United Nations
resolutions, but also to the international community’s
failure to uphold international humanitarian law in the
face of grave breaches and to ensure the protection of
civilians until such a solution has been realized.
The intent of those who drafted the Geneva
Conventions and Additional Protocols was clear. It was
to ensure protection to civilians in situations of armed
conflict and minimize their vulnerability and suffering.
Yet, the tragedy of civilians in armed conflict persists
due to lack of respect for international humanitarian
law in too many circumstances and the failure to hold
accountable the perpetrators of violations and grave
breaches, including Israel, the occupying Power, which
continues to cause harm and suffering to the Palestinian
people with absolute impunity.
We have repeatedly appealed for protection for the
Palestinian people, not just in the recent period but over
the decades as our people have endured immeasurable
oppression and cruelty under Israeli occupation,
including the killing and injury of civilians in military
raids, air strikes, bombardments and terror attacks
across the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, detention, imprisonment, abuse and torture,
forced displacement and transfer, an illegal blockade
and other severe measures of collective punishment.
The deplorable situation is corroborated by numerous
United Nations reports, including the SecretaryGeneral’s recent annual report on children and armed

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

conflict (S/2015/409), which documents the devastating
impact of the Israeli occupation on Palestinian children
and their extreme vulnerability. Yet, over the decades
and despite the Security Council’s own calls for
protection, Palestinian civilians have been deprived
of effective protection from such systematic violations
and crimes.
As far back as 1987, the Security Council, in
resolution 605 (1987), took into account “the need
to consider measures for the impartial protection
of the Palestinian civilian population under Israeli
occupation” and requested the Secretary-General to
examine the situation and report “on ways and means
for ensuring the safety and protection of the Palestinian
civilians under Israeli occupation”. Regrettably, the
recommendations contained in the report of 21 January
1988 (S/19443) were never implemented due to Israel’s
rejection of resolution 605 (1987) and the lack of
political will to hold it to account and insist on its
respect for international humanitarian law, to ensure
protection of the civilians under its occupation.
Resolution 605 (1987) was followed by other
relevant resolutions calling for respect for international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
in particular resolution 904 (1994), in which the Council,
expressing grave concern at the Palestinian casualties
and underlining “the need to provide protection and
security for the Palestinian people”, called for
“measures to be taken to guarantee the safety and
protection of the Palestinian civilians throughout
the occupied territory, including, inter alia, a
temporary international or foreign presence”
(resolution 904 (1994), para. 3).
Reaffirmations of the obligations of the occupying
Power under international humanitarian law, including
the obligation to ensure the safety and well-being of
the Palestinian civilian population, were repeatedly
made thereafter by the Council, the General Assembly,
conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and successive United
Nations High Commissioners for Human Rights,
including Ms. Mary Robinson, who in 2001 stressed
that,
“[t]he protection of the victim should be the
overriding concern of the United Nations and its
agencies and programmes .... Protection needs to be
accorded to the people of the occupied territories

S/PV.7606

in strict compliance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention”.
All of that has been to no avail. Although the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, a small,
unarmed international civilian contingent, was deployed
in 1997 and continues to provide a limited protective
presence in the city, the violations faced by Palestinian
civilians have never ceased and continue to the present
day, only with greater intensity and impunity. The
impact of the violations on civilians has been immense,
with countless lives ruined and generations lost,
underscoring the need for the enhanced and effective
protection of the Palestinian people. The international
community has clear responsibilities, particularly the
Council and the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which must be upheld. Protection
should not be viewed as unreasonable or unimaginable
by any party that respects the law and human rights
and seeks peace. Civilians — children, women and
men — must not be used as cannon fodder, and all
efforts must be made to spare them the atrocities of war
and protect their lives.
The United Nations special responsibilities were
underscored, inter alia, in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which stresses
that
“[t]he protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a core principle of international humanitarian law
and a moral responsibility for the United Nations”
(S/2015/446, para. 82),
and decries the systemic constraints, including the
lack of consensus among Security Council members,
that have prevented United Nations action in efforts
to address the protection needs of civilians in many
conflicts.
In that connection, we also highlight the essential
role that can be played by humanitarian organizations,
as well as civil society, in providing a protective
civilian presence. In Palestine, we recognize the
important contributions, in that regard, made by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies providing assistance and protection to the
most vulnerable, including children, and the work
of civil society. The latter includes, for example, a
programme run by the World Council of Churches that
provides protective escorts for our civilians, and we
urgently call for the enhancement of such efforts. We

16-0110451/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

call on the Secretary-General, in particular, to urgently
explore and mobilize United Nations capabilities in that
regard, in line with international humanitarian law.
Moreover, the United Nations study reviewing
protection regimes (S/2015/809, annex), which was
requested of the Secretary-General by President
Mahmoud Abbas and which was presented by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council in October,
provides important precedents that should be fully
considered, along with other relevant reports aimed at
strengthening the Council’s ability to address protection
needs in conflicts throughout the world. That study,
containing several dozen pages, was not circulated
to the members of the Security Council for them to
shelve away. It was circulated rather for them to study,
consider and draw conclusions with regard to practical
steps to provide protection for the Palestinian people.
For the Palestinian people, that call is more urgent than
ever in an unsustainable and dangerous situation that
continues to require sustained international attention
and action. We implore the international community,
and foremost the Security Council, to rise to the
challenge and act to protect civilians and uphold human
rights in Palestine and everywhere else in the world,
where innocent civilians are suffering in conflicts, and
to restore credibility to international humanitarian law
and to the Council itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the spokesperson for the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, and wishes to add the following remarks in its
national capacity on this timely initiative, for which we
praise your presidency.
The deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, is on the
rise. Italy has endorsed the Safe School Declaration on
the use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups in contravention of applicable international
law. Sustained humanitarian access remains a key
challenge. The number of refugees and internally
displaced persons has reached record levels. Impunity
for violations remains, unfortunately, very high. Those
are the challenges that we are up against.
Against that background, Italy welcomes the
recent report on the topic by the Secretary-General

52/91

19/01/2016

(S/2015/453) and the adoption, under the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council, of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/23, reaffirming
the Council’s commitment to that cause, and looks
forward to the upcoming World Humanitarian Summit
in Istanbul as a platform to reinforce our collective
engagement, which Italy demonstrates every day in
the rescue operations involving migrants and refugees
coming from across the Mediterranean. Allow me to
highlight a few points.
First, there are the issues of accountability
and compliance. It is important that the Council
systematically remind parties to a conflict of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights and refugee law, and systematically
condemn violations of the existing norms. In that
respect, Italy supports proposals to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law,
including through a forum in which States could engage
in a more systematic, non-politicized and voluntary
dialogue. Moreover, I wish to stress the importance
of the International Criminal Court as an essential
institution in strengthening the message that there can
be no impunity. We believe that the Council should have
a forum in which issues of international criminal justice
and accountability could be regularly and more broadly
discussed, bearing in mind the differing sensitivities
at hand, but also the need to assist domestic efforts to
strengthen local judicial institutions.
Secondly, there is the issue of humanitarian
access and needs. In coordination with the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, it is important for the Council
to systematically remind parties to a conflict of
their obligations to guarantee rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access, and to condemn the denial of such
access without fail. It is also important to empower local
communities and civil society, which play a primary
role in delivering aid and advocating for humanitarian
values. We must also remember that women, children
and people with disabilities most often bear the brunt of
armed conflict, and we must therefore never lose sight
of their specific needs. Allow me, in that context, to
recall Italy’s most recent contribution to the World Food
Programme, last week, in the delivery of essential food
items to the besieged population of Syria, including the
town of Madaya.
Thirdly, with regard to peacekeeping operations,
Italy welcomes the recommendations contained in
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and recognizes that the
protection of civilians is a mission-wide task. To fulfil it,
many non-military tools are available, including strong
political advocacy, credible reporting, and liaison with
local communities. Training prior to deployment is also
essential, including on issues of sexual exploitation and
abuse. Italy is fully supportive of the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy in that regard.
Prevention is not only the right choice, it is the
better choice. Negotiated political solutions to conflicts,
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) to tackle root causes,
the preventive power of justice, the renewed focus on
prevention and mediation by strengthening United
Nations capacities, including in terms of financial
resources, are the best ways to guarantee effective
protection of civilians. I therefore stress the importance
of early-warning mechanisms, such as the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes of the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect. I welcome continued
reporting to the Council on those issues.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the adoption, upon
the initiative of the Government of Rwanda, of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. Italy is
among the inaugural subscribers to that voluntary set of
principles, which establish that the effective protection
of civilians in peacekeeping requires properly trained
troops, adequate equipment and strong political
commitment. We are confident that a greater number of
troop- and police-contributing countries will subscribe
to and implement the Principles.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s thematic
debate. It underscores the pivotal importance of the
issue, especially as civilians have come to represent the
ever-increasing proportion of victims in ongoing armed
conflicts — in an era that the Secretary-General recently
aptly portrayed as one of mega-crises. My delegation
also appreciates the insightful briefings by the Deputy
Secretary-General and by the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The suffering of civilians caught in the line of fire in
conflict situations is unspeakable. Tens of thousands of
people, including women, children and the elderly, have

S/PV.7606

become tragic victims of conflicts not of their making.
Civilian casualties have mounted, and so has the need
for humanitarian assistance. The United Nations report
released today reveals that in Iraq’s ongoing conflict
nearly 19,000 civilians were killed between 1 January
2014 and 31 October 2015, with more than 36,000
wounded. Those are indeed staggering numbers.
Millions have been dislodged from their homes, driven
out by bloody and unremitting conflict and unending
turmoil or persecution. Many who managed to flee
have seen their perilous journeys of escape become
journeys of death.
The protection of civilians is a core system-wide
responsibility, but host countries bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of all civilians without
discrimination. A normative framework is in place,
and the international community keeps urging all
parties to comply with their obligations and abide by
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
But compliance, unfortunately, is sporadic at best, and
defiance remains rampant, especially, but not only, on
the part of non-State actors. As recent examples attest,
starvation has been used as an instrument of a siege
strategy, and indiscriminate bombing campaigns have
been undertaken with no regard for the loss of civilian
lives. The destruction of hospitals and attacks on
medical workers has been the most egregious example
of such impunity. All that has presented formidable
obstacles to legitimate humanitarian access to affected
populations and resulted in death and destruction,
which could have been avoided. We would therefore
fully support efforts to strengthen compliance and
accountability measures.
The attention given to the subject in the report of the
High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
is also timely. We support its recommendations for
better training of peacekeepers and closer trilateral
dialogue and collaboration. We do, however, believe
that the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are
not an impediment to protection-of-civilians mandates.
The Security Council establishes those mandates, and
the use of force in defence of those mandates is an
integral part of those principles. The report also urges
extreme caution when mandating enforcement tasks.
Pakistan, as one of world’s top troop-contributing
countries, has proudly and conscientiously undertaken
the task of proactively protecting civilians, when
mandated by the Council. We have demonstrated that
this can be done by a robust deterrence posture and

16-0110453/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

without resort to the actual use of force. Action by
Pakistani troops in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur offers an example of the
active protection of civilians while adhering to the
principles of peacekeeping.

in particular the June 2015 report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2015/453), unanimously affirm that the deliberate
targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks on, civilians
continue to increase.

While we appreciate the acknowledgement in the
Secretary-General’s report that Pakistan’s counterterrorism operations involves “better advance planning
to limit the effect on civilians” (S/2015/453, para. 20),
my delegation reiterates that these are law enforcement
actions and do not constitute a situation of armed
conflict. We of course strongly condemn the deliberate
targeting of civilians in conflict situations. We have
even temporarily relocated civilians to protect them
from deliberate targeting by terrorists in areas where
law enforcement operations are taking place. As has
been demonstrated time and again, terrorists are not
bound by any consideration of humanity. The have not
even spared schoolchildren, as the cowardly attack on a
school in Peshawar demonstrated a year ago, underlining
the new and appalling levels of inhumanity to which
violent extremists have sunk. Even so, the response of
States to combat terrorism must be measured, wellplanned and carefully targeted to protect civilias and
uphold human rights. Anything less would play into the
hands of terrorists and would be counter-productive.

The consequences are there for the whole world to
see: huge civilian casualties, including many children;
massive population displacements; the refugee and
migration crisis; the intentional destruction of civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and medical facilities;
the use of civilians as weapons of war by depriving
them, inter alia, of food and other basic necessities;
the total disregard for the safety of humanitarian
workers and journalists; and other clear violations of
international humanitarian law.

Finally, the goal of the protection of civilians is best
served, as other speakers before me have also pointed
out, by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts in
the first place, addressing the root causes of conflicts
and finding inclusive and peaceful political solutions to
disputes and conflicts. That, we believe, is the strategy
that will lead us to sustained and enduring peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See.
Brother Carroll (Holy See): My delegation wishes
to thank the presidency of Uruguay for bringing the
question of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
to the attention of the international community.
One of the saddest developments in the evolution
of armed conflicts is that more and more victims are
innocent civilians. In the early 1900s, approximately
5 per cent of such fatalities were civilians, while in
the 1990s, more than 90 per cent of the fatalities were
non-combatants. It continues to worsen. All the reports
and studies on the theme during the past six months,

54/91

The whole international community is implicated
in those heinous crimes in one way or another by silence
and indifference, for instance, or by the fact that the
destruction of civilian infrastructure and the slaughter
of innocent civilians are perpetrated with weapons
manufactured and supplied by the industrial engines of
the world and sold on the open or black market or given
or loaned to client States. The extent of responsibility
goes well beyond those directly massacring civilians.
Nobody can remain indifferent before this tragedy.
We must act with the utmost urgency. First, this
barbarity must be denounced by all without exception
and in the strongest possible terms. Secondly, the
international community must do all it can to stop these
heinous crimes, including the legitimate use of force
to stop atrocities and war crimes. Thirdly, the tools
at the disposal of the Council and of the international
community to protect civilians in armed conflict and
bring perpetrators to justice must be enhanced and
further strengthened where necessary. Fourthly, the
international community and individual States must
have the will and readiness to use those tools. Fifthly,
those responsible must be held accountable. Sixthly,
civilian populations who have been affected by mass
atrocities and war crimes deserve all the help we can
and must provide.
Pope Francis, in his 11 January address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, gave voice
to the victims of wars, saying:
“We hear Rachel weeping for her children who
are no more. Hers is the plea of thousands of people
who weep as they flee horrific wars, persecutions
and human rights violations, or political or social

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

instability, which often make it impossible for them
to live in their native lands. It is the outcry of those
forced to flee in order to escape unspeakable acts
of cruelty towards the most vulnerable persons,
such as women and children and the disabled, or
martyrdom solely on account of their religion.”
In the name of Pope Francis, my delegation
wishes to convey profound gratitude to the countries,
communities and individuals who are extending the
hands of solidarity and fraternity in the midst of so
much human suffering. The Pope explicitly thanks
Lebanon and Jordan, as well as the frontline countries
of Italy, Greece and Turkey, for all their efforts and
commitments to save lives and ease this horrendous
suffering. Those countries need the help of the entire
international community to face the challenges posed
by massive movements of refugees and migrants.
There is a panoply of interdependent problems that
can only be resolved by establishing peace through
dialogue and negotiations. We are encouraged by
progress towards finding political solutions to some of
the most violent conflicts in the Middle East. Care for
the civilians caught in the crossfire and used as weapons
of war calls for full support for ongoing dialogue and
negotiations. Peace achieved through these means is
our best guarantee to avoid resorting to war again.
The use of civilians as weapons of war represents
the worst of human behaviour. The international
community should show itself at its best by conquering
evil with good, by beating our swords into ploughshares
and our spears into pruning hooks, by combatting
indifference with solidarity and by rising above narrow
national and geopolitical interests to spare us all from
the scourge of wars.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): Romania
associates itself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to make
some remarks in my national capacity.
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, an issue that is central to
the Security Council’s responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Protecting the
civilian population in armed conflicts is today a major
challenge. The two emergency meetings of the Security
Council on the humanitarian situation in Syria last
week demonstrate this.

S/PV.7606

We find the reports of the Secretary-General of
June (S/2015/453) and September 2015 (S/2015/682)
very helpful to our debate. The latter is based on the
relevant observations and recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for the very pertinent, albeit grim, briefings they
presented today.
As this is the first time that the Security Council
is discussing this subject after the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), I would like to express the satisfaction
of Romania, as an active promoter of the Agenda,
at the inclusion of Goal 16, on promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
providing access to justice for all and building effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. That
Goal has an important impact on the sectoral aspects of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The many ongoing conflicts force us to stress once
again that the responsibility for protecting civilians
in times of war lies with the States, and that it is up
to States to prosecute those who commit violations of
international norms, including those of international
humanitarian law. That obligation applies equally to
all parties to conflict. We categorically condemn any
attack against civilians and call on all Governments
and warring factions to protect their populations and to
encourage the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
In situations where States have neither the will
or the ability to exercise their responsibilities, the
international community must immediately become
involved. It is the Security Council’s duty to call on
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to enforce the
protection of civilians. Romania believes that the fight
against impunity is a fundamental instrument for the
protection of civilians. That is why we call on all States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute
and cooperate with the ICC. It is also a sine qua non
condition to preventing genocide and atrocities.
Romania has been participating in peacekeeping
missions since 1991, and Romanian military and police
forces have never been involved in events related
to a lack of respect for the local civilian population.
That is because we maintain a zero-tolerance policy
for any abuse. In 2015, we participated in 10 out of
18 peacekeeping missions under the United Nations

16-0110455/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

flag, as well as in four missions of the Department
of Safety and Security. We intend to make further
contributions this year. Our men and women who go
on mission under the United Nations flag, and under
the flags of the European Union and NATO, receive
strict instructions during the three months before
their departure, including with regard to respect for
civilians and human rights, with particular focus on the
protection of women and children.
Romania has always maintained that the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is increased
through the engagement of and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. Just two months ago, we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1631 (2005), the first resolution of the
Security Council on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. As
the author of that document, Romania is pleased to note
in the Secretary-General’s most recent report that we
have made significant progress in that area in recent
years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian Policy
Advisor at Oxfam, for their contributions to this debate.
The protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict remains an acute concern, and we appreciate
that Uruguay has chosen this important topic for an
open debate in the Security Council. The European
Union and its member States share the outrage
expressed by the Council in November 2015 that
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in today’s conflicts (see S/PRST/2015/23).
We also concur with the Secretary-General’s view, as
expressed in his report of July 2015, entitled “A vital and
enduring commitment: implementing the responsibility
to protect” (S/2015/500), that the prevailing disrespect

56/91

19/01/2016

for international humanitarian law on the part of some
States and non-State armed groups, and the pervasive
impunity that they enjoy for violations have become
one of the most critical challenges for the protection of
civilians.
The EU and its member States are committed
to promoting the implementation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
worldwide. The respect for those laws is crucial to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and to providing assistance to victims in the most
effective manner. The frequent failure of the parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations is
of profound concern. We are also concerned about the
increased targeting of medical missions and personnel,
again in clear violation of those obligations. We regret
that no agreement could be found on a resolution to
establish a new forum to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law at the thirty-second
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement in Geneva in December 2015.
However, participants agreed on the imperative need
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law and committed to working towards that goal over
the coming years. We encourage all States to participate
in ongoing discussions on exactly how such a new
forum might work.
The EU is implementing its guidelines on promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and is
making full use of all of the tools at its disposal. The
EU and its member States are committed to continuing
their efforts to promote dissemination of and training
in international humanitarian law inside the European
Union, as well as to continue their efforts to advocate
strongly and consistently for the respect of international
law, including international humanitarian law.
The specific protection needs of women and
children require special attention. Similar attention
should also be paid to the phenomenon of sexual
violence and the use of rape as a tactic of warfare,
affecting women, children and also men. Children are
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts, and
grave violations against children continue to increase.
The situation of children in Syria is of utmost concern.
National authorities have the primary responsibility
to ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights. However, where national authorities are unable

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

or unwilling to take the necessary steps to ensure
accountability, other mechanisms must be used to ensure
that accountability. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) should exercise jurisdiction, where applicable.
The Security Council has an important role to play in
that regard, given its global mandate to make referrals
to the Court. The EU is a firm supporter of the ICC and
its work. However, every case that is brought before the
ICC represents, at the same time, a failure on the part of
national Governments and the international community
to prevent conflicts and atrocity crimes. Given the
magnitude of sexual and gender-based crimes in times
of conflict, the EU appreciates the special attention
accorded by the Prosecutor of the ICC to such crimes.
For a number of years already, the mandates of
many United Nations peacekeeping and other missions
have included the protection of civilians. It remains a
crucial dimension that is often decisive for the success
and legitimacy of an operation. The EU welcomes
the centrality of the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping, as put forward in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) and the reports of the Secretary-General.
The emphasis on the role of political processes, conflict
prevention, early warning and partnerships in those
reports is also key for efforts to advance the protection
of civilians.
However, many challenges remain in terms of the
effective implementation of protection mandates, and
we need to continue to address them. For example,
effective implementation requires better planning
support for missions, applying lessons learned
effectively and improving the understanding of how to
support host States in their efforts to protect civilians.
Operations need to be equipped with the necessary
tools to address both the root causes of crises and
their most visible consequences. Peacekeepers must
protect civilians under threat of physical violence, in
a manner consistent with the requirements of their
mandates. Different levels of threat must be met with
the appropriate and commensurate use of force, as
necessary.
In many ways, training is the cornerstone of
improving the protection of civilians by missions.
Such training should also include predeployment and
in-mission training on child protection, as well as on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The EU is supportive
of the United Nations zero-tolerance policy in that
regard. Nothing is more damning to the legitimacy of

S/PV.7606

international peacekeeping and efforts to regain the trust
of local populations than peacekeepers abusing those
whom they are mandated to protect. For its part, the
EU has provided training on the protection of civilians,
atrocity prevention, gender and child protection, human
rights law and international humanitarian law as an
integral part of the training curricula for its missions in
Somalia, Mali and the Niger.
United Nations peace operations should also
play a critical role in assisting the host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, as those
operations are often in the frontline when a State is
unable or unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of
atrocity crimes. In that context, United Nations peace
operations need to be staffed and equipped in a way that
allows United Nations personnel to better interact with
the local population and civil society organizations,
including women’s rights-oriented groups, with the
overarching aim of responding to warning signals and
reducing the risk of atrocity crimes. The implementation
of the Human Rights Up Front initiative should make a
positive contribution in that regard.
In cases where international efforts fail and atrocity
crimes are committed, accountability is crucial.
Where mandated or when the host State has consented
thereto, United Nations peace operations should be
equipped and staffed with the capability and expertise
to assist in transparent investigations and support the
collection of evidence in a professional manner. The
EU is committed to assisting States to strengthen their
national judicial and correctional systems, so as to
enable them to investigate and prosecute perpetrators
of atrocity crimes. Furthermore, closer cooperation
between the ICC and missions in the field is of vital
importance. When a peace operation is to be deployed in
an ICC-situation country, its mandate should authorize
it to facilitate or assist the ICC, including by assisting
authorities in the protection of witnesses and the arrest
and surrender of individuals subject to arrest warrants
issued by the Court.
To conclude, the EU remains a loyal United Nations
partner. The Security Council can count on our support
in reinforcing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including through support to United Nations
peace operations and through our own missions. We will
maintain our support for the promotion of compliance
with international humanitarian law and strengthened
accountability for serious violations.

16-0110457/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Poland.

appreciated. They protect civilians in very harsh and
difficult conditions, with often insufficient resources.

Mr. Winid (Poland): I thank Uruguay for
convening today’s important debate. Poland aligns
itself with the statement just delivered by observer of
the the European Union, but I would like to add some
remarks in my national capacity.

Thirdly, United Nations peace operations should
play a critical role in assisting host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect.
The implementation of the Human Rights Up Front
initiative should make a positive contribution in this
regard. Human rights monitoring and advocacy, the
development of the rule of law, strengthening the
standards of good governance and political engagement
should be central to United Nations protection efforts.

First, the issue of protection of civilians is now more
important than ever. We still see millions of civilians
suffering as a result of deadly military attacks, civilians
sheltering in United Nations bases and recurring
attacks on humanitarian workers. The Security Council
has a fundamental role to play in this regard, given
its primary responsibility for international peace and
security.
Poland welcomes the fact that the protection of
civilians is addressed in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
and the subsequent report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the Panel’s recommendations
(S/2015/682). With nine United Nations peacekeeping
operations currently operating under explicit civilian
protection mandates, we encourage the Secretariat to
work further on the development of relevant policies,
guidance and training.
The Secretary-General’s report before us (S/2015/453)
accurately indicates key challenges with regard to the
protection of civilians, namely, limited humanitarian
access, attacks on humanitarian and health-care
workers and facilities, and the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. We agree that the development of
policy standards to curb or limit the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas could strengthen the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations should be
equipped with more advanced tools to address both
the root causes of crises and their most visible
consequences. There is a crucial need to improve early
warning and rapid-reaction capacities. It is our duty to
explore new capabilities and adopt new technologies.
We also need to further work on developing a clearer
understanding of the meaning of the kind of protection
of civilians that is needed in peacekeeping operations.
The universal value of human life should be cherished
beyond any doubt. While caring about the lives of
those who should be protected, we cannot forget about
those who are given the task to protect. The challenges
that peacekeepers face are often not sufficiently

58/91

We should never forget about the most vulnerable,
women and children, who require our undivided
attention. The number of those most affected by armed
conflicts is, unfortunately, not decreasing. We underline
that national authorities remain primarily responsible
for protecting their citizens.
Last but not least, let me stress that Poland
remains committed to promoting the implementation
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law worldwide. Respect for these laws
is essential to helping the victims. However, the
politicization of aid and the polarization of States
around humanitarian issues remain a huge challenge. In
that regard, we are grateful to the Secretary General for
convening the World Humanitarian Summit and to the
Government of Turkey, which will host that meeting in
Istanbul in May. The Summit will be a rare opportunity
to bring all stakeholders together and reshape the
global humanitarian system for the years to come. It
has been almost 25 years since the last time the world
came together to discuss humanitarian aid.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a
highly important subject, and we congratulate you on
Uruguay’s accession to the Council presidency for the
month of January.
My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General and the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Oxfam for their respective briefings.
This debate is timely in light of the fact that
civilians now constitute the vast majority of victims
in today’s armed conflicts and of the continued trend
of violations of international humanitarian law at an

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

alarming level in current conflict zones. In that regard,
my delegation very much welcomes the fact that the
Council is continuing its efforts to ensure that this
critical issue remains at the very top of its agenda. My
delegation hopes that today’s debate will send a strong
and clear message to all parties to conflicts on the
imperative of respecting international humanitarian
law without preconditions.
My delegation is of the views that the assessments
and recommendations contained in the latest
Secretary-General’s report on this topic (S/2015/453),
issued in June 2015, remain relevant. In particular,
my delegation supports the idea of strengthening
the monitoring, tracking and recording of civilian
casualties. My delegation believes that a common
system should be developed within the United Nations
to systematically record civilian casualties in the
framework of monitoring and reporting on violations
of international humanitarian law, in cooperation with
Member States and relevant civil society organizations.
These mechanisms could be instrumental in informing
the international community of the level of observance
of international humanitarian law by any party to
armed conflict, State and non-State actors alike, as
the basis for improving strategies and policies in this
regard, including by ensuring accountability of those
responsible. This would also serve as a means of
informing military strategy to reduce civilian casualties
in armed conflicts.
In the same vein, my delegation also supports the
intention of the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict on an
annual basis rather than every 18 months, as is the
current practice. Indeed, protection of civilian issues
in situations of concern, including the state of respect
for international humanitarian law across current
conflicts, require the international community’s
sustained attention and action.
In light of the broader context of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, my delegation wishes to
stress that it is vital to ensure humanitarian access and
the protection of humanitarian personnel in conflict
zones. My delegation believes that the Council should
play a more effective role in ensuring that all parties
to armed conflict, including non-State actors, do their
utmost to respect international humanitarian law,
ensuring humanitarian access and guaranteeing the
security and safety of persons and facilities protected
under international humanitarian law. The Council

S/PV.7606

should provide active and consistent political and
operational support in this regard.
Regarding the protection of civilians in the
framework of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
my delegation believes that a common doctrine on
protection of civilians and practical guidelines are
important to the implementation of civilian protection
mandates. Missions should have clear, credible and
achievable mandates with an explicitly identified
protocol on the use of force. My delegation also agrees
with one of the recommendations of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations that missions also need to
identify their limits. Along with closing the gap between
what is asked of and what is provided to peacekeepers,
my delegation underlines the impartiality of the Blue
Helmets and the importance of seeing to their safety
and security. These aspects are also essential to their
success in meeting their tasks.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
carried out in the broader context of conflict resolution
and conflict prevention. Credible political solutions
to conflict are the best and most lasting framework
for civilian protection. This perspective includes
addressing the root causes of conflict. It is therefore
important to give proper attention to the building of
national capacities in the fields of human rights, rule
of law and justice as a part of a country’s inclusive
development and conflict-prevention frameworks.
Finally, my delegation shares the view that the
forthcoming World Humanitarian Summit will provide
an excellent opportunity to address this issue in a more
in-depth and comprehensive manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the members of the Human Security Network,
a cross-regional network composed of several States,
including Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer State, and my own country,
Slovenia.
For the sake of time, I will deliver a shorter of
my statement. A full version will be available on our
website.
I would like to start by thanking the delegation of
Uruguay for convening today’s open debate. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the

16-0110459/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and the representative of Oxfam for their
briefings.
Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in armed conflicts. The regular discussion
of this topic is of the utmost importance to the work
of the Security Council to better ensure the security
and dignity of civilians affected by armed conflicts.
The humanitarian situation affecting the people in the
Syrian Arab Republic, South Sudan and Yemen, to
mention a few, needs an urgent response.
Ensuring the respect of all parties to a conflict,
including armed groups, for human rights law and
international humanitarian law is the first necessary
step in enhancing the protection of civilians. States
must comply with their obligation to allow and
facilitate rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel. In the longer run, the political
settlement of armed conflicts, coupled with preventive
measures to ensure that there is no relapse into conflict,
is needed to achieve more sustainable answers to the
urgent challenge of the protection of civilians. The
Human Security Network recognizes the efforts
taken under the Secretary-General’s Human Rights
Up Front initiative to strengthen the role of the entire
United Nations system to better prevent and respond to
large-scale violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in a timely and effective manner.
We continue to witness the grave abuses and
violence, including sexual violence, being perpetrated
against civilians, especially women and girls, in
conflict and post-conflict settings. We unequivocally
condemn sexual and gender-based violence and are
determined to prevent and address those heinous
crimes. At the same time, we recognize that women are
not merely victims of armed conflicts but are positive
agents of change. Accordingly, resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, the global study on
its implementation, resolution 2242 (XXXX) and other
related resolutions should be taken into account when
addressing the issue of the protection of civilians.
Armed conflicts have a devastating effect on the
lives of children. We categorically condemn all forms of
violence against children. The international community
must do more to protect children’s rights during and
after armed conflicts and guarantee that they have a
safe and secure childhood. We also call for greater

60/91

19/01/2016

efforts to raise awareness of the plight of refugee and
internally displaced children and their human rights.
Accountability is another key element in the
protection of civilians. States must comply with their
obligations under international law and hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
The Human Security Network stresses the usefulness
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
in investigating and substantiating alleged violations
of international law. When States are unwilling or
unable to bring perpetrators to justice, a referral to the
International Criminal Court is a complementary means
to avoid impunity and restore dignity to survivors of
atrocities, their families and communities.
The Security Council has mandated several
peacekeeping missions to protect civilians. The Human
Security Network underlines the importance of clear
and achievable mandates with sufficient resources and
capabilities to fulfil the protection mandate. The Human
Security Network supports the recommendation of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
that all peacekeepers deployed are properly trained,
equipped and commanded so as to be able to deliver
on their responsibilities to protect civilians. The
Human Security Network considers it to be of utmost
importance that the Security Council remains seized
of the question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and calls to continue this discussion on a
regular basis.
I would now like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity. I would also like to say that
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union a few minutes ago.
Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in conflicts and are too often deliberate
targets by parties to conflict. The tragedy of Madaya is
a stark reminder that civilians are not only affected by
bullets and bombs, but also by other conflict-induced
suffering. Safeguarding humanitarian access and
respect for humanitarian principles needs to remain at
the core of our endeavours. The impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law can no longer be
tolerated. Parties to conflict have to respect their
obligations to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access.
The World Humanitarian Summit later this year
will be a historic opportunity to build a truly global
partnership among all actors within and beyond the

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

existing humanitarian system so as to prevent and end
human suffering and address the root causes of crises.

the civilian population, which is the most vulnerable in
times of armed conflict.

In the past few years, situation-specific resolutions
adopted by the Security Council have increasingly
called for protection to be made a priority in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. Currently,
10 out of 16 United Nations peace operations have the
protection of civilians at the core of their mandates.
As these operations play a central role in protecting
civilians, it is essential that the Council consider
providing all peacekeeping missions with such
mandates, with special emphasis given to the protection
of the most vulnerable, such as children, the elderly and
the disabled.

This debate is useful in evaluating our reaction
to these circumstances and ascertaining whether the
available tools in our arsenal are effective in responding
to our collective responsibility. It is therefore critical that
in responding to and countering this extreme violence,
we ensure that we ourselves are not the perpetrators of
acts that bring suffering and death to the very civilians
whom we are trying to protect.

Women are important players in the protection
of civilians. Their equal and full participation is of
vital importance in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery. Their involvement is crucial if we are to find
the best solutions for lessening the burden of civilians
in conflict situations.
To mitigate the harm on civilians, special attention
must also be given to prevent and address sexual
violence in conflict and the role of peace operations in
this regard. United Nations peacekeepers should be role
models in preventing and addressing sexual violence
and abuse — and should not be the perpetrators of
sexual abuse — and should respect the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse.
In conclusion, I would stress that the continuous
support and engagement of the Council is crucial for
the protection of civilians on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President, South
Africa wishes to congratulate you and the delegation
of Uruguay on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you for organizing this timely
debate, which is of continuing relevance.
States bear the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, in accordance with their legal obligations
under international law. However, the international
community today is increasingly being challenged by
the changing nature of conflicts, which have become
asymmetrical and are motivated by the goal of targeting

In adding our voice to today’s timely debate, my
delegation wishes to make the following three points.
First, the protection of civilians could best be
achieved by the Security Council strengthening and
investing greater efforts in prevention and finding
political solutions to conflicts. Palestine, Libya and
Syria are glaring examples of the untold suffering
that civilians experience as a consequence of the
Council’s inability to find political solutions to
these conflicts. The selective application and abuse
of protection-of-civilians mandates undermine the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
this goal. Furthermore, opting for a military solution,
including by arming members of the opposition, blurs
the distinction between civilian and combatant and
subsequently makes the pacific settlement of disputes
a less attractive alternative.
Secondly, we wish to underline that while it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders, armed opposition groups must also
bear responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians
are protected. The Council should ensure that failure by
both State and non-State actors to uphold that principle
does not go unpunished. Ensuring accountability
for the most serious crimes, in particular those of
international concern, is a very important aspect of
ensuring the credibility of the protection of civilians
and is key to delivering global justice. Strengthening
accountability is therefore an essential element in
enhancing compliance by the parties to armed conflict
with their international obligations.
Last but not least, South Africa holds the view that
peacekeepers should be deployed in support of political
or peace processes. However, should political or peace
processes be obstructed and non-military protection
tools be inadequate, peacekeeping missions with an
explicit mandate to protect civilians must play their
part in the protection of civilians, including through the

16-0110461/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

use of force. The deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
credible example of the success that can be achieved
through the use of force against those who obstruct the
peace.
As highlighted in the report of the High-Level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446),
the three principles of United Nations peacekeeping
should not be an excuse for failure to protect civilians
or defend the missions proactively, and there should
be flexibility in interpreting these principles to ensure
that peacekeepers enforce their mandate. This would,
however, require that peacekeeping missions be
adequately resourced and provided with the requisite
mandate and capabilities to implement their mandate.
Additionally, the United Nations, through the use of
Chapter VIII, could rely on the comparative advantage
of regional arrangements in advancing the protection
of civilians in conflict situations, as demonstrated in
Somalia and Darfur.
In conclusion, preventative measures, the promotion
and protection of human rights and support for
development within a stable environment ultimately
forms the best long-term strategy for the protection and,
indeed, prosperity of civilians under the responsibility
of States.
It is my delegation’s hope that this thematic
discussion will result in concrete actions, particularly
by the Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to begin by congratulating you
once again, Mr. President, on your country’s election as
a member of the Security Council and on its accession
to the presidency of the Council for this month. I should
like also to congratulate the other new members of the
Council, and I thank you for having convened this
important meeting.
The creation of the United Nations gave hope
to peoples around the world that the Organization
would discharge its responsibilities, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security and
protecting humanity from the sufferings of war. But the
Organization has not been able to fulfil the hopes of

62/91

19/01/2016

the founding fathers; it has not been able to put an end
to war or to the resultant human suffering, despite the
fact that more than 16 years have elapsed since a debate
began within the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Experience has shown that protecting civilians in
armed conflict is always a selective process and subject
to double standards, which contravenes the very basis
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. The impact on peoples of such interventions is
very clear. Regrets or recognition of errors made in the
process of attempting to ease the suffering of peoples
are not enough to restore hope or to rebuild the States
affected.
My country would like to underscore the following
several points.
First, good offices used to prevent crises or settle
disputes peacefully, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law, are
the best means of protecting civilians.
Secondly, the main responsibility for protecting
civilians against all dangers, including terrorist acts,
rest on the shoulders of the State. The State is the
authority that is responsible for maintaining peace and
stability throughout its territory.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot become reality unless the norms of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations are fully
respected, including, first and foremost, sovereignty,
sovereign equality and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States.
Fourthly, it is unacceptable to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in a selective manner,
which makes it into a means of furthering the political
agendas and interests of certain influential States at
the expense of other Member States. Some Members,
including Security Council members, use the protection
of civilians as a pretext to impose their interests, which
undermines both the Council and the Charter.
Fifthly, the issue of the protection of civilians
should be approached comprehensively by addressing
anything that might be harmful to civilians and
preventing unilateral interventions that the United
Nations recognizes as illegal. Civilians should not
be exposed to suffering or slow death caused by the
deprivation of daily means of subsistence. They should
not be forced into displacement, asylum or any situation

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in which they could be subject to blackmail. The
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict
requires Member States also to respect the Security
Council resolutions pertaining to the fight against and
financing of terrorism.
My delegation renews its plea for the protection of
civilians suffering under the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the other occupied
Arab territories, and for an end to the aggressive
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, as well as
to its occupation. The Council’s silence vis-à-vis
Israel’s violations of international law, international
humanitarian law, human rights and other international
instruments pertaining to the combat against terrorism
allows Israel to believe that it is immune from
accountability and that it can support terrorist groups
in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and other regions,
which threatens both regional and international peace
and security, and undermines the rules and regulations
of international law.
In conclusion, unfortunately some delegations are
using this meeting to repeat their allegations with regard
to the situation in our country and to prevent any positive
action intended to resolve the crisis in Syria, including
the upcoming talks in Geneva. It is also unfortunate
that a large number of speakers have not addressed the
issue of the root causes of the Syrian crisis, including
terrorist groups supported by some States, in particular
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar; the perpetration of the
Israeli occupation of Syrian territory; and the unilateral
measures imposed on our country. The Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic once again asks the Security
Council to assume it responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations in order to put an end to the Israeli
occupation. We further request that Israeli authorities
be held accountable for their violations of Security
Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Uruguay, a new member of the Security
Council, and to wish every success success during its
important mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union. I would like to make
additional remarks in my national capacity.

S/PV.7606

We thank the Uruguayan presidency for holding this
timely debate on the protection of civilians. This is a
topic that requires our constant and undivided attention,
especially when we are witnessing unprecedented levels
of human suffering throughout the world. I would also
like to thank and commend the Secretary-General for
his report on this topic (S/2015/453).
Day after day we see media reports and images
of civilians in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, South Sudan and
many other conflict areas bearing the brunt of conflict,
fleeing war zones, struggling to survive in unbearable
circumstances. The number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance is staggering. In that context,
we are hopeful that the World Humanitarian Summit
will be a significant step towards finding sustainable
solutions to the global humanitarian crisis.
The conflicts are many and often protracted,
and it may seem that too often we address them with
a business-as-usual approach. But no conflict and
no human suffering should be treated in such a way.
The situation in the Syrian city of Madaya, with the
images of people there starving to death, is just one
among many tragedies about which we cannot stay
silent. Let me therefore add Croatia’s strong voice to
the calls of the international community on all Syrian
parties, especially the regime, to end all sieges, allow
immediate and unfettered humanitarian access, and
adhere to international humanitarian law. Protecting
civilians and ending the widespread atrocities and
suffering in Syria must be the focus of the efforts of the
international community all the time.
Unfortunately, the pictures coming out of Madaya
and other Syrian cities remind us of what many people in
our part of the world went through a quarter of a century
ago. February will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the official end of the siege of Sarajevo, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which lasted for almost four years — the
longest city siege of the twentieth century. This year,
Croatia will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
siege of Vukovar, a town that was besieged and shelled
constantly for almost three months by Serbian forces.
It is important to underline that at least some of those
responsible for the atrocities committed in Vukovar
and Sarajevo are facing justice before the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Accountability and bringing those responsible to
face justice should be regarded as part of the equation
of protecting civilians. The parties to a conflict have to

16-0110463/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

ensure full compliance with international humanitarian
law. Clearly, sieges, starvation and the denial of
aid are unlawful; they are crimes punishable under
international law. We therefore reiterate the importance
of the International Criminal Court in the context of
protecting civilians in armed conflicts. Those violating
human rights in armed conflicts should know that they
will face justice for the crimes committed. That is
why Croatia supports the request for the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
We acknowledge that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians lies with the State, but the international
community has to assume its share of the responsibility
to protect, and take collective action through the
Security Council if and when national authorities
manifestly fail to protect their populations.
We are also very concerned by reports of the
alleged use of cluster munitions in Yemen, Syria and
other conflict areas. In September last year, Croatia
hosted the first Review Conference of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions. We strongly support the overall
goal of the Convention, which in our view has been
largely successful in stigmatizing cluster munitions,
which should never be used by anyone at any time.
We also welcome the humanitarian aspects of the
Convention, which has established high standards
for assistance to cluster munitions victims, their
socioeconomic reintegration, and the enhancement of
local and regional capacities. Croatia was one of the
sponsors of General Assembly resolution 63/71, the
first-ever on this subject.
Croatia is also deeply concerned about the
implications of armed conflict on women and children,
especially the fact that sexual violence against women
continues to be used as a tactic of conflict. Sexual
violence is not only one of the most heinous crimes
committed against women in conflict, but is also one
that is often the least visible. Therefore, Croatia believes
that we have to continue to raise our voice against sexual
violence and that the international community can and
must do more to prevent and respond to sexual violence
in conflict. For us, it is also of utmost importance that
rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflicts be
recognized as war crimes and crimes against humanity,
for which the International Criminal Court is also
competent.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the prevention of
conflicts must lie at the core of all our efforts to ensure

64/91

19/01/2016

the protection of civilians. We therefore welcome the
fact that the peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews
put prevention at the centre of international peace and
security. We would also like to reiterate our strong
support for the Human Rights Up Front initiative and
the concept of the responsibility to protect.
Siniša Glavašević, a radio reporter who perished
with so many of his fellow citizens in Vukovar in
1991, and whose stories and reports from that besieged
Croatian town bear witness to the tragedies of life
under siege, in one of his stories, said that war was
truly the most terrible and destructive thing to happen
to humankind. I believe that that sentence perfectly
summarizes the reasons that we should all strive to
be better at preventing conflicts, and if conflicts do
happen, at protecting civilians because, in the end, it is
they who pay the highest price.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Uruguayan presidency for having
convened today’s debate and for having prepared the
concept note (S/2016/22, annex ). We also thank the
Deputy Secretary General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for their
briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the Human Security Network and by the
Permanent Representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Civilians continue to be affected most by armed
conflict. Their protection is one of the issues that
the Security Council must continue to prioritize,
particularly in its decisions related to actions taken by
the players in a conflict. The responsibility to protect
civilians because a State is unable or unwilling to
take action to ensure respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law is a key element in
the response from the Organization and Council. The
code of conduct on the non-use of the veto in situations
of genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
prepared by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, of which my country is a member,
and the French-Mexican statement on the issue, which
we have endorsed, are concrete proposals in the right
direction.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The reports of the ongoing review processes
contain similar recommendations. We acknowledge the
need to strengthen early-warning mechanisms and the
role that regional and subregional organizations play
in the effort. The political and humanitarian signals
that the Security Council sends should reaffirm the
importance of human rights, first and foremost, and
assess information provided by missions themselves
and by civil society.
Enhanced coordination among the Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
would help to better protect civilians. Troops should
be properly trained and missions should include
gender advisers and advisers on protecting women,
children and human rights as an independent category
to ensure that vulnerable people are protected and
that their special needs are met. We acknowledge the
particular challenges that women and girls face. The
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant resolutions, as well as the recommendations
of the global study thereon will undoubtedly help
to protect them. We urge the Council to implement
resolutions 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015) by convening
the informal group of experts on women and peace and
security to better attend to the task.
Similarly, the situation of children and armed
conflict deserves special attention. We call for the
implementation of resolution 2143 (2014) and other
relevant resolutions to ensure the protection and
non-military use of schools and universities during
conflicts, according to the Lucens Guidelines and
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. There exists a
responsibility to combat impunity and prosecute and
punish those responsible for crimes perpetrated against
civilians. If States are unable or unwilling to prosecute
alleged perpetrators, it will fall to the International
Criminal Court to deal with such crimes, under the
Rome Statute.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s debate will
lead to greater political support for protecting civilians
according to the provisions of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized today’s debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the

S/PV.7606

International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for
their briefings.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Today, far too many conflicts around the globe have
a devastating impact on civilians. Innocent civilians,
including women and children, often constitute the vast
majority of victims or they are deliberately targeted.
Lately, almost every single day we hear about the most
terrible crimes such as killings, torture, sexual violence,
kidnapping, slavery and other crimes perpetrated by
parties to the armed conflict or violent extremists in
many regions. The increasing role of illegal armed
groups and terrorist organizations in conflicts creates
an even more challenging environment for civilians
in conflict zones. Conflicts and violence force people
to leave their homes, leading to the highest number of
displaced persons and refugees since the Second World
War. A generous international response to the growing
humanitarian needs of people in dire and complex
crises is required on a daily basis.
A failure to protect civilians is tantamount to
disrespect for international law — humanitarian law,
refugee law and human rights law. While at the normative
level there has been progress — the relevant Security
Council resolutions play an important role — the lack
of respect for international humanitarian law and the
existence of impunity on the ground are increasing.
States bear the primary responsibility to protect
their populations from atrocity crimes. Therefore,
Latvia fully supports the joint appeal of the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the ICRC of 31 October
2015 to make every effort to achieve political solutions
to conflicts, to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law, hold perpetrators of violations
accountable, grant unhindered access to and protect
humanitarian and medical personnel and facilities, and
respond to the needs of internally displaced persons and
refugees. Latvia is a strong supporter of the principle
of the responsibility to protect. We look forward to
reaffirming that commitment via a General Assembly
resolution.
Latvia believes that promoting the protection of
civilians in all United Nations activities is essential.
The Security Council must view the matter as a priority
when addressing situations of concern. Its failure to act
promptly in order to prevent or stop a conflict, and to

16-0110465/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

demand accountability, is a severe blow to the victims.
We call on the permanent members of the Security
Council to refrain from using the veto in situations
of atrocity crimes and, in that regard, we strongly
support the initiatives of France and Mexico, and the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first like
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of Uruguay
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month, which is the first month of your term in the
Council. Let me also thank you for convening today’s
timely debate on the protection of civilians.

Strengthening conflict prevention and the reading
of early warning signs are key. We applaud the
Secretary-General for promoting his Human Rights
Up Front initiative, which has been created to regard
human rights and the protection of civilians as a systemwide responsibility of the Organization. Latvia believes
that all three United Nations reviews — on women
and peace and security, on peace operations and on
the peacebuilding architecture — will contribute to a
strengthened United Nations response to conflicts. We
are especially encouraged that the reviews recognize
the role of women in all areas of achieving peace and
security.

As we enter the new year, we are humbled by
the daunting realities around the world, given the
devastating impact on civilians — particularly women
and children — resulting from the many conflicts
that we are grappling with. In the past, the Security
Council has repeatedly expressed the urgent need to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. Resolutions 2222
(2015), on the protection of journalists, 2175 (2014), on
humanitarian operations, and 2150 (2014), which calls
for the prevention of, and the fight against, genocide
are only a few recent examples. Back in February
2013, during my country’s presidency of the Council,
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) that comprehensively addressed
the issue of the protection of civilians — including
humanitarian access — and refugees, the need to
protect humanitarian personnel, sexual- and genderbased violence, and the need to end impunity for serious
violations. We urge the Security Council to continue to
address those issues with a renewed sense of urgency
and resolve.

Latvia welcomes the fact that protecting civilians
in conflict has come to the forefront of many peace
operations. However, the effective implementation of
protection mandates remains a challenge and must be
improved through the ongoing peacekeeping review.
Latvia is willing to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and, in addition to our engagement
in the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO missions,
has decided to join a United Nations peacekeeping
mission for the first time. Last week, the Parliament
of Latvia supported the participation of Latvian troops
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, but we will also increase
our practical engagement in the global coalition to
counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, also
known as Daesh, and will contribute to the training of
Iraqi security forces.
We cannot become immune to human suffering
and calls for help. Remaining, as well as emerging,
challenges to the protection of civilians in conflicts
from Syria to Ukraine, as underscored by the recent
report of the Secretary-General, must be addressed
with a sense of urgency. The international community
must step up its commitment to providing stronger
protection to civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.

66/91

In that regard, we appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s continued commitment to incorporating the
protection of civilians throughout all United Nations
peace operations. A large part of his September 2015
report (S/2015/453) is devoted to identifying ways in
which to better implement the protection-of-civilians
mandate in the field, inter alia by tailoring them to
the conditions on the ground, My delegation also
welcomes the Security Council’s presidential statement
of 25 November 2015 (S/PRST/2015/23). For our part,
the Government of the Republic of Korea has been
engaged in the ongoing discussion to build and sustain
the political momentum for the implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Last year, we hosted two conferences on that subject,
first in New York in May, followed by one in Seoul in
October. We look forward to continuing that discussion
this year.
The Republic of Korea also supports the fight
against impunity and for holding accountable those
who have committed the most serious crimes of

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international concern. We have joined many other
delegations in supporting the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, as well as the FrenchMexican initiative on the suspension of the veto power
in cases of mass atrocities.
Finally, I wish to underscore that Member States
bear the primary responsibility to protect civilians.
It is our responsibility to bring perpetrators of
atrocity crimes to justice, as specified in the relevant
international instruments. With that in mind, my
delegation wishes to urge the members of the Security
Council to take advantage of the opportunity presented
by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document and to reaffirm
especially its paragraphs 138 and 139, regarding the
responsibility to protect. The Security Council already
has a wide range of tools to enhance compliance and
accountability so as to address the current challenges
presented by the protection of civilians. The task at
hand is to mobilize the collective will of the Council
to utilize those tools. We hope that the views expressed
during today’s debate will help the Council to carry out
its commitment to protect civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I also want
to join the previous speakers in congratulating the
Uruguayan presidency for its leadership and to thank
it for organizing this debate. My appreciation also goes
to all the briefers for their valuable contributions earlier
today.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to make the following
brief comments, while the full text will be made
available.
More than 15 years have passed since the Security
Council held its initial open debate on the issue before
us (see S/PV.3980). Yet as we speak, millions of people
worldwide are suffering from the dire consequences
of armed conflict, which deprives them of their
fundamental rights and freedoms, separates them from
their families and forces them out of the places of their
permanent residence. The task of protecting civilians
in conflict remains challenging. From Syria to Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, to the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South

S/PV.7606

Sudan, the Sudan, to Ukraine, civilians caught up in
armed conflict are being killed and injured. The scale of
brutality is often beyond the scope of our imagination.
It is the collective responsibility of the United Nations,
in particular of the Security Council, to undertake all
the necessary measures to protect civilians and ensure
their basic rights.
Another vital issue is the ability of the international
community to address the human rights situation in
areas where the official authorities cannot exercise
their sovereign rights and which are under the
effective military control of an occupying Power.
In such situations, international human rights and
humanitarian law should nevertheless operate without
any impediment in order to provide a minimum level
of protection for the civilian population. Safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors to reach
people in need of protection and assistance is another
important element. It is imperative that populations
residing in conflict-affected areas be provided with
unhindered humanitarian aid and that, to that end, the
relevant international organizations be allowed to carry
out their activities.
The issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is of particular concern to me as a
representative of a country that has had to withstand a
full-scale military aggression against its statehood and
independence in the recent past. More than seven years
after Russia’s military invasion of my nation, 20 per
cent of our sovereign territory remains under illegal
military occupation, in blatant violation of Russia’s
own obligations under international law, including the
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement. The population
currently residing in Georgia’s occupied regions is
deprived of basic human rights and minimal safeguards
for their lives, not to mention their civil, socioeconomic
and cultural rights. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands
of Georgian internally displaced persons and refugees
are doomed to protracted displacement.
Over the past several years, the occupation regime
has been installing barbed wire fences along the
occupation line to divide families and communities and
to prevent people-to-people contacts. That is happening
against the backdrop of continued militarization and
the complete absence of any international monitoring
mechanism inside the occupied regions — a situation
that has in fact been reflected in General Assembly
resolutions and reports of the Secretary-General and
of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of internally

16-0110467/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

displaced persons. Notably, after having been repeatedly
denied access to territories, the former United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
referred to the occupied Georgian regions as “a black
hole” and “one of the most inaccessible places on Earth,
with no access permitted for international agencies.”
A detailed account of what I have just mentioned
can also be found in one of the quarterly reports on
the human rights situations in the occupied territories
of Georgia issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
which are also issued as official documents of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, for those
who are interested.
The only international monitoring mechanism
currently on the ground is the European Union
Monitoring Mission, but even that mechanism has
been prevented from fully implementing its mandate,
as well as from entering the occupied territories. It
is imperative that the conflict-affected population be
provided with unhindered humanitarian aid and that
the relevant international actors be allowed to carry out
their activities according to their respective mandates.
There is no alternative to strengthening our common
efforts to protect civilians in armed conflicts. We need
to take concrete steps to alleviate the consequences of
armed hostilities for civilians and to safeguard their
rights and freedoms.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Georgia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and calls on all the relevant actors to
ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
to the affected populations in unresolved conflicts
worldwide. For our part, my country stands ready to
contribute to concerted international efforts to ensure
more effective protection for civilian populations
during armed conflicts and in the post-conflict phase.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me, on behalf of the Government of Canada, to
extend our deepest condolences to the families and
friends of those persons killed in the recent attack in
Ouagadougou, among them six Canadian humanitarian
aid workers and volunteers. We wish a speedy recovery
to all those who were injured.
Canada firmly condemns in the strongest terms
all acts that threaten the safety of civilians, including

68/91

19/01/2016

those who strive to improve the lives of vulnerable
people around the world. Working in challenging and
dangerous situations, their efforts to establish lasting
ties between peoples, while building a more just and
peaceful world, will never cease. The attack I just
mentioned is yet again another reminder of the danger
that terrorism poses around the world for Canadians and
for all our citizens throughout the world. It is reminder
of the need to work with partners to deal with global
threats.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank Uruguay for its initiative to
hold this open debate today and for allowing delegations
broad scope to raise our concerns with regard to
the protection of civilians. It is essential that the
Security Council devote its attention to the mounting
protection challenges. Canada would therefore also
like to acknowledge and welcome the Council’s recent
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/23), which will
enable States to more regularly and comprehensively
address those concerns.
Canada is deeply concerned by the scale on which
civilian populations are suffering, and often targeted, in
armed conflicts by State as well as non-State actors. The
growing complexity of armed conflicts, marked by the
fragmentation of armed groups, asymmetrical warfare
and the regionalization of conflicts, demonstrates the
need for sustained international attention to meet the
protection needs of populations affected by violence
and armed conflict. In too many places, men, women
and children are victims of indiscriminate attacks,
sexual violence, the denial of humanitarian assistance
and other violations of international law. Warring
parties today are exhibiting what the Secretary-General
has rightly called a casual disregard for human life and
dignity, and with it, unacceptable contempt for the
rules of war.
It is Canada’s view that the fundamental issue is not
that there are legal or normative gaps, but rather that
there is an alarming rate of failure to fully and properly
implement international humanitarian law obligations.
The full implementation of international humanitarian
law is essential for the protection of civilians during
times of armed conflict. It is therefore essential that the
international community and the Council re-energize
their efforts to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law, enable humanitarian access, promote

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

and protect human rights and, most important, prevent
and resolve conflict.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.

(spoke in French)

Mr. Kickert (Austria): First of all, I would like to
thank Uruguay for convening this open debate. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict has always been
of great importance to Austria. We remain engaged in
efforts to strengthen the safety and security of civilians
by supporting and complementing the work of the
United Nations, including through dedicated training
courses in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

We hope that the upcoming World Humanitarian
Summit will allow us to call attention to protection
issues. The Summit will provide an opportunity to
examine key aspects of actions aimed at promoting
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, such as
compliance with international humanitarian law, the
fight against sexual violence, as well as access to safe
and unhindered humanitarian aid. It will allow us to
prepare the ground for better responses to humanitarian
and protection needs, notably in confronting the
current crisis of historic proportions provoked by the
displacement of populations fleeing violence.
Finally, while national Governments bear the
responsibility for protecting civilians, the United
Nations and the Council also play an important role
in that area, in addition to having the necessary tools
to prevent conflicts and to respond to and resolve
them. Humanitarian operations currently under way
in Madaya and other besieged communities must be
sustained and expanded, but they are just one example
of what can be done. The recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
promising initiatives such as the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians can guide us in strengthening
our capacity to protect civilians in the field.
Moreover, we urge the Council, in its resolutions
concerning conflict and the protection of civilians,
to apply an approach that addresses the gender
perspective. One of the best ways to protect women,
men and children is to take into account the various
impacts that conflicts have on each of those groups, as
well as the different contributions they can make to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, Canada emphasizes that we must
summon the will to act in the face of the challenges
before us. People must not lose hope. As daunting as
the circumstances may be, we see encouraging signs
that must be nurtured and opportunities that must be
seized. We thank the Uruguayan presidency for this
opportunity to express our concerns. We look forward
to collaborating on renewed efforts to enhance the
protection of civilians.

The prevention and peaceful solution of conflicts
remains the most effective method for ensuring the
safety and well-being of civilians and strengthening
human security. In that context, women’s participation
in conflict prevention, management and resolution is
crucial for achieving inclusive and sustainable peace. At
the same time, we continue to witness the perpetration
of the most heinous violations against women and
children on a large scale, including sexual and genderbased violence. Austria therefore fully supports the
efforts to enhance the effective implementation of the
agenda on women and peace and security, including the
recommendations contained in the October 2015 global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace, and the agenda on children and
armed conflict, which should be taken into account
when addressing the protection of civilians.
We fully support the recommendations on the
role of peace operations in the protection of civilians
contained in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446),
as well as the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of the HIPPO recommendations
(S/2015/682). Austria agrees that, if a peace operation
is so mandated, the protection of civilians requires
proactive operations, which may include the use of
force by uniformed personnel. Moreover, it is important
to make the protection of civilians a mission-wide
task, which requires adequate training and resources,
including early-warning and protection-of-civiliansrelated technological capabilities, as well as dedicated
personnel. We welcome the inclusion of senior
protection-of-civilian advisers in all missions with such
a mandate and we encourage the Secretariat to expand
their presence.

16-0110469/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Despite efforts by the Council and the international
community as a whole, armed conflicts still cause
immense civilian suffering around the world, further
aggravating the already dire humanitarian situation
in Syria, Yemen and South Sudan, among other
countries. To that end, it is of the utmost importance
that we end the persisting climate of impunity and
ensure accountability. We invite all members of the
Security Council to sign the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, which includes a
pledge to support timely and decisive Council action in
situations involving atrocity crimes, as well as a pledge
not to vote against Security Council resolutions aimed
at preventing or ending those crimes. Furthermore, the
crucial role of the ICC cannot be overstated, and we
call on the Council to refer situations in which crimes
under the Rome Statute may have been committed
to the Court. We also call on all States to fulfil their
obligation to fully cooperate with the ICC.
The full compliance of all parties with international
humanitarian law remains of unquestionable relevance
to the protection of civilians. In today’s world,
international humanitarian law is confronted with
many serious challenges: its brutal disregard by
certain non-State actors, the destruction of cultural
heritage, and attacks against protected persons and
institutions. The growing numbers of refugees that are
currently leaving their war-torn home regions are a
direct result of the constant violations of international
humanitarian law. For many years, Austria has strongly
supported efforts towards the better implementation of
international humanitarian law and the creation of a
special mechanism for that purpose, and was actively
engaged in the process following the adoption of
conference resolution 1 adopted at the 31st International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011.
Unfortunately, the negotiations at the 32nd International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent did not
lead to the desired result.
In 2015, 39 journalists were killed in the ongoing
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa alone,
most of them executed by the Islamic State, while
a further 54 journalists were kidnapped. The high
number demonstrates that armed groups in the region
are ready to do whatever it takes to stifle criticism
and independent information emerging from conflict
zones. Impunity for such acts remains widespread and
fuels further violations. We call on the United Nations

70/91

19/01/2016

to provide timely and accurate information on threats
to journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in conflict situations, which is a prerequisite
if the Council is to address the topic in a more coherent
manner, including in country-specific deliberations.
Austria also highlights the concern about the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas as a major cause
of civilian harm in many countries. In most armed
conflicts, civilian casualties from explosive weapons
in populated areas dramatically outweigh military
casualties. This is a grave humanitarian problem and a
severe challenge for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Let me close by assuring the Security Council that
Austria will continue to work closely with all interested
stakeholders to further strengthen the protection of
civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate and for giving us the
opportunity to speak. I would like to congratulate your
country on joining the Security Council and wish you
every success.
My delegation welcomed the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/22, of 25 November 2015, in
which the Security Council underscored the importance
of the protection of civilians as one of the core issues
on its agenda. Swift action by the Security Council is
necessary in situations posing threads to civilians.
I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the representative of
Oxfam for their respective briefings.
We are very concerned about the increasing gross
violations of the international humanitarian law,
especially by non-State actors, and attacks against
humanitarian workers and health-care workers and
facilities. Ongoing conflicts throughout the world have
horrifying impact on civilian populations. According to
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/453), displacement
has reached its highest levels since the Second World
War. There are more than 60 million refugees, including
38 million internally displaced persons, and the number
is still growing. Civilians in besieged towns, such
as Madaya, Kafraya and Fu’ah, are suffering from

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

malnutrition and lack of medical care, which is simply
unacceptable.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to take this opportunity to highlight a few
additional points.
First, the main responsibility for the protection of
its population lies with States. My country supports the
further advancement of the responsibility to protect
principles, anchored in three pillars.
Secondly, as far as United Nations peacekeeping
operations are concerned, many improvements have
been made since 1999, when the first peacekeeping
mission in Sierra Leone was mandated to take the
steps necessary to protect civilians. We commend
the Secretariat for elaborating its policy for the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates
and encourage them to further identify ways to make
this implementation more effective. We appreciate the
commitment expressed by the Secretary-General in
his respective reports to inform the Security Council
about situations where escalating risks or shortfalls
in the capability of missions to fulfill protection
mandates endanger civilians. We also support his
recommendation to submit reports on the protection of
civilians every 12 months and to hold open debates of
the Security Council in June and December.
Unfortunately, there are cases where those who
should protect become perpetrators. My country, as
a troop contributor, supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians and security
sector reform (SSR) are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. They are both aimed at the protection of
civilians and their communities from physical violence,
and ultimately at improving human and State security in
a society. We believe that it is important to better clarify
how the protection of civilians and SSR are related in
order to strengthen the reinforcing relationship and
convergences between them in the decision-making
process of the Security Council.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the need to end
impunity and hold accountable those responsible for
crimes against humanity. In situations where national
authorities are unable or unwilling to conduct national
investigations, the role of the International Criminal

S/PV.7606

Court is indispensable. We therefore call on all United
Nations Member States to ratify the Rome Statutes and
its amendments and thereby achieve its universality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like first to congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January, and to thank your delegation for
organizing this open debate on an issue that concerns
all of us — the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I take this opportunity to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing,
taking stock of the current state of the protection of
civilians and highlighting the challenges facing the
international community in this regard.
Finally, I thank the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
representative of Oxfam for their briefings and
especially for all the efforts of the members of their
organizations, often undertaken at the risk of their lives.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The ongoing attention and involvement of the
Council, supported not only by the entire United
Nations membership but also by non-governmental
organizations and civil society, have led to significant
normative progress the protection of civilians. As noted
in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2015/453)
on the issue, numerous resolutions and presidential
statements, the updating of aides memoire and the
establishment of mandates tailored to the needs of
women and children in situations of armed conflict
have promoted the creation of a robust legal framework.
However, it is clear that despite these advances, the fate
of civilian populations, especially women and children,
continues to deteriorate, with an ongoing increase in
the number of victims, displaced persons and refugees.
The damning figures of the past decade have never
been higher, at least since the Second World War, and
forecasts for the coming decades are hardly promising.
The past year was particularly marked by this scourge.
Morocco strongly condemns all indiscriminate
attacks affecting civilian populations, and calls on
parties to conflict to honour their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international

16-0110471/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

human rights law. While the protection of civilians
lies primarily with States, it is clear that in times of
conflict, the capacity of these States may be inadequate
or non-existent. In such cases, the international
community has a responsibility to support these
countries by building their capacity and providing the
necessary means to shoulder their responsibilities for
protecting populations on their soil. It is in this context
that Morocco is redoubling its efforts to cooperate with
countries in or emerging from conflict, including with
respect to security sector reform and strengthening the
rule of law.
We must also commit ourselves firmly to promoting
the implementation of and compliance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, especially human rights law, and
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols. It is unacceptable that hospitals and schools
are targeted indiscriminately and that weapons are used
indiscriminately in densely populated zones, hitting
not only the combatants but also civilian populations.
We believe that the fight against impunity should be
at the centre of our debate. It is also unacceptable that
journalists and humanitarian workers are deliberately
targeted. International humanitarian law is too often
swept aside, despite repeated appeals by the Security
Council. Similarly, we reiterate the imperative of
respecting the principles of the equality, independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Humanitarian assistance is an important element
in the protection of civilians during armed conflict.
Bringing humanitarian assistance to those who need it
should remain a priority of the international community,
because the lives of thousands of vulnerable people are
at stake. With the unprecedented number of displaced
persons fleeing conflict, the international community
must redouble its efforts to bring the necessary
assistance to those people. That is why my delegation
believes that the World Humanitarian Summit, to
be held in Istanbul in May 2016, will be a crucial
meeting that will make it possible for the international
community to rethink humanitarian assistance and find
new ways and means to improve its response to crises
and make humanitarian assistance more effective and
efficient. Humanitarian assistance cannot be effective
without free and unimpeded access for humanitarian
organizations to people affected by conflict.
The seminar on the protection of civilians that
was organized in November 2015 by the delegations

72/91

19/01/2016

of Uruguay and Australia made it possible for us to
develop our thinking with a view to underscoring the
importance of political solutions to conflict and to
reconciling that with the imperative of the protection of
civilians. Indeed, one of the main instruments available
to the Security Council for ensuring the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is peacekeeping operations,
an area that is rightly currently being reviewed. Morocco
fully subscribes to the recommendations of the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations (see S/2015/446), especially with regard
to the chapters on troop-contributing countries.
Moroccan troops, which have been deployed for over
60 years in peacekeeping operations, have always
considered the protection of civilians to be a key part
of their mission. That aspect is duly taken into account
during the predeployment stages of training Moroccan
contingents to serve under the United Nations flag. A
specific example is the offensive undertaken around
Bria, Central African Republic, which made it possible
to restore State authority throughout the region, ensure
the protection of civilians and even allow for the return
of many displaced persons.
Troop-contributing countries have a responsibility
to protect civilians, but that responsibility is shared
with both the Security Council and the Secretariat.
In order to make it possible for troops to fulfil their
missions successfully, the Council needs to take into
account the realities on the ground and provide United
Nations forces with adequate means. The Secretariat
should also strengthen its cooperation with troop
contributors and involve them more in the planning
phases. Those elements attest to the importance of
revised and strengthened triangular cooperation,
aimed at identifying possible obstacles and at enabling
deployed troops to fulfil their mandate successfully.
Such discussions could be held in the context of informal
Security Council working groups on the protection of
civilians and working groups on peacekeeping.
The conduct of Blue Helmets responsible for
the protection of civilians should be irreproachable.
Morocco firmly supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy and has taken specific measures
in that area. Morocco systematically sends national
investigators to its deployed troops, so as to deal with
any situation that might arise with the greatest diligence
and firmness. Once again, improved cooperation with
the Secretariat is necessary, especially in the area of
sharing information. All of those elements should be

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

taken into account during the upcoming review of the
matter during the meetings of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Morocco’s firm
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is an imperative, be it in the context of
troops committed to serve under the United Nations flag
or in the form of programmes to strengthen the capacity
of States. We hope that the ideas and proposals put forth
during this debate will be implemented concretely in
order to improve the protection of civilians on the
ground. We must pursue our collective mobilization in
order to initiate changes that are awaited by millions of
people in conflict situations around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate the
Government of Uruguay on its initiative to convene
this open debate on an issue that, unfortunately, is still
current, even after the heartbreaking experiences of
two world wars and countless armed conflicts.
In an armed conflict, the protection of any individual
who is not a party to hostilities is an obligation that the
States at war cannot avoid, even if they are not parties
to the Geneva Conventions, since that obligation is
enshrined in international humanitarian law and is
of a customary nature. Armed conflicts have been
changing. Today, they have little in common with the
conflicts of the nineteenth century, which took place on
defined battlefields, far from populated areas, and were
between armies of different States. Such armed conflicts
are now the exception. Unconventional conflicts are
now the norm and, increasingly, it is civilians who
indiscriminately suffer their consequences.
For Paraguay, the increased number of unconventional
conflicts and the new technologies in no way challenge
the applicability of the Geneva Conventions. We
believe that the concern of the international community
should be focused on developing their provisions and
their Additional Protocols, in order to avoid legal
gaps that could impede their implementation in given
conflicts, which would be mainly to the detriment of
the affected civilian population. For that reason, it is
vital that the issue of defining an armed conflict be
properly debated. Not defining a situation as an armed
conflict implies the non-application of the norms of
international humanitarian law, and can therefore lead

S/PV.7606

to a lack of protection for civilians, particularly the
most vulnerable civilians — those who, for the simple
fact of being present at the wrong place or time, are
trapped in conflicts between States and non-State or
transnational armed groups or in conflicts between such
groups, or have been subjected to kidnapping, torture,
forced recruitment, inhuman or degrading treatment
or displacement from their homes and separation from
their families.
We are convinced that political will is one of the main
factors needed to ensure that civilians, irrespective of
their nationality or any other social, economic, cultural,
religious or other condition, are protected and that their
human dignity is safeguarded, particularly through
respect for, and the enforcement of, international law
and accountability, when those laws are violated. We
appeal to States, in all situations, when faced with the
imperative of military requirements, to always choose
the humanitarian imperative to protect. In that regard,
we encourage the Council to ensure that such a choice
is made at every point in time, irrespective of who the
parties to the conflict are. We reaffirm that negotiation
and political agreements in conflicts represent the best
guarantee for protecting individuals and achieving
lasting and sustainable peace. We emphasize that that
is a matter in which the Security Council must play a
major role.
Finally, Paraguay reiterates its support for the view
that all civilians have the right to be protected, and that,
when referring to the most vulnerable, such as children,
women or the elderly, the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution should serve as the basic
guideline for all actions on the part of parties to armed
conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): I would like to
thank the delegation of Uruguay for organizing this
open debate on the important topic of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson; the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), Ms. Beerli; and the representative of
Oxfam, Ms. Rooijmans, for their valuable contributions
to today’s debate. I align myself with the statement by
the Observer of the European Union.
As we see in today’s conflicts in Syria, Libya, Yemen
and elsewhere, it is the civilian population, including

16-0110473/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

women and children, that is the main victim of brutal
violence. The recent images coming out of Madaya and
elsewhere speak for themselves. We are appalled by the
fact that besieging civilian populations has become a
means of war. The appeal by the Secretary-General and
the President of the ICRC last October to act effectively,
decisively and in a timely manner to protect civilians
in conflict was unprecedented and is a strong wake-up
call for all of us.
The international community should address the
importance of the protection of civilians at the highest
political level. In this respect, I stress the importance
of timely briefings by the Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect in contributing to early awareness of potential
crises. This approach is in line with the Human Rights
up Front initiative. I also would like to emphasize
that the responsibility to protect and international
humanitarian and human rights law, including the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, are mutually
reinforcing.
Today, I would like to make the following three
points in relation to the protection of civilians: first,
the importance of compliance with international
humanitarian law; secondly, monitoring peace
operations in conjunction with consultation with troopcontributing countries, and thirdly, the training of
peacekeepers.
First, with respect to compliance with international
humanitarian law, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
regrets that is was not possible to agree on the
establishment of a new mechanism to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law at
the 32nd International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent. Indeed, international humanitarian
law, when respected by all the parties, offers the best
protection for civilians during armed conflict. However,
on a daily basis, we are faced with the harsh reality of
systematic and often deliberate non-compliance with
international humanitarian law. We need to strengthen
our efforts towards the realization of a widely supported
State-led compliance mechanism. We owe this to all
those civilians in conflict situations that are currently
not being protected as required by international
humanitarian law.
Secondly, with respect to peace operations, the
Security Council could monitor more closely whether
peacekeepers do what is asked of them in a mandate.

74/91

19/01/2016

Leadership and proper guidance on the protection of
civilians are necessary elements in the success and
credibility of a mission. Mission leadership should take
full responsibility and be held accountable for how well
a mission protects civilians. That includes the use of
force beyond self-defence to protect civilians when it is
necessary to fulfil the tasks set forth under the mandate.
And all missions should report when peacekeepers fail
in the area of protection of civilians. The Netherlands
underlines the importance of the Security Council
consulting in a more structural manner with countries
deploying troops and police to United Nations missions.
We welcome current efforts to have informal meetings
in advance of mandate renewals.
Finally, with respect to the training of peacekeepers,
in May last year the Kingdom of the Netherlands
participated in a conference on the protection of civilians
organized by Rwanda in the run-up to the Leaders’
Summit on Peacekeeping in September. We were among
the first signatories of the Kigali Principles that were
presented at that conference. These principles provide
clear and straightforward recommendations on how to
effectively implement protection of civilians mandates
in peacekeeping operations. In particular, they focus
on building peacekeeper capacity when it comes to
the protection of civilians. Together with Rwanda and
the United States, we are currently developing a tailormade training on the protection of civilians, as part of
the pledge we made during the Leaders’ Summit.
The main objectives of this training are to apply
a comprehensive approach in peacekeeping to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and develop
leadership on translating military and civilian mission
responsibilities into timely and decisive action in the
area of protection of civilians. A pilot run of the training
will take place this spring. We look forward to sharing
the concrete results and good practices obtained.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to
serve as a constructive partner on issues of peacekeeping
reform. We advocate for an integrated approach to
peace operations, combining efforts in the fields of
political dialogue, conflict prevention and the rule of
law, protection of civilians, gender and development.
The report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) provides valuable
recommendations for strengthening United Nations
peace operations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has supported the work of this panel and looks forward

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to further discussions on the implementation of the
recommendations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains fully committed to peace operations in the
years ahead, building on a strong and long-standing
tradition of active involvement in participating in
United Nations missions across the globe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the delegation of Uruguay for
organizing today’s open debate and the briefers for their
respective statements. We also welcome the concept
note circulated by the presidency to focus our debate
(S/2016/22, annex).
The current humanitarian crises facing the
international community require the attention of us
all. The number of displaced persons and refugees
and the degree of human suffering recorded in recent
months are causing great consternation. We condemn
the violations of international humanitarian law and
of human rights by certain States and non-State armed
groups, as well as their impunity for these violations
and abuses. Humanitarian access should be provided to
meet the basic needs of civilian populations in conflict
in a timely manner and without any hindrance.
Our delegation, as a troop-contributing country,
echoes the remarks made by Mr. Eliasson and the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a basic principle of international
humanitarian law, a fundamental task of the Security
Council and a moral responsibility of the United
Nations.
Peacekeeping operations have evolved, and
international protection has been strengthened through
the implementation of specific mandates. We believe that
this evolution has been positive, as it has given priority
to some aspects of the broad scope of the protection
of civilians, particularly the protection of children and
women in conflict situations. But the challenges are
multiple, and we therefore recognize that there should
be better coordination in order to strengthen the role
of the United Nations, particularly with regard to strict
compliance with the zero-tolerance policy for all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse. In this regard, we
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to step
up the Organization’s prevention, implementation and

S/PV.7606

troubleshooting activities in relation to all forms of
misconduct.
The protection of civilians is a legal obligation.
We must demand that members of the security
forces, local militias or other armed groups who have
committed violations of international humanitarian
law or human rights be held to account. We reaffirm
that it is the primary responsibility of the troop- and
police-contributing countries to investigate without
delay any allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse.
Women and girls are the ones who suffer the most
devastating impact of armed conflict, particularly due
to the increasingly widespread use of gender-based
violence. However, women should not be considered
only as victims of war. They are the ones who ensure the
family’s survival in the midst of chaos and destruction.
They participate actively in the promotion of peace
within their communities. However, it is undeniable that
there is room for improvement in promoting women’s
participation at the negotiating table and in their role as
mediators, negotiators and technical experts in peace
processes.
Moreover, it is a source of concern to witness the
emergence of new and more radical groups, which have
changed the landscape of armed conflict. That is why
we believe that the focus on the protection of civilians
must evolve according to changing circumstances.
It is vital to build the capacity of public institutions,
which often are either dismantled or weakened
following conflict. That, in turn, requires, among other
things, guaranteeing that the practice of protection
be both more coherent and more effective, and also
providing training to such forces. United Nations troops
cannot substitute for the State in the discharge of its
responsibility to protect its civilian population. When
States are unable or unwilling to honour this basic
commitment, major humanitarian disasters ensue.
It is vital that all instruments available to the
Council be used coherently, that they be adapted to the
type of crime perpetrated and that they contain strong
elements of deterrence, accountability and justice, in
cooperation with, inter alia, the International Criminal
Court. The lessons learned from conflict, from the
worst failures to best practices, should serve as a useful
guide in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

16-0110475/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the choice of the theme of the present
debate. Throughout 2015 we were equipped with a
considerable number of important analyses on the
state of play within the United Nations, including the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/453) and those
of the Advisory Group of Experts (A/69/968) and the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446).
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the disturbing challenges in the area of the
protection of civilians in conflict-affected areas, which
remain as persistent as ever. While the humanitarian
aspects of the populations affected are of deep concern,
the basic physical security of civilians continues to
be compromised by, as the Secretary-General stated
in paragraph 4 of his report, “shocking levels of
brutality and casual disregard for human life”. The
fact that considerable progress has been achieved
in strengthening the normative framework for the
protection of civilians, is, of course, commendable.
However, the persistently rising number of civilian
casualties calls for resolute action.
The analyses available are good enough only when
they are acted upon. They are sufficiently comprehensive
in defining ways of strengthening the capacities of
all major actors in the function of prevention. We are
willing to share some of our thinking on certain aspects
of these analyses.
First, the question of accountability requires greater
consolidation of the Council in demonstrating its
resolve against the parties responsible for denying basic
security or humanitarian relief to affected populations.
Secondly, the idea of giving United Nations peace
operations a mandate for a preventive, protective and
tactical use of force to protect civilians under threat
of physical violence needs to be given thorough
consideration. The reputation of the Organization
is judged not by its words of condemnation but by
deliverable protection.
Thirdly, United Nations field missions remain
an important source of information in detecting
deteriorating situations and alerting the Organization
to take early action. Prevention, as has often been
recognized in all of the available analyses, is the best
means of protection. Strengthening the capacities of
field missions, including those of the relevant regional
organizations, to this end remains an ongoing priority.

76/91

19/01/2016

Last but not least, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is closely tied to the prevention of mass
atrocities, including the crime of genocide. Once again,
we stress the importance of the Office of the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect in detecting emerging risks.
A culture of assessing every crisis situation affecting
the civilian population through the prism of atrocity
crimes, including the crime of genocide, should be
further cultivated within the Organization.
Most recently, Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh
have been experiencing significant challenges to the
security of the civilian population as a result of the
ongoing disregard by Azerbaijan for respecting and
upholding the 1994 ceasefire agreement. Increasingly,
Azerbaijan continues to target civilians across the line
of contact with Nagorno Karabakh and the border with
Armenia. As a result of intensified ceasefire violations
and the massive shelling of populated areas with the
unprecedented use of heavy artillery, considerable
damage has been inflicted on the livelihoods of the
bordering villages. In September 2015, three women
were killed by Azerbaijani fire. Armenia strongly
deplores Azerbaijan’s intentional acts aimed at violating
the ceasefire regime and damaging the ongoing peace
process within the framework of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk
Group co-chairmanship.
Once again, Armenia urges Azerbaijan to heed
the calls of the international community and to agree
without delay, as a first step, to establish a mechanism
for investigating the ceasefire violations and to
withdraw its snipers. By rejecting such a mechanism,
Azerbaijan bears full responsibility for the violations
and the escalation of tensions.
To conclude, the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the framework of the OSCE Minsk Group
co-chairmanship is a positive example of the effective
utilization of the capacity of regional organizations
in conflict resolution. It is an example of what the
Secretary-General describes as a pragmatic approach
to a global-regional partnership.
Armenia highly commends the support of the
international community, the United Nations and
the Secretary-General for the OSCE Minsk Group
co-chairmanship in the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Azerbaijan should be

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

denied the possibility of attempting to undermine the
efforts of the co-Chairs or to engage in forum and
mediation shopping.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to congratulate Uruguay on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January and to say how pleased
we are to see Uruguay in the Council once again.
Mr. President, based on your country’s diplomatic skill
and experience, we are convinced that you will make
an important contribution to the work of the Security
Council during your two-year term of office. I should
like also to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, and to thank the briefers for the information
provided.
Unfortunately, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2015/453) reaffirms that civilians
continue to constitute the majority of victims in such
conflicts. The lack of distinction between combatants
and civilians results in civilians being killed, wounded
or displaced and in situations where there are serious
impediments to, if not outright attacks on, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council must
therefore remain committed to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict through the promotion of the full
respect for international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
well as through the fight against impunity.
The authorization by the Council of robust mandates
and the implementation thereof by peacekeeping
operations should not compromise the discharge of such
operations’ fundamental mandate to protect civilians
or distract them from their mission. Peacekeeping
operations must have clear mandates and be provided
with the resources necessary to implement them in a
timely and effective manner.
Many of these concepts are contained in the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and in the report
of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations.
However, one aspect that has not been sufficiently
addressed in these documents and that my delegation
wishes to emphasize is the obligation of United Nations
forces to respect international humanitarian law.

S/PV.7606

In that context, I would like to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s Bulletin (ST/SGB/1999/13) on the observance
by United Nations forces of international humanitarian
law. Argentina hopes that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will address this matter
at its next session, in March. We emphasize that it
would be appropriate for the Security Council, in its
pronouncements, to include a reminder, which is always
useful, that the forces of the United Nations, as well as
those involved in operations authorized by the Council,
are also bound by international humanitarian law.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict should make every effort to ensure that
effective and timely access to humanitarian action is
guaranteed, including shipments and equipment. Such
assistance enjoys special protection under international
humanitarian law, which is why it is troubling that, in
many situations, access to humanitarian assistance has
been impeded or even denied. It is in that context that
my delegation expresses its deep concern about and
condemnation of recent events in Syria, in particular
with regard to the cases mentioned this morning by the
Deputy Secretary-General, and in recent days by the
Secretary-General, with particular regard to the city of
Madaya. It is imperative that humanitarian assistance
reach the civilian population to avoid starvation. We
recall, as mentioned by both the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the Secretary-General, that the intentional
use of starvation against the civilian population as a
tactic of war, including by deliberately obstructing the
provision of relief assistance, is a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and a war crime.
It is clear that the first challenge is to promote
compliance with the relevant standards. The existing
regulatory framework for the protection of civilians
must be translated into concrete results on the ground.
Argentina considers it a priority to continue the
debate on setting up new mechanisms to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law, as well
as to foment a constructive, transparent and inclusive
dialogue among States and other stakeholders. One
way to accomplish that would be to establish a forum
in which States can meet regularly to exchange views
on relevant issues — a possibility that was discussed
during the thirty-second International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, and which will remain
under consideration for the next few years.
The Council should strengthen its efforts to
promote respect for international humanitarian law.

16-0110477/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

In that regard, Argentina believes that accountability
mechanisms play a preventive role. Impartial
mechanisms are essential to the investigation of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. Ad hoc commissions of inquiry, including
those established by the Human Rights Council, are
important. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
work of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission provided for in the Protocol additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. We hope
that the Security Council will continue to recognize
the possibility of using the Commission, as expressed
in resolution 1894 (2009) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.

Also in relation to the need to strengthen
accountability by those responsible for heinous
crimes, Argentina stresses the role of the International
Criminal Court. It is important that States parties to
the Rome Statute adopt the necessary norms to that
end. The cooperation of all States with the Court is also
essential. Moreover, it is necessary that the Security
Council strengthen its commitment to combat impunity
for such crimes. In that regard, the implementation of
a method to effectively monitor Council referrals to
the International Criminal Court is a much-delayed
necessity. We urge the Council to implement the
commitment it made in the aforementioned presidential
statement.

Every day we are reminded that the rules and
principles of international humanitarian law to protect
civilians from the effects of military operations
are challenged and, unfortunately, often ignored.
Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or disproportionate
attacks, and sexual and gender-based violence are just
a few examples of this troubling and worsening trend,
which we have witnessed in Syria, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and Iraq. The sad reality is
that civilians still account for a high proportion of the
victims in most armed conflicts.

In conclusion, I reiterate that, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions, any attacks against civilians, in particular
women and children, or other protected persons,
schools, cultural property and places of worship, as
well as the recruitment of children and the obstruction
of access of humanitarian assistance, constitute a
violation of international law. In that context, we
reiterate that medical and hospital personnel cannot be
attacked, and we condemn the numerous cases where
such has occurred, in particular the attacks in Yemen
and elsewhere against Doctors Without Borders, about
which we heard testimony.
Finally, I wish once again to urge strict
compliance with the obligations arising from The
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907; the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of
1977; international human rights law; international
refugee law and Security Council resolutions.

78/91

Mr. Perović (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate on the
protection of civilians and commend Uruguay’s strong
commitment to the issue. We also thank today’s briefers
for their valuable presentations, which reminded us that
this agenda item continues to be of relevance to the
Security Council.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer European Union. I would
like, however, to make some remarks in my national
capacity.

When something such as the death and suffering
of civilians, especially women and children, happens,
people across the world look to the United Nations and
its peacekeepers for reassurance and protection. And
we ask ourselves what more could be done to prevent
it and how to practically improve civilian protection
in conflict. We have seen a number of important and
positive developments relating to the protection of
civilians. However, the Security Council must do more
than address the issue of the protection of civilians at
the thematic level. Our close attention, decisive action
and full engagement in the implementation of this
agenda item in practice is needed to protect civilians
and ensure that the perpetrators of grave violations
against civilians are brought to account.
More importance needs to be given to the
protection of civilians in conflict zones, and to the
refugees who have fled them. We must do all we can
to reduce suffering, allow humanitarian access, build
trust and protect civilians. Civilians trapped in today’s
conflict areas cannot wait for the conclusion of political
processes before they receive assistance. There can be
no justification for any country that stands in the way
of a resolution designed to allow civilians access to

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

food and medical assistance. Preventing humanitarian
access by indiscriminate attacks is a great crime, and an
important role of the Council is to ensure accountability
for such violations.
Montenegro is of the view that early action to
prevent conflict and mass human rights abuses is
essential. We recognize the valuable progress made in
the area of enhancing the implementation of protection
mandates by United Nations peacekeeping and other
missions.
Priority should be given to the protection of civilians
in mission-planning assessments, the allocation of
resources, and in activities on the ground. The challenges
of protecting civilians appear to be increasing.
Logistics, mobility and rapid response challenges in
difficult environments, in the midst of armed conflicts,
some in the presence of violent extremist groups, are
very significant. However, protecting civilians is not
just the responsibility of uniformed peacekeepers, but
also the primary responsibility of States. It is therefore
essential that we take up our responsibilities and use the
Council’s authority to ensure that States shoulder their
primary responsibility to prevent conflict and minimize
suffering. Civilians, as well as non-governmental
organizations and communities themselves, play an
important role in that regard.
The emergence of new challenges to international
peace and security implies a greater role for new
technology. The predeployment training of troops that
are ready and willing to meet evolving threats is crucial
in order to be effective.
The protection of civilians from the ravages of
conflict is vital to the mission of the Security Council;
it is what the United Nations is ultimately judged upon.
This is a challenging time for taking action. Montenegro
remains committed to contributing to the common
objective of protecting the lives of women, men, girls
and boys from the consequences of conflicts.

S/PV.7606

principles of peacekeeping operations. Being part
of most of the highly challenging United Nations
peacekeeping missions, we can see the relevance of
the protection-of-civilians mandate first-hand on the
ground — and, in a number of cases, tackled it with
professionalism and some degree of creativity, even
when the mandate was not laid out in clear, specific
terms.
We have incorporated a comprehensive protection­
of-civilians component in our peacekeeping training
curriculums, with built-in demonstration exercises. In
2014, our premiere peace support operations training
institute organized a customized training course on
the protection of civilians, through the United Nations
Mobile Training Team and with support from Japan.
As announced by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina at the
summit on peacekeeping last year, we shall continue to
further mainstream the protection of civilians into the
peacekeeping training programmes designed for our
troops and police.
Drawing on our overall experience, we would make
five observations concerning the protection of civilians,
including in the context of peacekeeping mandates.
First, there needs to be greater emphasis on
strategic analysis and an assessment of threats to
civilians so that the Security Council can clearly set
out its expectations regarding the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates to protect civilians. To that
effect, it is imperative to have meaningful coordination
and consultation among the Security Council, troopand police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
country teams, with a view to improving guidance to
the missions and promoting a mission-wide coherent
approach to protecting civilians.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the your presidency, Sir, for organizing
today’s debate.

Secondly, in order to be effective, protection-ofcivilians mandates require the continued political
support of the Security Council, the main parties to
the conflict and, in particular, host Governments.
Protection-of-civilians mandates need to be backed
by viable strategies and adequate resources so that
the missions’ capacity does not fail when faced with
belligerence from the parties to the conflict or the
lack of will or capacity of the host Governments to
cooperate.

As one of the leading troop-contributing countries,
Bangladesh has usually taken a pragmatic approach to
the protection-of-civilians mandate in both practice
and preparedness, while adhering to the underlying

Thirdly, concerted efforts are needed to bring
clarity to the operational aspects of the protection-ofcivilians mandates and to eliminate confusion as to who
to protect, so as to effectively reduce the gaps between

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.

16-0110479/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

mandate design and implementation. Unpleasant
though it may sound, with limited presence and
resources in relatively large conflict areas, it is crucial
to appreciate that peacekeeping missions cannot always
protect everyone from everything and that the Council
is therefore required to manage expectations.
Fourthly, the ongoing global campaign to end
violence against women and children in armed conflicts
should gather further momentum to garner the support
of all State and non-State actors. Resolution 1325 (2000)
and its successor resolutions provide an excellent basis
for effective national strategies developed through
an inclusive, consultative process. We must uphold
our zero-tolerance approach to any aberration by
peacekeepers to set the standards for dealing with
sexual and gender-based crimes.
Lastly, the renewed attention to ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian law and invoking
the norms of international criminal justice have
resulted in enhanced awareness on the prevention
and accountability aspects of the protection of
civilians. We have seen the benefits of setting up a
national international humanitarian law committee, as
advocated by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and would urge that the existing accountability
mechanisms inherent in international humanitarian
law be utilized to their full potential. While we will
continue to promote the universalization of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, we would
underscore the need to give due recognition to national
efforts to seek justice for crimes against humanity and
other international crimes committed against civilians.
The security and protection of civilians in today’s
asymmetrical conflict environment are now increasingly
seen as linked to the legitimacy and credibility of
United Nations peace operations and its humanitarian
assistance. As a number of seminal reports last year
duly underlined, the protection of civilians through
military means alone will always fall short unless
they are vigorously supported by meaningful political
processes to establish lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today’s debate, and all the briefers
for their important contributions and insights.

80/91

19/01/2016

The protection of civilians was one of the main
priorities of Lithuania’s membership on the Security
Council, on which we organized two debates and an
Arria Formula meeting focused on the implementation
of protection-of-civilians mandates by peacekeeping
operations, the protection of journalists in armed
conflicts, and human rights issues in peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the protection of civilians
should remain firmly embedded on the Council’s
agenda.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. In my national
capacity, let me touch upon early warning, prevention
and accountability in relation to the protection of
civilians.
With regard to early warning, more needs to be
done to alert the Council to potential crises, with the
aim of defusing conflicts before they erupt. United
Nations teams on the ground have an important role to
play in sensing the early signals of potential crises and
alerting the Secretariat. Positive steps have been taken
by the Department of Political Affairs in that respect,
such as informal briefings to Council members. In
our view, such briefings, as well as horizon-scanning
exercises, should remain part of the toolbox at the
Council’s disposal.
Close interaction with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is essential in the
context of early warning, as human rights abuses and
discrimination of individual groups within a society
often signal more trouble to come. The SecretaryGeneral bringing specific situations to the Council’s
attention is another important tool, which, in our
view, could be more actively used. The now prevalent
reluctance and taboo of taking up situations before they
explode in the Council’s face cost too many human lives
and destroy many others. The sooner issues are brought
to the Council’s attention, the better the chances for
preventive action.
Stronger mediation capacity, the good offices of the
Secretary-General and early engagement with, and the
involvement of, regional and subregional organizations
are key. We appreciate the mediation work of the
Department of Political Affairs, and we call for better
and more predictable support for such efforts. As we
call on countries to ensure that women have a seat at the
negotiating table, we should also make sure that more
female mediators are actively engaged on the ground.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We therefore encourage countries to submit more female
candidatures for mediation rosters. Overall, a greater
presence of female peacekeepers, police officers and
protection advisers on the ground does matter. They
have better chances to establish communication and
trust with female victims, especially where customs
and taboos are rigid, and provide unique insights and
perspectives in adjusting mission protection mandates.
In the context of the review of peace operations, it
would be useful to consider how best to encourage
troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries to step up their efforts in that regard.
Prevention on the ground also requires a more
diverse array of physical tools in the hands of
peacekeepers. Here at the Council, force commanders
have spoken repeatedly about the utility of unmanned
aerial vehicles for preventive or salvage purposes.
Among other things, unmanned aerial vehicles, night
vision capabilities and the use of cellular or satellite
communications for early warning would enable better
protection and more lives to be saved.
Finally, let me turn to the issue of accountability.
The state of impunity for crimes and attacks against
civilian populations, humanitarian aid and medical
workers, schools, and journalists working in conflict
zones is shocking. In Syria, the worst humanitarian
crisis of the century — with barrel bombings, sieges,
the use of starvation as a method of war, killings, torture
and chemical attacks — is taking place with total
impunity. According to the World Health Organization,
the year 2015 in Syria was the worst-ever for attacks on
medical facilities, with Government forces responsible
for most of the attacks, including by double-tap barrel
bombing. Since September of last year, Russian air
strikes have compounded the damage and destruction
incurred by health facilities, medical staff and patients.
In the Central African Republic, more than 200 attacks
were perpetrated against humanitarian organizations in
2015, thereby hindering safe access to those in need of
immediate assistance. In Yemen last year, nearly 100
hospitals were attacked by the parties to the conflict.
Attacks on humanitarian and medical facilities and staff
have taken a heavy toll in Afghanistan, Libya, South
Sudan and elsewhere. In eastern Ukraine, occupying
mercenary forces created a climate of abysmal
lawlessness. Over 1 million people were forced to flee,
and some 30,000 people were wounded or killed.
In those and other conflicts, we cannot succeed in
protecting civilians, when those who commit abuses,

S/PV.7606

crimes and atrocities know that they can get away with
murder — literally. The Council has a critical role to
play in bringing the perpetrators to account by taking
a strong and systematic position on ending impunity
for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity
and gross violations of human rights. My delegation
reiterates the call to restrain the use of the right to
veto in situations where such crimes are committed.
Perpetrators of crimes against civilian populations and
those who attack and kill humanitarian and medical
workers and journalists must know that there is no
escaping justice. National and international justice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, have an important role to play in that regard.
Accountability must also be assured wherever
and whenever peacekeepers engage in the sexual
exploitation and abuse of the most vulnerable. While
the onus is on respective troop-contributing countries
to bring the perpetrators to account, the Secretariat too
has an array of tools to combat the situation, including
the removal of offending troops. The Secretary-General
should continue to report to the Council on the efforts
and measures taken to eradicate sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers.
In conclusion, no normative base, as perfect as it
may be, will in itself protect civilians if gaps remain
between the norm and the actions on the ground. We
have to use all of the available tools to ensure the
protection of civilian populations, including through
the Human Rights Up Front initiative. More broadly,
we have to redouble our efforts in implementing Goal
16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), as the best chance
we have at prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mr. Ndong Ella (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
organize this high-level debate on the important issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
Gabon fully appreciates the untiring commitment
and mobilization of the Security Council and the efforts
and determination on the part of the Secretary-General,

16-0110481/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

which amply demonstrate the particular interest that
they accord to that matter. I take this opportunity to pay
heartfelt tribute to the Blue Helmets and humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross, who work every day and risk their
lives to protect and provide for the needs of civilians in
situations of very complicated conflicts.
As the Council is aware, civilians, especially
women and children, are the main targets of the
abuses committed in armed conflict situations.
They are particularly subject to violence, sexual
slavery, hostage-taking, discrimination and other
forms of abuse that constitute serious violations of
international law and human rights. Gabon therefore
endorses the recommendations of the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/453), published in June
2015, which highlights the fact that civilian populations
are increasingly becoming the targets of attacks in
armed conflicts. The same endorsement applies to
the recommendations contained in the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), which underscores the limits of
humanitarian action with regard to the intensity and
complexity of conflicts. Gabon, under the leadership of
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of
the Republic and Head of State, attaches high priority
at all times and in all circumstances to the protection
of vulnerable populations, especially women, children,
the disabled and the elderly.
As we recalled during the debate on the question
woman and peace and security (see S/PV.7534), the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of states themselves, in times of peace and during
armed conflict. Beyond the responsibility of States,
the protection of civilians must be exercised within
conflict zones and at the very heart of peace operations.
Concerning the first point, it is important to provide
peacekeeping missions with a robust mandate to protect
civilians in line with the realities on the ground. That
is already the case in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic must reach full
operational capacity through a robust mandate, as well.
Moreover, that reflects one of the recommendations
adopted by the Heads of State and Government at the
Extraordinary Summit of the Economic Community of
Central African States held in Gabon on 25 November
2015. Similarly, it is necessary for the Security Council

82/91

19/01/2016

to strengthen its own sanctions mechanisms against
State and non-State actors guilty of abuses against
civilians.
We regret the increasing number of cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation perpetrated by the very people
who are supposed to ensure the protection civilians.
Gabon reiterates its full support of the SecretaryGeneral’s new policy of zero tolerance. The protection
of civilians goes hand-in-hand with justice. In that light,
soldiers and officers guilty of such heinous crimes must
be punished to set an example.
Prevention also requires that civilians can enjoy
effective protection. To that end, human rights must be at
the heart of prevention mechanisms more than ever. The
particular offices of peacekeeping operations devoted
to human rights, gender equality and the protection of
civilian populations must anticipate potential threats by
sounding the alarm to avoid any further degradation of
the situation. It is also in that context that the increased
participation of women in peacekeeping operations can
promote a climate of trust between peacekeepers and
local communities. Women’s contribution could consist
of working with communities to provide psychological
support the victims of violence and seeing them through
to their full reintegration into their communities.
My delegation has the highest appreciation
for the role played by the United Nations via the
deploymnet of peacekeeping operations in war-torn
countries. Yet we must recognize that such missions
are dangerous and often unfortunately result in the
loss of numerous peacekeeping soldiers’ lives. I take
this opportunity to condemn all attacks against Blue
Helmets, humanitarian workers and journalists, as
they constitute serious violations of the principles and
provisions of international humanitarian law.
In conclusioon, Gabon supports the call of the
Secretary-General call aimed at promoting the political
settlement of conflicts and ensuring the promotion of
human rights, the rule of law and good governance .
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António (spoke in French): Allow me, at
the outset, Mr. President, to express my sincere
congratulations on your delegation’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January, which also coincides with the beginning of

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

your country’s tenure in this organ. My congratulations
also go to the other new members — Egypt, Senegal,
Ukraine and Japan — to which I wish every success.
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Oxfam Advisor for their briefings.
This debate on the theme of the protection civilians
in armed conflict is a timely one. As we look at the
theatres of armed conflict today and the recent
developments there, we are reminded of the harsh
reality facing civilians, who continue to be number
among the first victims in armed conflicts. The
indiscriminate and often deliberate attacks against
civilians and humanitarian aid workers have become
increasingly frequent in the past decade, as stated in
the Secretary-General’s June 2015 report (S/2015/453)
on the protection of civilians. That harsh reality has
become commonplace and has reached unacceptable
levels in terms of the numbers and the degree of
atrocities, notwithstanding the international legal
framework that sanctifies human life. It is therefore
evident that the problem is not due to any lack of an
international framework for the protection of civilians;
rather, it is due to the absence of implementation,
including in those areas controlled by armed non-State
actors or terrorist groups.
Terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Sham and other opposing forces that
are challenging all fundamental rights are primarily
responsible for the violence committed against civilians
in Africa. Moreover, peacekeeping operations, which
are the primary instrument of the United Nations to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
are facing increasingly complex challenges, which
has weakened their capacity to fulfil their protection
mandates. The emergence of non-State armed actors
and the increase in terrorism and violent extremism, as
well as other related threats, serve rightly to underscore
the need to adapt the concept of peacekeeping to those
new realities while moving towards greater flexibility
in the interpretation of traditional principles that have
guided United Nations work in this area.
Such an approach will mean that we must find
a balance between, on the one hand, maintaining
important aspects of the traditional principles of
peacekeeping and, on the other hand, the utilization
of force by operations that are deployed, particularly
in Africa. The recent experience in Somalia and the

S/PV.7606

Sahel demonstrates that it is timely and viable to use
peacekeeping when it is a matter of combating such
terrorist groups.
The resolute political will and sustained
commitment of the African Union leaders with regard
to the protection of civilian populations from the
horrors of war has made non-indifference to human
suffering a fundamental principle. The African Union
approach in terms of peacekeeping, which is essentially
based on that cardinal principle, has demonstrated
our continental organization’s capacity to adapt and
respond to new challenges, particularly through the
following means.
First, we are involved in the deployment of
peacekeeping operations in extremely hostile and
unstable environments where no other organization is
ready to venture.
Secondly, we have put in place robust mandates
for African Union operations, which, in most cases,
have among their main missions to protect civilians, to
neutralize armed groups and terrorists and to promote
the authority of the State.
It should be emphasized that the practices of
the African Union in the area of peacekeeping mark
an advance when compared to those of the United
Nations. They therefore prompt us to rethink the
model of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The model adapted to
the circumstances I have described must also take into
account how African Union operations are financed
through contributions to the regular budget of the
United Nations.
Along with its operations on the ground, the
African Union is investing in finding political solutions,
as evidenced by our recent involvement in efforts to
conclude peace agreements in Mali and in the Central
African Republic, among places. In other situations,
including in Somalia, the African Union continues
to seek to reduce violence in order to encourage all
stakeholders to relaunch the political process. As the
Secretary-General highlights in his report (S/2015/682)
on the implementation of recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations, political
solutions must be at the heart of all strategies that
seek to ensure lasting protection for civilians. In that
context, the African Union, faithful to its tradition of
the peaceful resolution of conflicts, remains convinced

16-0110483/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

that negotiation and mediation are the main tools that
should be more encouraged and explored in finding
political solutions to conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Nina (Albania): At the outset, allow me to than
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the topic of the protection of civilians in conflicts during
your first month of Security Council membership, as
well as for the concept note (S/2016/22, annex).
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.
The protection of civilians provided by international
humanitarian law is quite extensive; however, as in
the past, in all ongoing conflicts, the difficulties are
related to its application. As accurately pointed out
in the Secretary-General’s report of 18 June 2015,
unfortunately, in many parts of the world, the situation
has deteriorated significantly. It is outrageous, as
rightly noted in the report, inter alia, that
“[d]irect attacks on schools and hospitals have
become common features of many armed conflicts.
Humanitarian and health-care workers are
deliberately targeted.” (S/2015/453, para. 4)
On a daily basis, across the world, we see a
widespread failure to respect international humanitarian
law, which is the duty of all States and non-State
actors, pursuant to the Geneva Conventions. In ongoing
conflicts, civilians have been specifically targeted
and subjected to terrible atrocities, which ignores the
very basis of the Geneva Conventions: respect for the
human person. It is shocking that, in the twenty-first
century, the outbreak, continuation and escalation
of armed conflicts and the recurrence of violence in
post-conflict settings all over the world have taken a
dramatic toll on civilians, in particular for the most
vulnerable — women and children, older persons, the
disabled, internally displaced persons and refugees.
Neither States nor non-State armed groups have
respected their obligations adequately, including
during the past 16 years, during which the Council
has established a robust normative framework for the
protection of civilians. Furthermore, every passing year,
the consensus grows stronger around the idea that the
protection of civilians lies with the State, but it is also

84/91

19/01/2016

a legitimate and necessary focus of collective action
by the international community. But progress made at
the normative level makes sense only if translated into
tangible action on the ground. On that, unfortunately,
we have to concur with the conclusion in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that
“the task of protecting civilians on the ground
has been more pronounced in its failures than its
successes” (ibid, para. 6).
That sad reality shows that much more needs to be
done to reverse the catastrophic consequences of the
continued actions by terrorist groups. It is therefore
important to recall the need for the Security Council
to act swiftly and resolutely in all situations affecting
civilians. The Security Council should be given credit
for the fact that, by creating the International Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and by referring the
situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), it has itself sent out important
messages. It is therefore equally important that, when
a peace operation is to be deployed in an ICC-situation
country, its mandate should authorize it to assist the
ICC, which is an important step towards providing
justice by making those responsible for human rights
violations accountable.
For a number of years, the mandates of many
United Nations peacekeeping and other missions have
included the protection of civilians. Albania believes
that, for future missions, it will be increasingly crucial
for information to be gathered from current global
missions in order to evaluate, analyse and contextualize
their work, specifically on civilian protection. That is
why there is a need to match the protection mandates
for peacekeepers with appropriate resources, providing
specific training on civilian protection, including
training on child protection, measures against sexual
exploitation and abuse as well as developing civilian
protection doctrines and practical guidance. Any abuse
at the hands of peacekeepers — in other words, of those
mandated to protect — is unacceptable for international
peacekeeping. Moreover, we strongly support the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy.
We reaffirm the need to carefully plan
peacekeeping operations and to conduct them in such
a manner so as to facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding
and progress towards sustainable peace, stability and
development. We also believe that the implementation

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7606

of such activities requires close coordination between
peacekeeping, United Nations country teams and
development actors.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
highlights that

On a final note, we would like to point out that we
have entered an era in which armed conflicts are greater
in complexity and in the numbers of actors, broader in
tactics and weapons used and, above all, more horrific
in the human suffering they cause. The international
community’s response should also be adapted to the
new reality and the challenges we all face. We therefore
reiterate the call to the Council to provide consistent
political and operational support for the protection of
civilians in conflict, including where State parties are
involved in attacks and atrocities against civilians.

“shocking levels of brutality and casual disregard
for human life and dignity have come to characterize
most of today’s armed conflicts.” (S/2015/453,
para. 4)

Next year’s World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul will be an opportunity for all of us to renew and
further the commitment for a world of peace, security
and sustainable development. Unless we adopt more
effective ways to address the suffering of civilians in
armed conflict, we cannot aspire to meeting the targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), whereby no one
should be left behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Allow me to express
our appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
organizing this timely debate. I would also like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement, as well
as the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Oxfam representative for their
briefings.
Today we are confronted with increasingly complex
challenges against international peace and security.
The elimination of conflicts stands out as a challenge
that the international community still needs to deliver
on 70 years after the foundation of the United Nations.
The severe effects of conflicts on civilians constitute a
significant problem that needs addressing, Furthermore,
our world is now facing the largest humanitarian crisis
since the Second World War, with an increasing influx
of displaced populations due to protracted conflicts
and a lack of security and stability. In line with the
road map established by the Secretary-General, the
first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
Istanbul in May, will be a major opportunity to address
the ongoing humanitarian challenges.

Civilians are killed and maimed in targeted or
indiscriminate attacks. They are tortured, abducted,
forcibly displaced and denied access to their most
fundamental needs. Attacks on schools and hospitals
further exacerbate the already dire state of education
and health services in situations of armed conflict.
Furthermore, the unspeakable and inhumane attacks
of all terrorist groups, including Daesh and Boko
Haram, against civilians are beyond the realm of any
condemnation.
Against that background, we welcome the attention
paid to the issue of the protection of civilians at the
Security Council. Over the past 16 years, the Security
Council has established a sound normative framework
on the issue, with the adoption of various resolutions
and presidential statements. Moreover, the Security
Council’s thematic mandates on children and armed
conflict and on conflict-related sexual violence have
provided opportunities to address the challenge from a
more focused perspective.
Furthermore, last year’s reports — namely, the
report on the implementaiton of resolution 1325 (2000),
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
and the report of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490) — provided us with
some important recommendations. Throughout those
processes, the need to further strengthen the role of
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations efforts
for conflict prevention were highlighted. Despite the
establishment of that robust framework, the situation
of civilians on the ground, unfortunately, continues to
deteriorate. That is why we should devote more energy
and more resources, as necessary, if we are sincere in
living up to our commitments to protect civilians.
Armed conflicts create immense humanitarian
needs. In fact, 80 per cent of the humanitarian crises we
face today are caused or triggered by conflicts, which
generate massive suffering. Focusing on prevention or
addressing the root causes of conflicts should be at the
top of our agenda. Nevertheless, humanitarian action

16-0110485/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

should go hand-in-hand with efforts to resolve conflicts.
I would like to reiterate once again our commitment to
strengthening respect for international humanitarian
law.
As a concrete example, just across our border,
the crisis in Syria has caused the world’s largest
humanitarian tragedy. United Nations assessments
indicate that the humanitarian situation inside Syria
continues to deteriorate, which has an immense impact
on civilians. As a neighbour of Syria, Turkey is deeply
and widely affected by that tragedy. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Turkey is the largest refugee-hosting country
in the world today. Turkey has been a safe refuge for
over 2.5 million Syrians who had to flee Syria for their
lives. It has also ensured that cross-border humanitarian
assistance reaches millions of people in dire need on
the Syrian side of the border, in conformity with its
international obligations and in support of the United
Nations.
The tragic reports of starvation and death emerging
from the besieged town of Madaya, Syria, are the latest
blatant examples of violations of the most fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. As the
Secretary-General has underscored,
“[t]he town has been the victim of deliberate
starvation. Let me be clear: the use of food as a
weapon of war is a war crime.”
Not only those in Madaya, but Syrians who are currently
living under siege-like conditions elsewhere should
be granted unhindered humanitarian access. Those
responsible for horrific crimes should be reminded
that impunity will not prevail, and they will be held
accountable for their actions.
Finally, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the recent air strikes targeting civilians in Syria. Such
attacks not only undermine the prospects of a political
solution, but also exacerbate the scourge of terrorism in
the region and beyond.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to express our appreciation in
seeing you, Mr. President, once again in New York to
preside over this meeting. We welcome your initiative in
convening this open debate and in preparing the concept
note (S/2016/22, annex) to guide our discussions.

86/91

19/01/2016

Seventy years after the establishment of the
Organization, we still face significant challenges as
an international community, including new threats
to international peace and security. That is evident
in the fact that the Security Council is increasingly
discussing the actions of non-State armed actors who
attack civilians. That growing concern on the part
of the Council to protect civilians who are victims
of armed conflict is reflected in the fact that every
peacekeeping operation established in the past decade
is multidimensional in nature and has a mandate that
includes protection-of-civilians tasks.
Peru has broadened its perspective on participation
in peacekeeping operations in the light of that
multidimensional character. In addition to our joint
participation with Uruguay in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Peru has deployed
a contingent for the construction and maintenance
of airfields in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic. That is the first time that a Peruvian
contingent has been deployed in Africa.
Peacekeeping operations face serious challenges in
fulfilling their duty to protect civilians. My delegation
would like to highlight three points in that regard.
First, the establishment of operations with
multidimensional mandates means greater complexity
in planning and implementing those mandates. In that
regard, better coordination among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
is required so that the vision and views of troopcontributing countries can be duly heard, given that
their contingents will be responsible for implementing
the mandate on the ground.
Secondly, at the operational level, missions with
an explicit mandate to protect civilians should have the
necessary capacity and command structure to fulfil the
task effectively. To that end, uniformed personnel need
to have access to better training facilities, awarenessraising and access to new technologies to make it
possible for them to detect potential threats to their
security and improve their ability to protect civilians. In
that context, it is essential that peacekeeping operations
be provided with adequate and predictable financial
resources.
Thirdly, Peru believes that, when there are specific
threats of physical violence against the populations
they seek to protec, the use of force by troops involved

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in peacekeeping operations in accordance with their
mandate to protect civilians must be strictly preventive
and tactical nature. In that regard, while we recognize
the progress made by the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to protect
civilians, my delegation believes that the perception
of impartiality on the part of peacekeeping missions is
essential for their legitimacy on the ground, the safety
of its personnel and a mission’s long-term effectiveness.
Peru believes it is crucial to promote political peace
agreements as a central element in preventing and
resolving conflicts and protecting civilians. Similarly,
it is important to ensure accountability. In that regard,
when a State fails to prosecute perpetrators of crimes
against civilians, the Security Council must assume its
role with regard to impunity at the international level
and refer such acts to the International Criminal Court.
Given that peacekeeping operations are responsible
for performing the tasks of protecting civilians on the
ground, I would like to conclude by stressing the urgent
need to review the performance of such operations in
the light of the recommendations contained in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and in the report (S/2015/682) of the
Secretary General in that regard, so that peacekeeping
missions are able to effectively carry out those tasks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/453), as
well as Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Advisor of Oxfam for their briefings
this morning. We also wish to congratulate you, Sir, as
well as the the delegations of Egypt, Japan, Senegal and
Ukraine, on your elections as members of the Security
Council. We also express our appreciation to the five
outgoing members.
The horrors of conflict and war, whose brunt is
borne by civilians, serve to underscore the importance
of putting an end to violations of moral standards and
legal norms of war. The international community has
been making every effort to protect civilians in armed
conflict and to promote human rights and the dignity
of the human person, in accordance with international

S/PV.7606

humanitarian law. In spite of the major achievements
in that regard, we continue to see grave violations
and many crimes against civilians, in defiance of the
determination of the international community and in
blatant disregard of the results of violating international
humanitarian law.
The ongoing illegal Israeli practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories are flagrant violations
of internatinal humanitarian law and human rights
law. Those practices also undermine the two-State
solution, agreed upon by the international community.
We therefore call on the Council to provide protection
to the Palestinian people, put an end to violations of
their rights and implement the relevant resolutions on
Palestine.
The continuing, systematic crimes by the Syrian
regime and its allies gainst innocent civilians in that
country, including the siege of towns, the starvation of
civilians and indiscriminate bombardments with barrel
bombs, are crimes against humanity and violate the
Council’s resolutions on Syria. The entire world has
seen the scenes coming from Madaya of starving and
dying people. The Syrian regime is trying to intimidate
Madaya and making its population choose between
starvation or bowing to a regime that continues to kill
its people. Given the situation of those in besieged
areas, we call on the Security Council to take every
measure to deliver emergency humanitarian assistance,
including via air and land, to all besieged areas, and
implement paragraph 6 of resolution 2258 (2015).
Impunity for perpetrators of such grave violations
has serious consequences — the violation of
international instruments serves to weaken them and
is detrimental to the image of the United Nations.
Impunity emboldens perpetrators and leads to further
violations. We must therefore make collective efforts to
protect civilians and hold perpetrators to account.
Finally, we reiterate our support for all measures
taken by the Security Council to protect civilians. And
we underscore our respect for international instruments
agreed by the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Nigeria congratulates you, Sir,
on the commencement of your country’s two-year term
on the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also congratulate Egypt,

16-0110487/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Japan, Senegal and Ukraine on their membership of
the Security Council. My delegation also thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well
as for the excellent concept note (S/2016/22) that your
delegation has provided to guide our deliberations. Our
appreciation also goes to Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Beerli, and the Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam, Ms. Rooijmans,
for their briefings.
Nigeria aligns itself with the respective statements
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and by the Permanent Observer
of the African Union on behalf of the African Union.
Conflict situations expose civilians to killings,
kidnappings, torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking
and other grave dangers. That is particularly so when
non-State armed groups are involved. Their complete
disregard for international law and international
humanitarian law underscores the challenge they pose
to the protection of civilians.
It is an unfortunate reality that women and girls
suffer the most in conflict situations. They face sexual
violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking and other
forms of exploitation and degradation. Situations where
women and girls are forced to provide for their families
expose them even more to exploitation and abuse. We
acknowledge the Security Council’s commitment to
the protection of women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations, as exemplified by the adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013).
We believe that those resolutions provide suitable
frameworks for the security Council to enhance the
protection for women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Nigeria recognizes the primary responsibility
of States to protect civilians within their national
jurisdictions. In that regard, we will continue to take all
the necessary measures as a country, in full compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, to protect civilians in the context of our war
against the terrorist group Boko Haram. The Federal
Government of Nigeria has no higher priority today
than that of defeating Boko Haram and rescuing all
kidnapped persons, including the Chibok girls. We are
utilizing all the resources at our disposal in that effort,

88/91

19/01/2016

and we have seen positive outcomes, as the Nigerian
military has rescued hundreds of civilians held hostage
by Boko Haram, including women and girls.
Humanitarian access to those in need is another
important dimension of the protection of civilians in
conflict situations. Attacks on humanitarian workers
and their families, the seizure of humanitarian supplies
and other acts that inhibit the delivery of aid and
negatively impact the welfare of civilians in need are
grave violations of international humanitarian law,
which we condemn in the strongest terms.
Nigeria shares the view that considering political
solutions to conflicts in a manner that is inclusive
would aid the effort to protect civilians. Nigeria urges
the Council to bring its influence to bear in that regard,
with a view to achieving political settlements that lead
to lasting peace and thereby enhance the protection of
civilians in a sustainable manner.
Protecting civilians in conflict situations remains
a critical challenge, not only for the United Nations
but also for the entire international community. We
pay tribute to peacekeepers, humanitarian workers,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
for their hard work, often in difficult circumstances, to
ensure the safety and the security of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): First, I would like
to thank the Uruguayan presidency for organizing this
open debate on such an important subject.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I take the floor to respond to allegations made
against my country by the delegation of Armenia.
Those allegations are part of Armenia’s practice of
falsifying data and fabricating pretexts to conceal
the fact that Armenia itself is directly responsible for
the illegal occupation of a significant portion of the
territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Through its
continued aggression and provocations against the
Republic of Azerbaijan, the Government of Armenia
imperils regional security and stability. By referring to
the so-called violation of the ceasefire, Armenia seeks
to justify its continued illegal military presence and use
of force against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Azerbaijan. For the same reason,

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Armenia fails to acknowledge the fact that at present
the front line extends far beyond the Nagorno-Karabakh
region, reaching the Agdam and Fizuli districts of the
Republic of Azerbaijan. In its relevant resolutions,
the Security Council condemned the seizure of those
districts and all other occupied areas of Azerbaijan and
demanded the immediate, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of the occupying forces from all occupied
areas of Azerbaijan.
Armenia set up and effectively controls the
separatist regime in the Nagorno-Karabakh region
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, particularly the socalled Nagorno-Karabakh defense army. On 15 June
2015, President Sargsyan of the Republic of Armenia
officially approved the rotation between the Deputy
Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the
Republic of Armenia and the so-called minister of the
separatist regime. That particular example also proves
that Armenia and the separatist regime are in fact a
single entity. It should be recalled that, in a statement
made on 26 September 2015, the President of Armenia
alleged that Nagorno-Karabakh was “an inseparable
part of Armenia”.
Armenia’s military provocations, aimed at
violating the ceasefire regime, are regular, aggressive
acts against the Republic of Azerbaijan, which are
deliberately concealed. For instance, in its letter
contained in document S/2015/11, while pretending
to objectively inform the General Assembly and the
Security Council on ceasefire violations, Armenia
forgot to mention the fact that, on 12 November
2014, MI-24 combat helicopters of the airforce of the
Republic of Armenia attacked the defence positions
of the armed forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan
near the village of Kengerly, in the Agdam district of
Azerbaijan, and one of them was downed by response
fire. Similarly, Armenia has never acknowledged its
continued indiscriminate attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians. For instance, the purposeful targeting of a
wedding ceremony in a village of the Terter district on
1 September 2015 by the armed forces of Armenia from
their positions on the occupied territory of Azerbaijan
is yet another notorious example of Armenia’s flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. As a result,
three civilians, including one child, were wounded.
Throughout 2015, as a result of Armenia’s illegal
occupation and ceasefire violations, 22 servicemen of
the Azerbaijani army were killed, 13 were wounded,
11 civilians were wounded and 1 was killed. In addition,

S/PV.7606

Armenia continues targeting civilian infrastructure
located in the vicinity of the front line. As a result,
houses, schools and other civilian objects in Tovuz,
Terter, Gedebey, Gazakh, Fizuli and Agdam districts of
the Republic of Azerbaijan were destroyed.
Armenia’s so-called reports on the ceasefire
violations are designed to conceal their reality. The
purposeful concealment of key facts attests to that
country’s deceptive and manipulative practices to
deny its role, involvement and grave responsibility
for the aggression and occupation of the territories of
Azerbaijan and its consequences.
In conclusion, let me underline that the continued
occupation of a big portion of the territory of the
Republic of Azerbaijan by the armed forces of Armenia
is a main obstacle to the settlement of the conflict
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and is the only
source of escalation of the situation and occurrence
of hostilities. Therefore, Armenia should withdraw
its armed forces from the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions — namely, resolutions 822 (1993),
853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) — and fulfil its
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations, to
which all Member States reaffirmed their commitment
in October 2015. Without withdrawing its occupying
forces from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan,
Armenia’s call for peace and alleged support for the
work of the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe are nothing but
lofty words to conceal its annexation policy and to
mislead the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to make
some short comments about the statement made earlier
by the delegation of the Russian Federation.
For almost two years now, the delegation of
the aggressor country has been desperately trying
to convince all of us in the Chamber that Russia is
not a part of a conflict in Ukraine. We have already
witnessed such an approach with regard to the occupied
part of Ukraine — the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea. I am quite sure that we all remember when the
same permanent member of the Security Council by all
means denied the presence of the Russian armed forces
in Crimea. Afterward, we heard the confession of the

16-0110489/91

S/PV.7606

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/01/2016

Russian President about the direct role of the Russian
armed forces in the occupation of part of sovereign
Ukrainian territory. On 17 December 2015, Mr. Putin
acknowledged the presence of the Russian servicemen
in Donbas. Following is a quote from the Russian
President’s website.

of searching the United Nations archives for solutions
and resolutions, I would like to remind him that, only a
year and a half ago, the Palestinians refused to accept a
Security Council resolution that would have improved
the lives of their people and enabled the Palestinian
Authority to go back to Gaza.

(spoke in Russian)

It seems that the Palestinian people do need
protection — protection from the choices of their
leadership, protection from their lack of foresight
and from their refusal to go back to negotiations.
Unfortunately, rather than restoring the rule of law and
improving the lives of the people of Gaza and the West
Bank, the Palestinian Authority choses to side with
terror. It is so sad, so counter-productive.

“We never said that there were no people who were
resolving certain issues, including in the miltary
sphere.”
(spoke in English)
Once again, I emphasize our firm commitment
to the full implementation of all the provisions of the
Minsk agreements by all parties without exception. Our
key goal in 2016 is clear: to bring peace back to Ukraine
and justice back to the international order. We believe
that there is no alternative to a political solution. Our
formula for a peaceful settlement is simple, that is,
the withdrawal of all Russian troops from Ukraine’s
territory, the holding of local elections in Donbas in
accordance with Ukrainian legislation and standards
set by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the reinstatement of the Ukraine’s full
control over the border with Russia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Several other
delegations have requested the floor to make further
statements. It is my intention to accede to those
requests. However, I would ask each delegation to limit
itself to one additional statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): During the past four months,
Israelis have been stabbed in their homes, shot at in the
streets and run over by terrorists using cars as weapons.
Over the course of that wave of violence, 29 people were
killed and hundreds were injured. One would expect that
the Palestinian Authority would condemn the terrorist
activities by Hamas and others and stop the increasing
incitement. Instead of condemnation — instead of
taking responsibility — the Palestinian leadership,
unfortunately, has once again preferred to attack Israel.
Since it is the easiest way to get attention, I would like
to be clear.
Israel’s commitment to the protection of civilians
knows no colour, no ethnicity and no borders, and will
always remain absolute. The Palestinian observer spoke
here today about a resolution from 30 years ago. Instead

90/91

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): My delegation requested
the floor to reply to the comments made by the
delegation of Azerbaijan.
We regret to see that disseminating misinformation,
distorting facts and simply spreading lies have become
that delegation’s habitual methods. All allegations
against my country and nation are strongly rejected.
Instead of watching Azerbaijan’s showcase of bankrupt
State propaganda, I think this respected organ would
be very interested in learning about the real situation
on the ground across the line of contact with Nagorno
Karabakh and the border with Armenia.
The Azerbaijani delegation’s claims and accusations
are simply baseless and fabricated, including accusing
Armenia of violating the relevant Security Council
resolutions and alleging an occupation. We advise
the Azerbaijani delegation to read those resolutions
carefully, as it appears that they have not done so over
the past two decades, and try to find a single sentence
about aggression by the Republic of Armenia. On the
contrary, it is Azerbaijan that repeatedly violates a
number of provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly by refusing to establish
confidence-building measures between conflicting
parties, declining to create investigative mechanisms
into ceasefire violations, withdrawing snipers, ceasing
warmongering at the highest level and using heavy
artillery to target civilians, civilian infrastructure and
institutions along Armenia’s border and the contact line
with Nagorno Karabakh.

16-01104

19/01/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The attempts at pointing fingers at others are
known to be a useful tool for distracting from
domestic problems. To divert attention from the unrest
of its population resulting from the deteriorating
socioeconomic situation in Azerbaijan, the leadership
of that country has chosen the route of intensifying
the ceasefire violations and massive shelling of
civilian-populated border areas of Armenian Nagorno
Karabakh. It is well-known and properly documented
that about 20 years ago Azerbaijan unleashed a fullscale war against Armenian Nagorno Karabakh, with
the intention of totally exterminating its Armenian
population. However, the military aggression by
Azerbaijan had unforeseen consequences for itself.
As a result of the military aggression by Azerbaijan,
hundreds of thousands of ethnic Armenians, including
women and children, had to leave their homes and
became refugees and internally displaced persons. They
suffered unspeakable acts of violence and State terror
by Azerbaijan. That aggression continues today. Due to
the indiscriminate shelling of Armenian villages by the
heavy artillery of the Azerbaijani military in the past

S/PV.7606

year, the casualties of Armenian Nagorno Karabakh
have doubled, and many civilians, including elderly
women, have been killed.
We all know about the importance of civil
society participation in the peace process, ensuring
that sustainable solutions to the conflict are found
and effective protection of the civilian population is
achieved. The practice of systematic repression against
civil society representatives, human rights defenders
and peace activists and free media in Azerbaijan
hinders the prospects of using people-to-people secondtrack diplomacy tools for conflict resolution. The
strategy and tactics applied by the country concerned
with respect to the Nagorno Karabakh issue prove
that Azerbaijan is not interested in finding a lasting
solution to the conflict and has chosen the option whose
consequences are detrimental to peace in the region
and result in further casualties, including among the
civilian population.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

16-0110491/91
