SECURITY
OFFICIAL
‘TWENTY-

COUNCIL
RECORQS

FIFTH

1531

,;

YEAR

st

MEETING:

NEW

11 MARCH 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (SIAgenda/1531/Rev.l).

. . , , , , . . . . . , . , . . . , *....a....,,

1

of the agenda . , , . . , . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , 1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . s I

SlPV.1531

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

I

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 11 March 1970, at 3 p.m.

President:

Mr.

Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

ARBELAEZ

Present:
The representatives of the following
States: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l531/Rev.l)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the CentraI African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo

(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,Sierra Leone,
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,’
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The representative of Gabon, in a communication
dated 10 March 1970, has asked that the name of his
country should be added to the list of thirty-eight
countries that have signed the letter to the President
of the Security Council which is contained in document
S/9682.
2. I wish to inform the Council that the representatives of Algeria, Senegal and Pakistan have asked to
be allowed to participate in this debate, without the
right to vote. These requests appear in documents
S/9685, S/9689 and S/9690, respectively. If I hear no
objectron, I shall invite these representatives to take
seats at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. N. Harbi
(Algeria), Mr. I. Boye (Senegal) and Mr. S4 A. Karim
(Pakistan) took places at the Security Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The Council will now continue its consideration of the
item on the agenda. Before calling on the first speaker
on my list, I should like to draw the attention of members to document S/9686, which contains the text of
a letter sent to the President of the Security Council
by the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
4. I call now on the first speaker on my list, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, Mr. Moto Nkama,
and I extend to him a very cordial welcome on behalf
of the Security Council.
5. Mr. NKAMA (Zambia): Allow me first of all, Mr.
President, to thank you for the very warm welcome
you have extended to me this afternoon. May I now
ask your indulgence and that of your distinguished colleagues so that I may be allowed to thank the Council

“‘. .
for Permitting tie to partici$te
in this d&hate? As &em-. ’ tiaradon; exercising his right of reply, said that there
was much that the Zambian representative had said
hers we aywe,,I liave.dpirie here follbwihg ‘a deci,sigu
witH khich lie could readily agree, 5‘particularly with
of the Council%f Ministerd,of the &gani&ti&
bf African Unctty @AU). Thus, although.1 am v&Y well aware .;. regard to the starting-point of our purposes: to see
an tnd to the illegal i%gime and to see that the interests
of the ‘wisdom and skill of niy $&rmanent repfeskhof all the people of Rhodesia are given full weight”
tative, Ambassador Mwaanga, and know hdw highly
[ibid.,. para. 62). The purpose of my coming here is
he is r’egarded by you,; it has becotie necessary for
me to be here to repr&knt
in thi3,debate
hot, or&y ‘:i to find du’t ‘whether this Gouncil, given that readiness
mY Government
but also,. togath&‘i+ith
tiy colleagties. I .on’ihe part of the British delegation, can now embark
on a course orimmediate action the purpose of which
from Algeria and Senegal, the member Stat++of the
1; ,’ ,,;
., “is to see an end td the illegal rCgime and to See that
OAU,
*
. .
*
.:
B’”
I , II tlie interests Of’ all the people, of Rhodesia are given
ftill tieight’ ’ .
6. This V&?Y decision on the p&t of tie 0AI.J is in
itself a measure of tlie seriousness with which the
member Goveknnients
of that brganization’view
the .9. At this stage it inay be useful here to go back
deteriorating
Rhodesian situation, and, indeed, an’indi- I to 11 November 1965 and see how we have tried to
grapple with’this problem. A day after the unilateral
cation of their determination,
tb do everything ‘possible
declaration
of the so-called independence of Rhodesia,
to enable the people of Zimbabwe.to-rid
themselves
th’e Security Council was convened at the request of,
of the oppressive and unconst’itu tio,h$ r&g& atid to
’ amohg others; the permanent representative of the
attain independence,
’
..’ I
~
United Kingdom. Among the many important points
made by the Stcretary of State for Foreign Affairs
7, AHOW kk al& ;o &pr&
I;ljr regret & n& having.
of the United Kingdofi, Mr. Stewart, were the folbeen able to be presetit in this Council whkn the debate
.lowing:
started last Friday, because I should have liked td listen
to the characteristically
eloquent argunients’ riduancefl, I h ’ “A group of persons who were until recently the
by the rCpre%ntaiive
df .the United Kinidom,
Lord
Government of Southern Rhddesia have purported
Caradon, my previous personal contacts, with whom
’ : to make a declaration ihat Southern Rhodesia is indestill COntinUe
to give mb,Very pleEissilit memories. Be
pendent of Britain. The British Government regards
that as it:ma):, I hav,e, within, th? lasX%w@itJiifour hours, , ;, this ris illegal and invalid since only the British Parliasince I arrived, famili’ari&d
.&>self with’ thC’ ti&&t.3;. ! . &ent,has the right and authority to accdrd indepenof hiS argurrients tis cotifained in the verbatim record
’ derice to Southern Rhodesia. This illegal act has been
of the COrincil’s 1530th’ ti&&i;ig.
p have alsd had’ah”
berforfied in the hope and with the intention of estabohipo@nity
sf studying the British draft r&dlut~oh as
.lishing a form df .govemment which would ensure
amended at the CouncilI s. last ~~~~i,~g~., As J,arn aw?$e’: ;,‘;, .’: #<ha+@; ptiwk to co&.ol the future of Southern
that all, the members, unlike myself;>‘haVe had the j . Rhodesia remains in the hands of a white minority
opportunity of listening to his lordship, I ‘d&:&t intend
com$ri$ng olily one-twtntieth of the population.”
to saddle this Council with a rep&&ion of those’argti[1257th meeting, parn. 13.)
merits, In ,a?y case,~ I think I sim right in stating that, i
State later on in his speech stated:
.the tl$etie: pf th&n’ ‘all,, is. @hat .ib’,<ontained itij dl’aft: a :Tii& $e&ktafy’tif
resdlutibm $?676/Rev,J
i Thsit dr’aft calIs.for; the.con:‘,‘, I’ 1 “Noiv that this illegal declaration has been made,
demnatibn
bf thk’ illegal acts. aof the racist ‘mitioiity ,’
the olilY lawful Government of Southern Rhodesia
r&ime in Sbutherh Rhodesia, ‘iricluding’ the put$orted (1’ is the Government of the United Kingdom. That
assumption ofa republican status; and the British rep- ’ : Gbvernment, however, has no physical presence in
resentative would Uris@fheCouncil,*in
accorGance’$Jh
Southern Rhodesia and in Southern Rhodesia there
Article 41 of.,the Chart+&,. to decide that: all Member
is therefore now no rule of law. It is, clearly and
States of the United Nations should refrain from recog- ..’ unmistakably, a British responsibility to re-establish
nizitig the &e’ial regime or rehdering any assistance
the iule of law in Southern Rhodesia so that in due
to,& slich action to bC taken under Article 2 of the
time that country may .enjoy not the mere name of
Charter, WhCle I am thiilled at the charticteristic eloindepkndeiice but the full substance of freedom for
quence of its arguments, and, while I ,appreciatk the
all its pedples.” pbid., para. 19.1
d&sire .of the’ British delegitipn
to propose ,a.,d;aft
resolution
whidh is precise,’ and which dirges :swlft. : ‘10. Representatives are fully acquainted with the rest
action, 3 cannot btit expres‘s, at the same ?$e, W very
of that momentous speech. In terms of approach, the
great disappointment
at the ext%.melY limited nature of
Councii adopted on 12 November 1965 resolution 216
the kind of act&
requested of this Council. It is
(1965), the substance’of which is more or less the same
especially disturbing, if I may be permitted to say so,
as that which the United Kingdom is asking for now
when such extremely inadequate action is requested by
after four years of continuous jungle law in Rhodesia.
none other than the administering
Power.
Of course, further action was taken on 20 November
of the same year, when the Council adopted resolution
8. The Council will remember the intervention made
217 (1965). It should be remembered that in paragraph
4 of this resolution, the Security Council:
last Friday 11530th meeting] by Zambia’s deputy permaneat represectative
to the United Nations in his
“Calls uporz the Government of the United Kingcapacity
as chargt? d’affaires ad interim, At this stage
dom to quell this rebellion of the racist minority;”
I shall only endorse his disappointment
at the limited
and in paragraphs 7, 8 and 9, it:
goals sought in the British draft. I notice that Lord

l

I

2

“7. Culls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom, as the working of the Constitution of 1961
has broken down, to take immediate measures in
order to allow the people of Southern Rhodesia to
determine their own future consistent with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
“8. Calls upon all States to refrain from any action
which would assist and encourage the illegal regime
and, in particular, to desist from providing it with
arms, equipment and military material, and to do
their utmost in order to break all economic relations
with Southern Rhodesia, including an embargo on
oil and petroleum products;
“9, Calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom to enforce urgently and with vigour all the
measures it has announced, as well as those mentioned in paragraph 8 above.”

countries have offered to the rebels in Rhodesia. Time
and again the British delegation, in ruling out the use
of force or in opposing sanctions against Sowth Africa
and the Portuguese colony of Mozambique, lras argued
as if the relations they have with Portugal and South
Africa are only beneficial to the United Kingdom. We
refuse to accept those arguments.
13. Frustated by that attitude of the United Kingdom
and concerned about the co-operation which the rebels
were receiving from the Portuguese and the South Africans, the Security Council met again, and on 9 April
1966 adopted resolution 221 (1966). An appeal was
made to the Portuguese Government to co-operate with
the Security Council, all States were requested to divert
any of the vessels believed to be carrying oil destined
for Southern Rhodesia through Beira, and in paragraph
5 Britain was called upon “to prevent, by the use of
force if necessary, the arrival at Beiraof vessels reasonably believed to be carrying oil destined for Southern
Rhodesia . . . “. The story of the Joanna V comes to
mind. After that the dust seems to have settled; nor
was that surprising, because everybody knew, including the British Government, that Rhodesia would get
all its oil requirements through South Africa.

11. As members of the Council are aware, the
Government of the United Kingdom, while accepting
its responsibility under the Charter as well as its special
responsibility over Rhodesia, did very little, if anything
at all, to implement the paragraph 4 which I have
quoted. With regard to paragraph 7, the British Government entered into a series of fruitlessnegotiations,
not
with the representatives of the people of Zimbabwe-whom
up to this moment they still do not recognize-but
rather with the very same rebels whom they
had condemued before this Council. It may be argued,
on the basis of NIBMAR-that
is, no independence
before majority rule-that
the British Government’s
negotiations with the rebels were not outside the scope
of the principles embodied in paragraph 7. Yet it is
an open secret that as one set of negotiations after
another broke down, the talk in London circles was
no longer NIBMAR but rather a “return to legality”.
It in fact became quite clear that if Ian Smith and his
fellow rebels had not been so arrogant and powerhungry, they could quite easily have achieved the
objectives they had intended to achieve, merely by
accepting the British proposals, dissolving their illegal
parliament and returning to the same parliament after
an election in which the indigenous African population
would have been barred from participating. The 1961
Constitution itself was capable of achieving the same
results. For is it conceivable that the United Kingdom
Government,
which has continued to deal with the
rebellion in a very gingerly manner, would have done
anything for the oppressed masses if Ian Smith and
his clique had agreed to “return to legality”? Nor did
the United Kingdom Government pursue with vigour,
as it was called upon to do in paragraph 9, all those
measures it had announced as well as those.mentioned
in paragraph 8.

14. After a whole year of side-stepping, the Council
made a determined effort in December 1966 to take
more drastic steps in accordance with Articles 39 and
41 of the United Nations Charter. Resolution 232 (1966)
was therefore adopted on 16 December 1966 within
that context. States Members of the United Nations
were required to cease forthwith the import of several
major products of Rhodesia, and not to permit the promotion of any activities which might lead to the export
by Rhodesia of those commodities. This was extended
to the shipment or air transportation of Rhodesian products, The sale or shipment of arms, military aircraft,
military vehicles, and so forth to Rhodesia was also
covered. The aircraft and motor industry was to be
hit in the same way.
15. Equally important was the reminder in paragraph
3 that failure or refusal by any Member State to comply
with that resolution would constitute a violation of Article 2.5 of the United Nations Charter. All States were
called upon not to render financial or any economic
aid to the illegal racist minority regime.
16. It should be remembered that those new efforts
were especially spurred on by the subsequent refusal
by the rebels to accept the terms negotiated between
the British Prime Minister and the rebel leader onHMS
Tiger, Thus it was that the Hon. George Brown, putting
the case for his Government before the Security
Council, stated:
“The [Tiger] document formed a comprehensive
solution, and had it been accepted by Mr. Smith
and his colleagues, I would have been reporting a
settlement here today which I could have commended to the conscience of the world. Alas, On
Monday, 5 December, it was rejected by the Smith
regime.

12. Our experience in the last four years has shown
that the greatest obstacle to the efforts of the Security
Council, and the United Nations as a whole, has come
mainly from Portugal and South Africa, countries with
which the United Kingdom has very close ties. Portugal
is a member of NATO; South Africa has very valuable
trade and other relations with the United Kingdom.
To our knowledge, those relations have not been in
any way affected by the open support those two
3

were against taking drastic measures to bring down
the illegal regime was the representative of the administering Power. From the very strong statement of the
British representative in 1966 we are made to descend
to the auologia of Lord Caradon of 29 May 1968 [1428t11
nzeeti&], which I quote:
“No one has been expected or asked to abandon
well-known national positions. Each one of us no
doubt has reservations on some of the Provisions
included in the resolution. But what we have sought
LO do and what we have succeded
in doing is to
find common ground. And that is our achievement.
“We on our side have from the beginning clearly
restated the basic position of the United Kingdom
on the use of force and our aim to secure a just
settlement by peaceful means. We have moreover
restated the reasons why we cannot contemplate an
economic confrontation with South Africa.
“ * . . As I have often said, this is a job not for
the cavalry but for the sappers. We can hope for
no speedy and spectacular victories I ”

6‘

The Rhodesian Front regime have shown
conclusively that they intend to persist not only in
their rebellion but in their defiance of civilized opinion everywhere. In the opinion of my Government, .
the con&uation
of the rebellion presents an ever
greater challenge to the international community. In
these circumstances, there is an urgent need for us
to strengthen and fortify our actions internationally
to overcome this challenge by the best and most
effective means open to us.
“ 1. 1
“The action of -the Rhodesian Front in making
the illegal declaration backed by the repressive use
of force, followed now by their rejection of this fair
and reasonable settlement, has brought in its train
the most far-reaching consequences. The dangers
to peace and stability in the whole region of central
and southern Africa are acute. Even outside Africa
stresses are being created between nations by this
issue.
“Here we have a small set of reckless men whose
actions have provoked and are now serving to protong a most critical situation, a situation fraught with
great and growing danger of interracial strife and
bloodshed throughout southern Africa-a
danger
which it is the duty of every one of us to do his
utmost to avert. My Government
accordingly
believes that this Council cannot permit the situation
to deteriorate further. It considers that the combination of circumstances flowing from the initial actions
of the Smith regime . ) . affects not only the stability
and progress of Rhodesia’s immediate neighbours,
but also. the maintenance of international peace and
security. . . . ” 11331st meeting, pm-as. 20-24.) .
.

I

.

20. I do uot intend to give the impression that this
debate should be seen as a conflict of approach or
of positions between the Government of the United
Kingdom and my Government or the Governments of
member States of the Organization of African Unity.
On the other hand, I have had no choice but to relate
my case in the light cf the position of the administering
Power. It is because Britain holds the ultimate responsibility over Rhodesia that I have taken the liberty of
quoting extensively from British
representatives.
Members of the Council will agree with me that
whenever this Council is asked to take firm measures
against the rebel colony of Southern Rhodesia the 3ritish delegation has worked tirelessly to frustrate the
adoption of those measures, as was the case on
24 June 1969 when a draft resolution presented by
Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan,
Senegal and Zambia
[Sl9270lRev.l]
failed to command the support of a
majority of the members of the Security Council. On
that occasion the British representative
urged the
Council to limit its consideration of the problem to
mere declarations-in other words, merely to condemn
the .illegal regime, which we all know had been done
many times before; merely to deplore the limitation
of a referendum to a minority, as if that would change
the situation; and, finally, merely to condemn the proposals for a new constitution. Apparently, to the British
Goveinment, the continued existence of the illegal
regime ,was of secondary importance; but, of course,
when the British representative continually advises the
Council that “our progress must be slow”, it is not
strange that when he comes with proposals, like the
ones now before us on which he asks for swift action,
they are of a palliative nature.

17. Given that kind of situation the Security Council
proceeded to take certain measures under Articles 39
and 41 of the Charter, as I stated earlier; but, unfortunately, as if by deliberate design, the Council was
not permitted to take all those measures which were
at its disposal under Chapter VII and which were
acceptable in a situation the gravity of which was so
ably described before the Council by the representative
of the .administering Power. The programme of socalled selective mandatory sanctions, embarked upon
too late in the day and frustrated as it was bound to
be by some of Britain’s closest allies, was bound to
fail.
18. It.was not surprising, therefore, that the Security
Council had to ,return to the “same problem in May
1968; and it adopted on 29 May 1968 resolution 253
(1968), the purpose of which wtis, inter afia, to place
Rhodesian commodities in the cold storage of Chapter
VII of the Charter. The same resolution applied to
the question of investment in Rhodesia and the restriction of movement of Rhodesians outside the colony;
and a committee of the Security Council, generally
known as the Sanctions Committee, was established
to assist in the implenientation
of that resolution,

21. It Was necessary for me to give all these details
before I submit the hopes and feelings of the member
States of the Organization of African Unity in connexion with my mission. I say “necessary” because we
have in the past been accused of being men who believe
that solutions will be found by violent speeches or
wild gestures. Yet for all the restraint and all the hypoc-

19. As was the case with previous resolutions, resolution 253 (1968) was again limited in its scope, and it
is disappointing to note again that among those who
4

;

risy of the past-or
is it because of it?-we are now
faced with a situation more involved and ‘more dangerous, and a r6gime more arrogantly aggressive and
oppressive than was the case in 1965. We have agreed
to be persuaded, if not to believe, at least to accept
the much advertised efficacy of the sanctions policy.
The result has been the strengthening of the rebels’
hands. The failure of that policy has been exposed
by many qualified observers of the Rhodesian situation.
Anyone who has read the trade statistics in Security
Council document S/9252/Add.l of 13 June 1969, for
.example, will no doubt wonder, if he is a believer in
the character of the United Nations, why no action
has so far been taken against the “sanctions busters”.

in Rhodesia exactly what has been professed publicly
by all members of the Security Council, namely, the
removal of the illegal rCgime, the restoration of law
and order and the granting of independence to the Territory on the basis of universal adult suffrage and with
a democratic constitution that guarantees freedom to
all, irrespective of colour, race or creed.
24. Now, what are the requests that the Organization
of African Unity is making to this Council? Simply
they are as follows: that the existence of an illegal
rCgime in Rhodesia, under whatever banner, be condemned and rio recognition be given to that regime,
as it is illegal and undemocratic. In pursuance of that
measure, all States should undertake all appropriate
measures to ensure that no act will be preformed by
anybod,y or any institution whatsoever on behalf of
the illegal minority regime in their territories. The
Council should decide that all States Cill, in accordance
with Chapter VII, ‘sever immediately all consular,
economic, military or. any other relations with the
illegal racist minority rCgime. This should include rail,
maritime and air transport and postal, teiegraphic,
radio and any other means of communications. These
measures sliould alsa be applied by the specialized
agencies and United Nations organizations.

22. In his so-called New Year message Ian Smith
gave conclusive evidence that the tempo of economic
development
was increasing-and
I quote from
Rhodesinn
Conz,nentary of January 1970, a publication
which regretfully still finds circulation in the United
States: “Our problem will be to control and maintain
the balance in the surge of expansion which we
anticipate”,
He boasted of a visible trade balance.
While Rhodesia had suffered a deficit: in 1968, the current account of its balance of payments in 1969 was
in surplus. The 1969 gross domestic product showed
a growth of at least 13 per cent to over S,440 million.
The output in the manufacturing sector had made a
significant increase during 1969, while mineral production had achieved
“an even more remarkable
result” -as Smith claimed. In case there are some who
may have thought this was merely a political or propaganda speech on the part of the rebel leader, a recent
statement by Mr. Owens, President of the Association
of Rhodesia Industries, should dispel such misconceptions. He estimated that industrial production would
rise in 1970 by between 11 per cent and 15 per cent,
“basing this figure on the number of new industrial
projects coming on stream, on the level ofcapital investment, on the value of plans passed for industrial buildings and on the level of retail sales. , . the value of
retail sales rose by 13 per cent in the first nine months
of last year compared with the same period of 1968”.
Mr. Owens sees it as follows: “Over-all I believe that
the leading indicators for all sectors of the economy
show that we in industry are justified in taking optimistic views of the prospects in 1970, and,.of course, a
confident
view of the particular
prospects for
industry”,

2.5, We feel that the Security Council should reiterate
its decision to render moral and material assistance
to the national liberation movements of Zimbabwe in
order to enable them to attain their freedom and
independence.
26. It is our firm conviction that the permanent members of the Security Council have a special obligation
to see to it that an end is put to the threat of international
peace and security caused by the existence df that
illegal rCgime in Zimbabwe. This does not in any way
prejudice our firm conviction that the Government of
the United Kingdom has primary responsibility over
the Territory of Southern Rhodesia and to that extent
that Government should apply all means at its disposal,
including the use offorce, to put an end to the rebellion
and thereafter to embark on a deliberately speedy pro;
gramme of granting independence to the people of Zimbabwe.
27. We ourselves are satisfied that, whatever this
Council may try to do, success can be achieved only
if the Governments of Pretoria and Lisbon are made
to comply with the decisions of this Council. Indeed;
it is our considered opinion that those Governments
have held in contempt even those .half measures the
Security Council has been adopting with a view .to
resolving the Southern Rhodesian crisis. Therefore we
appeal to the Security Council to take, appropriate
measures within the context of Chapter VII of the Charter to bring those two Members of this@rganization
into line.

23. All my colleagues who sent me to participate in
this debate are justified’in concluding that the so-called
sanctions policy that this Council has pursued for the
past four years has only been a decoy. Is it not time’
this Council re-examined its so-called biting measures
against Rhodesia with a view to taking measures that
are likely to bring about the desired ‘result in. that
country? The representatives of member States of the
Organization
of African Unity who directed that I,
together with my colleagues from Algeria and Senegal,
should, with the co-operation of the African Group
at the United Nations, raise this matter have a few
specific requests to make to this Council. Before I
enumerate these requests, I should like-to emphasize
that they have done so in the hope and belief cf seeing

28. I ‘am aware that the Council, in its wisdom, will
no doubt wish to take further measures, if it is to escapt:
the condemnation of all mankind, to.see to it that all
its decisions not only are respected but also achieve
the results that should follow from those decisions.
5

said on 4 March 1970 to the Rhodesian Council of
Churches:
“I believe the Church and State in Rhodesia are
fundamentally in total disagreement in principle and
practice. The two sides have reached a point of no
return. The actual clash may be temporarily buffered
by concessiveness on the part of the Church and
permissiveness on the part of the Government. ‘It
is the clear duty of any Council of Christian Churches
to consult together about how the Church should
face such a situation and how it should react to it,
If our nation’s rulers pursue a policy which is at
variance with our belief in God we have no choice
but to resist. It is just not good enough to wring
our hands and say we must accept it and try to live
with it. Justice is more important than law and
order”-1 repeat: justice is more important than law
and order-‘$and
can sometimes be incompatible
with it, Are you going tamely, passively, to accept
a Constitution based on fear and a Land Act based
on racial segregation, and therefore deny Christ? Are
you going to accept this deliberate attempt to silence
Christian truth which therefore denies Christ?”

In this particular case we are dealing with a r6gime
that has been condemned from its inception, a rBgime
that has survived on the strength of the bayonet. It
has imprisoned, detained and restricted hundreds of
thousands of inhabitants whose only fault, if fault it
is, has been their desire to be free and to participate
actively in the affairs of their country; nor has it shown
its ruthlessness only to the indigenous inhabitants of
Zimbabwe; it has, like every despotic regime, treated
liberal-minded
white journalists
with the same
ruthlessness. It has kicked out no fewer than fifty journalists in its attempt to suppress the freedom of the
press. It has refused entry into Rhodesia to no fewer
than 400 applicants every year. Religious missionaries
have been no exception in this smear campaign. In
short, it is a rCgime that has shown every intolerance
to all those opposed to it.
29. Is it surprising that, as we are considering the
situation in Zimbabwe, there are valid reports of an
uprising dating back to January? I say “to January”
only, because while there has always been violent
opposition to the rebel r6gime since 1965, the present
one is more militant and on a national scale. The people
of that country have now taken up arms against the
rebels.

34. My question to the Security Council is a simple
one in relation to the rebel rCgime. To use the words
of Bishop Skelton: Is it good enough just to wring
your hands and say you must accept it and try to live
with it?

30. At this stage, however, I should not fail to express
appreciation of the actions of those Governments that
have already begun to implement some of the proposals
I made in the course of my speech. We are especially
delighted by the fact that a number of countries which
continue to have diplomatic or consular relations with
Rhodesia have, at long last, decided to close their missions in Salisbury. All we can hope is that the few that
still have missions in that country will in the very
immediate future close them as well.

35. I thank you very much, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity of speaking. May I reserve my
right to intervene again whenever appropriate?
36. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council this
month. You have already shown proof of your excellence as President by the tactful and successful way
you carried out the negotiations which have resulted
in this meeting and the one held last week. We wish
you well during your period of office in what promises
to be a busy month. We pledge our co-operation to
you in your difficult task. We congratulate Ambassador
Terence of Burundi and Ambassador Liu of China for
their successful tenures as President in January and
February respectively.

3 1, Members of the Security Council will have heard
Smith’s warning of punitive and pre-emptive action
against Zambia as a result of Zambia’s continued support of the decisions of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity. We take a very serious
view of that threat. I must state in no uncertain terms
that my Government will hold the Government of the
United Kingdom fully responsible for any military
attacks on Zambia by the Rhodesian rebel minority
rBgime, acting either alone or in collusion with the
South Africanforces currently based in Rhodesia, Britain still maintains that Rhodesia is a British colony
and it must therefore be held fully responsible for the
lawlessness of the rebels beyond the borders of their
territory.

37. The representative of Zambia, in asking for an
adjournment
last Friday [153&h meeting] on our
behalf, indicated that the present draft resolution of
the United Kingdom did not sufficiently cover the feelings of ourselves and our African colleagues on this
matter. I should perhaps at the outset say that we have
no differences with the British draft resolution as put
before this Council p/9676/~~~.1). We feel, however,
that if we accept it as such we shall not be working
in the spirit of previous resolutions debated in this
Council,

32. It will be recalled that the merchants of bloodshed
and hate in southern Africa have already conducted
barbaric military raids against the sister republics of
Tanzania, Guinea, Senegal and the Congo (Kinshasa),
and indeed my own country. This Council has already
vigorously condemned those acts of aggression.

38. The declaration of a republic by the rebel leader,
Ian Smith, offers a temptation to certain interests in
‘Britain and to waverers in the international community
to put forward feelers towards recognizing the illegal
rigime. The present British draft resolution may halt

33. ‘For the representatives around this table it might
be appropriate for me to conclude my present intervention by quoting the Anglican Bishop of Matabeleland,
Rhodesia, the Right Reverend Kenneth Skelton, who
6

’

b

this but does not improve the situation which we feel
has deteriorated to a point from which anything, short
of forceful action, would appear
to be condonation.
,

43. That African nations do nqt use doublestandards
in this niaiter is &own by the facbthat, whatever their
indiyidual’&elings
may have been, they tacitly agreed
to thq.mili@ry end of a secession in Nigqia, and Britain
39. The question of non-recognition of the Republic
’ asdisted legally in this by ‘the supply of arms. The
is one which must be dealt with firmly and‘ ‘with
United Kingdom in actipg promptly would be using
expedition.
The Security Council, in its resolution 217
juc$cjz+l force to. h,tilt and correct a&@ipn
in yhich
(1965) of 20 November 1965, called upon all Stat?<
for@ has.,a!F.a,dy b<eepused by the other.ade, murdernot to recognize Rhodesianor,to
ente,@ain any diplopa- : ,QUS~xf&loris ‘&arrled but.in March 1968’by them and
tic
relations with it. We’ note wi& p&Jr+
tbat the . _* treasbn &ompitied al& bj; Jai Smith apd his colleagues
United States, Italy, Norway, France asd ,,;a@$$$. , in :‘1?65;; ‘.Nb. &$ish judge”@ ’ our k’n,c$ecige has
to news reports this morning, the Netheflpdds ‘have’ “,‘h&tated to &yiet,&d*sentence
g guil,ty prison&r who
all withdrawn their consulates from Southern Rhodesia
happens to be,British on the;gi’ounds that- they both
atid therefore still recognize’ it a’s a B,ritish F$sessib;;. 1’ belong ‘to, the, satie race atid. nation. Thus we fail to
President
Nixon a few weeks ago stated that there
‘8se2 how the questi’bn,of,kith aqd kiti cafi halt a judicial’
was no question of the United States condonipi’or’
*”.,prqcess, or diminish in evident rksponsibility! A handacquiescing
in the racial pol&s
of white-ruled
fu+of&itish citizens in’ Soythern Rhodesia, combrising
regimes. He has fulfill&d his pledge in this instance,
one half of one percent of the total population of Great
and we hope that this has initiated a new era Qf positive
Britain, have held their nation to moral ransom in the
action and firm opposition by the United States tbwards.
world and,ha+e subjected it to a decade of cqnfusion
I and laMentable compromise. ‘The economic benefits
racial despotism in Africa.
ib”Britain from Rbbde$$ ye less than,.that accruing
40.
My delegation recognizes t,hat’alJhougb the;sancfrom blaizk A&i&n n+ons. which, without any claim
tions c@led for by Securitj; CounciI ‘resdlutioti. 253
to blood r&la;$nship, have voluntarily remained.within
(1968) have had a limited kffect, thev have still failed ’ ‘. tli$ &bit, oq the sterling area and the Commonwealth.
I’
.
”
to bring down the Salisbury rCgime.he recogfiize thq
‘?
sacrifices
of many countries like Zambisi, B&i&a
i4.’ .We wb’ul&‘&o&gly L&e &&in to reconsider its
and Britain iq this particular aspect of the m.attei. Yet
position in this matter, particultrly as’it is quite eyident
the connivance of South Africa and Portugal @s under,fhat it is so much out of $ep’wlth,many other nations.
,‘.
“, ,
::
mined the effectiveness of sanctions; The ‘SecurSty
Council San&ions Committee, w&h has still. ‘to meet
4.5: ’ “Military considerations cafinot bold l&k a nation
this year, had this to say in its becond report of 12
wliich.. has iemined uiico.nqu&edlfor bver a century
June 1969 about their behaviour:
,, , frai;i disciplining a ,s,mall minority, amounting to less
thati. a~Gondon subvrb in Size,*which has refused to
“On the basis of all the facts at its’disposai
obey the laws of comeon decency ,and international
South Africa and Portugal , ‘. , ‘have contim&
id
democratic behhviour.’
maintain close economic, trade and other relations
with the illegal regime and to permit tbe~free flow.
46. The United States has’ shown repeatedly in the
of goods from Southern Rhodesia through the terpast decade that white mkn with strong feelings from
ritories of South Africa and the ‘colony of Mozamits southem’areas, at the commatid of their Governbique and their ports and transport facilitiis.”
ment,’ can use force .to cqntrol ofher white men and
[S/92.52, para. 45.1
:
‘.
wdmen from preventing black people from enjoying
th&ir iights. The British armed forces ds not lack equal
41.
If these two countries have openly atid’ biatantli
disciplinb and have a longer traditidn in this matter
refused to obey the wishes of this Council, there seems
because of their longer history in protecting oppressed
to be no alternative but to impose sanctions bn them
grqups. It is better for a controlled fbrce to handle
too, if need be by -force, to bring to an knd their open
an expld&e situation than tb. leave it to uprisings and
defiance of the decision of the Couficil. This \Il.e wbuld
guerrilla warfare, .uihich would in the end .cause far
strongly urge under Articles 41 and 42 of Chapter VII
more bloodshed and disruption. Lord Alport, a British
of the Charter since on a number of occasions-in its
politician of ‘strong conservative views who has been
resolutions
217 (1965) of 20 November 1%5,23? (1966)
connected with Rhddedian affairs for almost twentyof 16 December
1966 and 253 (1968)> of 29 May
years and who was High Commi$sioner to the ill-fated
1968-this
Council has recognized that the situation
Federation there for a few years, is reported to hay:,
in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat, tQ &tern’apredicted that Africans may be able to achieve therr
tional peace and security.
.
.
legitimate,expectations
there only as a result of a resort
to force. If this is done its abrasive after-effects
42.
Feelings of hesitancy in using force to bring about
between the races will be long-lasting and unhappy.
changes iti southern Africa are understandable. The
This can still be avoided if bo& Britain and the United
requests by many countries that this should be done
Nations a,ct forcefully and promptly.
by the United Kingdom to end the rebellion in Rhodesia
47. It has been reported that Ian Smith, head of the
are made not because of any bloodthirsty feelings on
our part, but simply because we feel that a more realisillegal rkgime, has scornfully referred to Africans as
tic and objective appraisal of the situation leaves no
“savages walking aro@d in skins sixty years ago”
other alternative. Even the intention to- take’forceful
and has‘ said that at present they still have a long way
action or preparation towards it would speedily lead
to go. He has not denied or withdrawn that remark.
to more compliancy from the rebels.
It is unfortunate that he should bring up the question

.

50. The views of my delegation are well expressed
in the consensus adopted by the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples which, at its 726th
meeting on 9 March 1970, stated:
“1. The Special Committee strongly condemns
the purported assumption of republican status and
other illegal acts by the racist &minority rkgime in
Southern Rhodesia. While the Special Committee
has no doubt whatsoever about the illegality of these
acts, it is gravely concerned at the extraordinarily
far-reaching and arbitrary powers which the regime
has now arrogated to itself to intensify the oppression
of the African majority by the racist minority,
“2. Noting that the recent’developments have led
to a further worsening of the situation in southern
Africa, constituting a dangerous threat to international peace and security, the Special Committee
calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom,
the administering
Power, to take all necessary
measures to put an end to that rBgime and to restore
to the people of Zimbabwe their right to selfdetermination and independence. The Special Committee also calls on all States to co-operate in bringing
the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia to an end by complying fully with the relevant resolutions of the
Security
Council and the General Assembly.
Furthermore, having regard to the latest developments, the Special Committee requests all States not
to extend recognition to or to entertain diplomatic
or other relations with the illegal rhgime and to refrain
from any actiqn which would assist or encourage
that r6gime.
“3 + In view of the fLIrther aggravation of the situation which has previously been determined by the
Security Council to be a threat to international peace
and security, it is the feeling of the Special Committee that the Security Council should urgently consider taking further appropriate measures under the
Charter to bring the rebellion to an end and to ensure
the full implementation
of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.” [See S/9686.]

of antecedents in this way, since it is more civiliied
to praise men for-their rapid advance than to stress
the lowliness of their origins. My delegation wishes
to make two points on this matter since world opinion
may begin to believe that the white SouthernRhodesian
is the only group fit to govern in that country.
48.

Less than a century ago the ancestors of mal?y
white Rhodesians were semi-literate
agricultural peasants in Europe and elsewhere, seminaked coal miners and semi-civilized products of the
‘Industrial Revolution. We congratulate their decendanfs, without any sarcasm, for the affluent position
in which they now ‘find themselves on the generous
surface of the African continent, Some of them worked
hard towards it. Let it be noted, however, that they
are not generally recognized as bCing the defenders
of civilization that they imagine and describe themselves to’be. We pay a tribute to those of the white
population in that country who have shown an outstandingly liberal and cultured outlook. We must note, however, that a distinguished contemporary, white British
observer who has lived in Southern Rhodesia has
described the majority of the white population there
as being enslaved by its history, bound by traditional
attitudes, and blinded by one of the most powerful
of all human lights: the gleam of alarge, steady income.
Professor Thomas Creighton further described Southern Rhodesia as having been insulated from the political
and ethical results of two world wars, though they
have served to stimulate the Rhodesian economy.
Rhodesia has managed to avoid contact with the liberal
and progressive thought of European countries for half
a century. He continues:

present-day

.“A fac;ade composed of all the material appurtenances of the’ twentieth century conceals antediluviarl attitudes and beliefs which appear fragrantly
picturesque or pathetically parochial and complacent, according to your viewpoint. It helps to explain
how illiberality
and emotional thick-headedness
have become hallowed national attitudes in Southern
Rhodesia.”
He continues:
“We have swum, in Rhodesia, into a backwater
of the mainstream of social evolution, where a small
shoal of fish has been growing in isolation.“’

I

51. My delegation, in conclusion, believes that only
firm, swift and forceful action by all concerned can
bring about conditions in southern Africa where peace,
democracy and stability can be built on lasting fdundations.

49. The second point I should like to niake concerns
Africans in Southern,Rhodesia. From my own personal
knowledge of that country, I have seen that it is perfectly possible for black and white to live together in
harmony and equality and to work towards noble ideals
and worth-while goals in the atmosphere of the university and some of the churches, I have also observed,
amongst black citizens of Zimbabwe, men and women,
many individuals who in other countries to the north,
with larger populations
and greater wealth than,
Rhodesia, could quite easily and adequately function
as distinguished cabinet ministers, ambassadors and
leaders.

52, The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Spanish):
Speaking on my own behalf, I wish to thank the representative of Sierra Leone for his words of welcome
and the congratulations that he extended to me for
having co-ordinated these two meetings. I also thank
him for his offer of co-operation during the rest of
the month of March. May I say to him that any success
I may have had is due to the co-operation of all the
members of the Security Council?

’ T. R. M. Creighton, The Awtomy
Faber and Faber, 19601, p. 31.

53. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Algeria on whom I now call.

of Partnership

(London,

8

54, Mr.
HARBI
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all on behalf of my
delegation I should like to convey to you my warm
congratulations on your acceding to the important functions of President of the Security Council for the month
of March and to thank you and all the members of
the Council for having been good enough to allow US
to participate in your deliberations on the important
question of Southern Rhodesia.

its true context and to deal only with its marginal
aspects. To attempt in this way to emphasize the details
to the detriment of the over-all picture is in truth tantamount to evading responsibility; this is really the
crux of the issue.
62.

At the risk of repeating ourselves we should like
reaffirm that the United Kingdom bears the primary
responsibility for the fate and future of 4 million Africans and that its passive attitude has made possible
the introduction of apartheid. Great Britain’s refusal
to assume its responsibilities-that
is to say, to accept
the logical and inevitable advancement of the Zimbabwe people-has already led to an explosion which
will gradually engulf all of southern Africa.
to

55. My delegatiop is particularly grateful to you
because, like the other African delegations that have
participated
in this debate, we consider’it necessary
to examine the question of Rhodesia in detail.
56. In addition, before expressing my delegation’s
preliminary
views, I should also like to congratulate
your predecessor in the post of President, Ambassador
Terence
of Burundi, for his enlightened and wise
action.

63. Today we can hardly expect the United Kingdom
to use the only means likely to create democratic conditions for the exercise of the right of self-determination
by the people of Zimbabwe-and
I refer to the use
of force.

57. The proclamation of an alleged republic by the
Rhodesian racists is not of importance in itself. It is
the outcome of the logical evolution of Mr. Smith’s
policies, a supplementary stage towards the consolidation of apartheid.

64. In a statement published recently in Algiers, the
representatives of the Zimbabwe African People’s
Union (ZAPU) stated:
“ZAPU has never expected or hoped that Great
Britain would have recourse to force to overthrow
the Smith rkgime following upon the unilateral declaration of independence in 1965 by the white minority.
Our people and our party have understood that the
instigator of these reactionary political positions was
none other than the British ruling circle, the
economic interests of which can be preserved only
by the imposition of a fascist-colonial rCgime in
Rhodesia.”

58. The news of that proclamation, therefore, could
not come as a surprise which would justify the calculated haste of the administering Power not to act
effectively, but simply to add one more condemnation
which, when all is said and done, is both illusory and
ineffective, to the already lengthy list of condemnations
adopted in the past by the Security Council and by
various other organs of the United Nations as well.
To tell the list of these condemnations like the beads
of a rosary may prove a source of moral satisfaction
both for the administering Power and for the United
Nations,
but it serves only to delay the true solution
of the problem.

65. That statement shows clearly that according to
imperialist strategy Rhodesia is to play the role of a
protective bulwark for non-African interests, not only
in Rhodesia but, above all, in South Africa, and that
that self-same device is designed, inter’ alia, to hold
back the tide of Africa’s legitimate aspirations.

59. Obviously such an attitude will change nothing
with respect to the fate of the Zimbabwe people, and
it is ill advised on the part of the administering Power
to link the urgency of convening the Security Council
into session solely to the issue of the unilateral proclamation of an alleged republic, In this case what is urgent
is the application of methods likely to put an end to
the extension and consolidation of apartheid, to the
domination
of the majority by the minority, in a country
which because of its peculiar distinguishing characteristics and its civilization has never ceased to be an
African country.

66. It is high time, for that matter, that Africa should
question itself seriously about the behaviour of certain
countries which offer Africa lavish messages of
brotherhood and friendship and, at the same time, continue to arm and fortify Africa’s adversary.
67. The situation in Rhodesia has reached the point
of no return and from this. point onward any solution
which rules out .recourse to force no ,longer seems
viable. The Security Council, in recognizing that the.
situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a serious
-threat to international peace and security, has pro- ,
claimed certain measures designed to overthrow the
Smith riigime. However, experience has shown that
these measures are ,as futile as they are ridiculous,
and the results expected quickly vanished as soon as
they came into contact with reality, Mr. Smith’s rbgime
is not only liolding its head up, but it is increasing
in arrogance, The racist press does not conceal its
satisfaction at the failure of the sanctions. That is why
a fresh review of the Rhodesian problem as a whole

60. It is this sense of urgency which is reflected in
document S/9682, in which the African countries call
upon the Security Council in the light of its responsibilities to take all necessary steps to safeguard the
inalienable
rights of the people of Zimbabwe to
independence and self-determination.
61. If it is useless now to ask ourselves what is the
meaning of the British initiative, on the other. hand
we cannot fail to express our concern about the way
attempts have been made to isolate the problem from
9

-.--

.

to take an energetic stand free from any element
wait-and-see.

Seem~ indispensable, on the one hand to determine
the reasons for the failure of the policy of sanctions
and, in addition, to adopt the new measures required
in view of the dangerous evolution of the situation
in Rhodesia.

of

74. Pending an action that has been too long in coming
on the part of the Security Council because of the
systematic hostility of certain Powers to the cause of
the freedom of peoples, the only forces that are acting
to make the principles of the Charter an internat-ional
reality are the peoples themselves, and the people of
Zimbabwe have already thrown themselves into that
inspiring undertaking.

68, If the policy of sanctions has produced results
that have been highly disappointing and even contrary
to those that were sought, it is because Southern
Rhodesia has benefited in large measure from sources
of supply and marketing outlets offered by its allies,
South Africa and Portugal, through Mozambique.
Unless sanctions are extended to the allies of Rhodesia,
and unless we bar all the doors to Rhodesia, as well
as South Africa and Portugal, there is no likelihood
of seeing that racist regime toppled in the near future.

75. The hard lesson taught us by colonialism is that
peoples which do not fight with weapons in their bands
are entitled only to humiliation
and contempt. The
people of Zimbabwe, like other peoples, will know
how to fight the violence that oppresses them with
the violence that will free them. They have already
experienced house searches, concentration camps and
the so-called crimes of attempted escape, but they Will
succeed in finding inexhaustible resources in the Will
of the people, so rich in possibilities for the defence
of a just cause. Their resistance will gain strength and
grow on the battlefields where liberty and dignity are
won and will enable them to achieve a genuine national
life.

69. Such a likelihood was already envisaged by the
Security Council, but it was opposed by States which
have a considerable volume of economic ties with’
South Africa and Portugal. This evaluation of the situation should, in our opinion, lead the Security Council
to put the problem in clearer terms.
70. In taking up the Rhodesian question the Security
Council has recognized that it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. It is in that spirit that
it has enacted a whole series of measures designed
to bring down the Smith regime-measures which,
however, in the light of experience, have produced
insignificant results.

76. On our part, we are convinced that the majority
of States Members of the United Nations, by recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle of the Zimbabwe
people and by committing themselves to render ail
necessary assistance in that struggle, is acting in
accordance with the spirit of the Charter of our
Organization.

71. Today, the African countries have come to this
distinguished Council to ask it to undertake action
likely to guarantee the security and stability of their
continent.

77. Today it is for the United Nations and, in particular, for the Security Council to overcome the difficulties it has encountered hitherto in shouldering its
responsibilities. It will thus be restoring the meaning
of the Charter which was conceived at the outset as
an instrument for peace among nations. The time for
disquisitions is past. The time for action has come,
and we invite the Council to act now,

72. The temporary success of aggression in certain
parts of the world, and the lack of any international
sanctions, may well encourage imperialism and reactionary racism to act in various ways against African
countries, and primarily against the neighbours of
occupied Rhodesia. That is possible, it is also feasible.
The techniques of provocation have already been perfected. It cannot be ruled out that the South African
and Rhodesian racists may charge that a frontier incident has been committed which would res,ult in a Hghtning invasion of a country like Zambia by their armed
bands-which they would then accuse of having
allowed liberation forces to be stationed in its territory,
This state of affairs makes it urgent for the Security
Council to take all necessary measures that are called
for‘to forestall that imminent danger.

78. The PRESIDENT (interpretntionfrom
I wish personally to thank the representative
for his words of congratulation.

,~‘panish):
of Algeria

79. Mr. RERARD (France) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I should like to add my congratulations to those already extended to you by my
colleagues, who have said how glad we are to see you
occupying thePresidency of this Council for the month
of March. MY colleagues and I are all greatly flattered
that a former Director of Public Education, a former
Minister of Finance, a former Minister of Development
has been appointed by his country to represent it here
in the Security Council. We have no doubt that YOU
will Prove equal to the responsibilities
entrusted to
You and we are indeed happy to work under your
guidance.

73. Having regard to the passive attitude of. the
administering Power, which still bears primary responsibility for the situation in Rhodesia, the Council is
duty bound, as we see it, to take broader and more
energetic measures in accordance with the Charter and
with the resolutions of the General Assembly. It is
uP to the Security Council to.put them into effect without weakness, without hesitation, and by bringing to
bear the full weight of its authority. The a&&&ring
Power, for its part, is duty bound to measure the extent
of the damage it is causing to 4 million Africans and

80* With regard to the agenda item before us, I shall
as usual be brief.‘1 merely wish to say in a few words
what the position of my Government is,
10

81. The decision which prompted the meeting of the
Security Council constitutes the last phase of a process
that has been going on for many years now, perhaps
ever since the election of 1962 and, in any event, since
the unilateral
declaration of 11 November
196.5.
Foreshadowed by a referendum the evils of which were
denounced in this very chamber less than eight months
ago, that decision consolidates the settler revolt against
the authority of the United Kingdom, the administering
Power. Furthermore, the constitution which it purports
to put into effect institutes a rCgime of racial discrimination which, by their own admission, it is the intention
of its architects to place on a permanent footing in
Rhodesia,

this objective or that might compromise the usefulness
of our discussions. It is in that spirit that my delegation
will vote on the draft resolutions to be submitted to US.
89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to thank the representative of France for his
very kind words.
90. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not
wish unduly to delay the Council, but I would wish
to say a few words at this stage before we adjourn
our meeting today.
91. I should like to recall that when I spoke on this
subject last, I finished by saying that I was confident
“that there is no member of this Council that does
not agree that it is right that a call should go to the
whole world that the illegal rkgime and the illegal
Republic should be recognized by no one” [153Oth

82. As if to leave no doubt as-to the philosophy that
inspires them, the rebel leaders have, furthermore, not
hesitated to accompany their proclamation by public
statements shocking and unacceptable to the majority
of the Rhodesian population.

meetirzg, para. 65).

83. A few months earlier, in similarly inadmissible
circumstances,
they divided the arable lands of the
country
into two allegedly equal parts, the first
reserved for a few tens of thousands of settlers, the
second assigned to over four million indigenous inhabitants.

92. In the recollection of having said that at our last
meeting, I should like, if I may, very respectfully to
thank the Ambassador of FranCe for the speech which
he has made to us this afternoon. As usual, he sets
an example to us not only in eloquence but also in
clarity and persuasiveness. I thank him for the manner
of his speech and also for the substance which he has
communicated to us today.

84. By notifying the Security Council on the day following the proclamation of the so-called republic, and
by immediately
submitting a draft resolution, the
United Kingdom indicated its determination to carry
out its responsibilities and to secure international support with regard to a situation whose consequences
we may all ponder. That draft is acceptable to us.

93. Events that have taken place since we last met
have justified the judgement which I made at our last
meeting, and my discussions with members of this
Council have shown that I was right in stating our
unanimity in that conviction. It- has been confirmed
by every speaker here today that recognition should
be refused to the illegai rCgime. I wish to express the
gratitude of my Government to those Governments
which have now taken positive and final action in giving
effect to the conviction which I am sure we all fully
share. Their action at this time has been of the utmost
value and far-reaching significance. This is the practical
action bn recognition and representation which we now
welcome and which we believe, as I argued last week,
is essential at this time.

85. In likewise requesting a meeting of the Council,
thirty-eight
African countries, for their part, indicated
that while the proclamation of 2 March was assuredly
a challenge to the authority of the Organization as a
whole, the Africans regarded the acts committed over
the past four years in Salisbury as a direct affront to
their dignity.
86. Although
France doubts that sanctions can
remedy
the situation, it is sincerely applying the
measures decided upon by the Council and, until its
recent suspension, participated actively in the work
of the Sanctions Committee. This very day I have been
authorized
by my Government-and
I welcome that
authorization-to
inform the Security Council of, its
decision to close the consulate general of France in
Salisbury, As a matter of fact, there has been no consul
general there for several years now.

94, I have never said that the matter before us is
solely a question of recognition. That has not been
the case I have made. In particular we do not retract
from any of the decisions which we have previously
taken together in this Council. They should be fully
and energetically carried out. I would also say that
my mind goes back to the work we did together, particularly in May 1968, when, over many weeks, we
examined every possible step, every possible measure
which could be undertaken, wqrking together as we
should in full consultation, frankness and understanding. We examined every possible step, every possible measure and we incorporated in a comprehensive
resolution [253 (1968)] the results of our deliberations.
I do not say that all of us were in full agreement, but
it was one of the most constructive .efforts in joint
action in this Council that I can recall.

87. My delegation, furthermore, will associate itself
with all efforts made here to condemn the proclamation
of a so-called republic in Rhodesia, to prevent any
recognition
of it, and to contribute to the restoration
of legal authority in the rebel colony, in view of the
unanimous indignation aroused by the conduct of the
Salisbury leaders.
88. It is however obvious that my delegation would
be unable to give its support to a text that failed in
11

” * We then endeavoured
to include in that resolution
Of MnY 1g68 every possible step which we could justify
On the test of effectiveness.
That was the test that
we applied
at that time; but what I maintained in our
meeting last week, and I repeat now, is that the illegal
regime badlY
wants recognition
and that our duty is
to refuse it. Wh a t ever else we do or say, our obligation
in this limited
but vital respect is clear. It is not in
dispute between
US. In this issue we are united and
the contention
1 have made is that it is well that we
should always seek to advance step by step on common
ground of agreement.

ment’s policy over the same Territory that is being
discussed this afternoon by this august body. Lord
Caradon is the man who appealed to us Africans to
be calm, to be patient--not to rush into precipitate
action, but to trust Her Majesty’s Government and
to wait and see. We were even told on one occasion
that the sanctions were biting and that the Smith regime
in Southern Rhodesia was going to fall in a matter
of weeks rather than months.
101. I have no doubt that the Afro-Asian Prime Ministers and Presidents and, I am sure, many world leaders
believed every word Prime Minister Wilson uttered.
I can also claim here and now that almost all Council
members believed that Lord Caradon, in pleading for
patience, for understanding and for calm in this
Council, meant every word he said.

96. I shall be ready, of course, to examine, as we
did in Previous
years, every aspect of this matter in
consultation
with other members of this Council-as
I should always
be under an obligation to do. I have
certdnlY not argued
that the step I advocated was the
only Or the last step. What I maintained and what I
still maintain
is that it is an urgent step, a sound step,
an agreed step and an essential step. I am sure that
we should not hesitate
to take it.

102. We heard those appeals in 1965, at the time of
the unilateral declaration of independence. The same
platitudes and appeals were repeated in 1966; they were
repeated in 1967; they were repeated in 1968 and in
1969. Now, regrettably, we have entered the 1970s
and, despite the United Kingdom claim that its sanctions would work if given time, not only is the rebellion
in Southern Rhodesia home and dry, but Smith’s
economy is booming and last year enjoyed an unusual
prosperity, culminating,
as I stated earlier in my
speech, in a favourable balance of trade. Smith’s
rCgime is now much more entrenched than it was in
1965. This means that the United Kingdom position
has been disproved and that the fears of the African
people have been proved right, beyond any shadow
of doubt.

(Zambia): I think that before I exer97, Mr. NKAMA
cise the right
of reply of my delegation I should
apoligize for asking
for this opportunity to reply to
some of the comments
which Lord &radon has just
made. I knew
that when, moments ago, 1 called cm
Her Majesty’s
Government
to take more vigorous
action in order
to overthrow
the Smith regime in
Rhodesia, I would be entertained with the usual declarations of Her Majesty’s
representative here.
98. At least one thing is certain, and that is that both
we Africans
and the administering
Power, the United
Kingdom,
accept
without
exception that the Smith
r6gime is illegal
and that it is an imposition on the
people of Zimbabwe
that cannot be tolerated by the
international
community.
Time and again when we
come here and make our suggestions and proposals
on how we think
the rebels ought to be dealt with
so as to end the unpalatable
situation in that Territory,
we are told here in the Security Council: “Oh, yes,
we understand
the sentiments
of the African people,
but we should
not take. hasty action whose cons,equenccs we cannot
foresee or control later”; of: “Her
Majesty's
Government
is equally determined to crush
the rebellion”
by the use of what Her Majesty’s repand peaceful
refers
to as “gradual
resen tative
methods”.

103. Perhaps 1970 is not a year for mud-slinging and
recrimination; I think this was noticeable in the speech
I just made a few minutes ago. Nineteen seventy must
not be a year of politics; it must not be a year of mudslinging or recrimination.
104. The point is this. Since the United Kingdom
and the Africans claim to be pursuing the same objettives and the same principles in Rhodesia, is it not
time to get down to business seriously? If the United
Kingdom and the African people in independent
Africa-and, indeed, in Zimbabwe itself-are pursuing
similar principles, similti purposes, similar objectives,
I ask: “Is it not time for the British and the Africans
to sit down and. discuss seriously the future of
Zimbabwe?” In my opinion, such an approach is in
the interest of both the United Kingdom and the Africans.

gg, If mY memory
serves me right-and
I am sure
it does-Her
Majesty’s
permanent represe.ntative was
unequivocal
in his attempts some time back to convince
Africa that it was qecessary for the SeCUritY COUnd
to try to implement
economic
sanctions, as proposed
by Her Majesty's
Government,
and avoid a Precipitate
courSe of action
because
that would discredit the
United Nations
and, indeed, the international
cornmunity.

105. Is it true that both the United Kingdom and the
Africans want the rebellion in Rhodesia removed? Is
it true that both the United Kingdom and the Africans
want the rebellion in Zimbabwe to go? If the answer
is yes-and we hope, even at this late hour, that the
answer is yes-why do we not try a more efficacious
method df dealing with Smith’s high treason? Why can
we not adopt more effective measures to ensure that
Smith’s rebellion is terminated, here and now?

10~. Those are the phrases that emanated from none
other than the permanent
repreSentatiVe of the United
Kingdom,
who ,at one ttme, I am ye allaof US Will
recall, resigned
his post iti prbtest agamst his Govern-

106. We have tried economic sanctions, and no one
can deny that they have.failed, and failed dismally.
12

I do not think that the Council would require a better
demonstration
of Smith’s growing c.onfidence and
intransigence than the flagrant declaration of a bogus
republic, let alone Smith’s frequent outbursts saying
that a black regime in Southern Rhodesia was inconceivable in his lifetime.

areas realize that the British are not impressed by the
language of reason. They are not impressed by eloquent
arguments. It is only the language of violence that they
will understand and appreciate. The Organization of
African Unity shudders to imagine what will happen
when that time comes. All this will take place because
consecutive British Governments have abdicated their
responsibilities in that strife-torn region.

107. The sixties saw the United Kingdom appealing
for reason and understanding amongst the Africans.
We the Africans ask: Is it not time, in the 197Os, for
us Africans-has
our turn not come-to appeal to the
British Government for an honest reappraisal of its
policy towards Smith and his henchmen? What language must we speak? How many conferences must
we hold before we can impress upon the British
Government
the intolerable sufferings and hardships
the indigenous population in Zimbabwe has been and
is still enduring? How many times?

111. At this stage a major question arises. If Britain
is refusing to honour its life-long obligations towards
the 5 million African people of Zimbabwe, not to speak
of millions upon millions in South Africa, Angola,
Mozambique and Namibia, do independent African
States have cause to take seriously Britain’s professed
friendship for them? Can we seriously believe it when
Britain says it is friendly towards us independent African States? There is an appropriate and wise saying
in one of mankind’s oldest and richest languages, It
is in Arabic and it is as follows: “If the enemy takes
your brother to lunch, he will surely take you to
dinner.” If the British Government persistently and
deliberately refuses to resort to the only alternative
open to it, that is, the use of force, after we have
tried the alternatives open to us initially, which were
negotiation and sanctions, what conclusion must we
independent African States draw? What must those
who support and understand our cause say? Must we
continue to rely on the sincerity and honesty of British
policy in southern Africa in spite of Britain’s vacillating
and double-dealing there? What has suddenly happened to the teeth of the British lion? The lion devoured
those who dared to acclaim principles of equality,
brotherhood, justice and democracy in India, in
Cyprus, in Kenya, in the Sudan, in Ghana, in Zambia
and in many other areas all over the world. The British
lion devoured you if you proclaimed the principles of
equality, of justice, of brotherhood, of democracy.
Most recently, a glaring example was Anguilla. Those
people-6,000
black people-tried
to express their
wishes, and what happened? The British lion was there
and put them down.

108. We ask: where is the conscience of the United
Kingdom? Where is the conscience of mankind? I think
we have the right. Have not the innocent and peaceloving people of Zimbabwe shed enough blood to warrant their obtaining their independence and freedom?
Or is Her Majesty’s Government waiting for the creation of another Mau Mau? Is it waiting for the creation
of another National Liberation Front? Is it waiting for
the creation of another National Organization of Cypriot Fighters? Is it waiting for such organizations to
emerge in Southern Rhodesia?
109. We do not know; we want to be told. Unless
the British value only their financial interests and their
kith and kin, who number 200,000, we the African
people cannot understand Britain’s policy of duplicity
and prevarication in Rhodesia; we cannot understand
it. We find it extremely difficult to understand this
policy. If the United Kingdom and the independent
African countries are pursuing the same objectives, the
same goals, why is it that the United Kingdom seems
to be pursuing policies which are diametrically opposed
to what the international community is demanding and
what we, the independent African States, are demanding? I think we understand the situation in Southern
Rhodesia much better. Our brothers in Rhodesia today
are going through exactly what we, the independent
African States represented at this table, have endured
in the past. So we can speak with authority.

112. Let me put this question differently. Supposing
the black leaders of Zimbabwe, Joshua Nkomo and
Ndabaningi Sithole had seized power from Her
Majesty’s Government and arbitrarily disowned the
Crown, would Prime Minister Harold Wilson have still
applied the same arguments which have inhibited him
and his Labour Party from using force against the rebels
in Southern Rhodesia? That is the question, and it
is a pertinent one. Would Prime Minister Wilson have
used the same arguments which prevent him now from
applying force against the rebels in Rhodesia, if
Ndabaningi Sithole or Joshua Nkomo had done exactly
what Smith and his henchmen are doing? I think we
have a right to know, I come:from Zambia, which
borders on Rhodesia. So I am m a position not only
to understand but to appreciate this question much
more, I am sure that a specific question of this nature
requires a very simple and straightforward answer from
Lord Caradon. For our part we can only say that the
performance of the Labour Party since it took office
in 1964 is, to say the very least, a cause for disappointment and deep regret. I shall not be letting the cat

110. There is also a tendency in British Government
circles to think that the patience of the African people
in Rhodesia is limitless and that Smith’s army is so
powerful that the Africans will never awaken to defend
their country and regain their rights. Obviously that
is a dangerous theory because it has been disproved
over the centuries and it is being proved wrong today
all over the world. Looking around the world, we can
see that no amount of fire power-I repeat, no amount
of fire power-can stop people from fighting and making sacrifices for that which is rightly theirs. We know
that the time will come, if it has not already come,
when non-violent
leadership, not only in Southern
Rhodesia but in other Territories still under colonial
domination
in southern Africa, will be replaced. It will
be replaced because the people in those oppressed
13

out of the bag if I say that many African students who
studied in England held the Labour Party, with its purportedly forward-looking socialist principles, in high
esteem and even joined in the belief that if and when
it took over 10 Downing Street it would pursue policies
commensurate with its publicly declared programme
of emancipating the oppressed and underprivileged
of the world. In fact when my colleague here Ambassador Mwaanga and myself were students in England
we used to work for the Labour Party, because we
sincerely believed in its socialist principles. I am sorry
to say we used to work for that party. It would appear
today that those who did not work for the party are
enjoying the fruits of our labours. We were grossly
mistaken in our beliefs. Comparing the Labour Party
with the Tories, one cannot but conclude that the Conservative Party was more forthcoming
and more
realistic. That in part explains why more Asian and
African colonies achieved independence under majority rule during the Tory administration.
The clock was
set back as soon as the Labour Party ascended to
power. I want to be properly understood. I am not
saying that the Conservative Party was not anticolonialist or that it never butchered innocent men,
women and children in the colonies. On the contrary,
it committed many crimes against Asia and Africa,
but at least eventually it admitted its inability to stem
or control the winds of change. It admitted its inability
to control the winds of change which were streaking
across the continent of Africa. Prime Minister Harold
Macmillan was able to admit that publicly.

kept quiet. But what did he do? He gave the green
light to the rebels to proclaim their rebellion, by stating
openly that he would not use force even if Ian Smith
and his henchmen proclaimed UDI in Rhodesia. He
said it. Even before the unilateral declaration of
independance was proclaimed, Mr. Wilson said that
if this was done he was not going to use force. A lot
of Africans have not been able to recover from this.
A lot of Africans-independent
Africans-have
not
recovered from this.
116. Now why did Mr. Wilson do this? Why? We
cannot accept that it was an inadvertent error; we cannot accept that. We cannot accept that it was an inadvertent political error on Mr. Wilson’s part. We find
it impossible to accept that, for two reasons. First,
we know that Mr. Wilson is such a brilliant man. We
know, the world knows, that he is very, very clever.
He could not have made this mistake inadvertently.
That would be absolutely impossible; it is ruled out.
117. There is another reason why we Africans do
not believe that this was an inadvertent error. I want
someone to tell me whether, since that statement was
made, Mr. Wilson has either regretted it or retracted
it. Has he? We have been following different papers
in different languages and we have not come across
this at all. If it was a mistake, has Mr. Wilson retracted
his statement? Again, if that is asking too much, has
he regretted the statement? To the best of our knowledge, no such thing has taken place, which leads to
the conclusion that Mr. Wilson knew what he was
saying, that he knew what he was doing. He wanted
to give the green light to the white rebels in Southern
Rhodesia.

113. In addition, the Conservatives were men enough
to recognize their errors and endeavour to do better.
That is why, when Sir Roy Welensky l the former Prime
Minister of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland,
dared to turn this Confederation into a dominion,
Harold Macmillan, who was the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom at that time, decided without any
equivocation whatsoever to station just a couple of
jet fighters in Kenya. That did it: just a couple of jet
fighters-not
a hundred, not a million, just a couple.
That saved the situation, Roy Welensky relented. He
knew that if he went ahead he was going to face a
lot of trouble.

118. I repeat my question: what would Mr. Wilson
have done if the rebellion had been perpetrated by
Ndabaningi Sithole or Joshua Nkomo? My argument
still stands; I think it is a very logical one. I am not
praising myself, but I think that, logically, it is plain,
119.

It would appear that the people of Zimbabwe
have no choice whatsoever but to fight for their
freedom and independence. This is the conclusion that
we Africans can reach because the United Kingdom
is not prepared to face up to its responsibilities.
Is
it really necessary that innocent men, women and chitdren should die at the hands of a bunch of reckless
buffoons when the British Government has the capacity
and the power to crush the rebellion in Rhodesia? Is
it necessary? Why cannot Britain learn from its t&h
past experience that no amount of higher power, no
amount of force, can forever keep down the people’s
quest for freedom and independence? Why can it not
learn from that rich experience? It has had plenty of
it. Why can it not learn from that? We do not think
this is too much to ask. We want to know.
now

114. Now we ask: why cannot Mr. Wilson do the
same in the case of Southern Rhodesia? Why can he
not? Have the British people changed? Have the old
ones gone and new ones come in? Have they? We
want to be told if this is the case. I am sure that the
same British people who understood Macmillan and
such distinguished anti-colonialists
as Iain Macleod
would appreciate his actions and policies- against
rebels.
115. What is interesting is that Mr. Wilson did not
at least threaten action if Smith seized power. Or are
we asking too much when we say that Mr. Wilson
ought to have just threatened-not
used-force; just
threatened? If that is too much, we would say that
at least Mr. Wilson ought to have kept quiet about
the impending rebellion before 11 November 1965. He
ought to have kept quiet at best-that
is, at best or
at worst, I do not know which. But he ought to have

15%. We would ask Lord Caradon to place himself
in our shoes. If he were black, as I am, what would
he have done about the rebellion in Rhodesia? Would
he have said, “This thing has happened”, folded his
arms and just forgotten about it. “Let it be; it has
taken place; justice does not matter; equality does not
14

r

matter;
human rights,
nothing”? We doubt it.

democracy,

no;

equality,

and singing and our enemies think that we are idiots
and fools. We are not, because we know what we are
doing.

121. It is interesting that, in spite of all the crimes
which consecutive British Governments have perpetrated against the black people and the Asian people,
independent
Asia /and independent Africa hold no
grudge at all against the British people as such. We
hold no grudge at all. I am privileged to state here
and now categorically that we enjoy the best of relations with the British Government and the British
people in spite of all they have done. Is that not enough
to show that the black people in Rhodesia are not
demanding that the white man should be driven into
the sea? They do not even want Smith to be hanged.
They are asking for their rights-equality,
freedom,
democracy. That is all they are asking for. Is that too
much? Is it really?

126. I have already said that before independent Africans and independent Asians obtained their freedom,
the colonial Power, the United Kingdom, called them
all sorts of names. They were called communists, they
were called savages, they were called murderers,
uncivilized, uncouth and all sorts of things. Patiently
the African people tried to explain that they were none
of those things, that they were nationalists, that they
were patriots, that they were men and women of dignity
who did not ask for British blood, that all they wanted
was their human rights.
127. Today, the same British Government realizes
that it made a mistake.in thinking in that way. Why
cannot it extend that realization to Rhodesia? Why?
We ask Lord Caradon to be fair to us Africans. We
are not asking the United Kingdom to give us a piece
of England. All we want the United Kingdom to do
is to assist the oppressed black population of Rhodesia
to regain its independence and its freedom. I think
that the time has come for us to say honestly that
sweet words, sweet platitudes and sweet declarations
are inadequate. We value independence and democracy just as any other nation or race value them. So
what we are asking of the United Kingdom is really
not beyond its capacity and not beyond its means.

122. Smith is now busy perpetrating heinous crimes
against the indigenous population in Zimbabwe and
those who sincerely believe in racial equality, justice
and freedom.
123. Where is the conscience of the United Kingdom?
Where is it? Is it not time that Britain should confess
publicly .the truth? The truth of the matter is that Britain’s interests are better served in those Territories
that have attained independence. Britain knows this.
The same principle applies in Rhodesia and the rest
of southern Africa. Let Britain grant independence to
Rhodesia. Let Britain assist the Zimbabwe people to
attain independence.

128. I thought that since I had been sent here by
the Organization of African Unity all the way from
Africa I should make Africa’s position clear beyond
a reasonable doubt, so that when I leave I shall be
able to report that I have fulfilled my mission. I want
to stress that the African people do.not simply want
to condemn the declaration of a republic status in
Rhbdesia. That is not the crux of the matter, The crux
of the matter is the rebellion. I think that the administering Power is trying to cover up, and that it is the duty
of the Council not to allow the United Kingdom to
do so.

124. We have no doubt that its national interests will
be better served. They are better served now in Tanzania, in Uganda, in Kenya, in Ghana, in Sierra Leone,
in Gambia, in Swaziland, in Botswana, in Zambia and
in countless other countries.
125. What have we done to the British nationals who
reside in our countries? Nothing, except to extend the
hand of friendship to them. We welcome them as our
brothers. We in independent Africa and independent
Asia do not believe that man is judged on the basis
of his skin, on the basis of his pigmentation,
on the
basis of his creed, nor on the basis of his race or place
of origin. To us that does not count. That is why the
Asians and the Africans are always smiling, laughing

129. With those words, Mr. President, I wish to thank
you for allowing me to air the views of tormented and
suffering Africa.
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m.

15

HOW

10

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATlONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Noltanc
publicationr
Ihs world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

moy
bookstore

COMMENT

LLS PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Le* pubtirtlliona
der
dipositaircr
du monde
Nations
Mrs,
Section

from bookrtores
and distributors
lor United
Notions,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

WAAHHR

COMO

PURLICACIONES

OP~AHHSAl#H

in United

Gtions,

New

York

UNIES

Price:

$U.S.

06bEAHHEHHblX

DR LAS NACIONES

tar publicocionec
de lar Nacionm
Unidor
artdn
en todor porter del mundo.
Consulto
a SU-librero
Ventas, Nuava Yolk o Ginebra.

iitho

throughout
New York

Notions
Unles
sod
on vente
dons Ios librairies
et lea ogencel
antier.
Informer-vous
aupria
de votre IibraIrIe
ou adrerrex.vpur
br
der venter,
New ?ork ou Genhve.

KAH llOJY’(HTb

CONSEGUIR

be obtotned
or write.

0.50

(or equivalent

HAUHil

UNlDAS

eri ventb en tibre$os
y r~sas dirlrlbuidoror
o dirijase
01 Nacioner
Unidor,
Secci6n

in other

currencies)

de

82020-June

1973-2,050
