UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/722
25 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 20 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force and my
mission of good offices in Cyprus.
Until 1992, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Cyprus was
resident on the island. Subsequently, it was decided to appoint a non-resident
Special Representative for Cyprus who was to deal specifically with matters
relating to the good offices mission of the Secretary-General and a resident
Deputy Special Representative who also acted as Chief of the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus.
Under this arrangement, since July 1998, Ann Hercus has been serving as
resident Deputy Special Representative and Chief of the United Nations Operation
in Cyprus. From April 1997, Diego Cordovez served as one of my Special Advisers
with the specific task of helping me to promote and facilitate a comprehensive
settlement of the Cyprus problem. On 22 April, I agreed to Mr. Cordovez’s
request to relieve him of his responsibilities with regard to Cyprus.
Since assuming my functions in 1997, I have been considering the advantages
in the longer term, including continuity and greater familiarity with events in
Cyprus, of reverting to the previous practice of having a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General resident on the island. In this connection, following
the usual consultations, I wish to inform the Security Council of my intention
to appoint Ann Hercus as my resident Special Representative and Chief of the
United Nations Operation in Cyprus, with effect from 1 July 1999. Her
appointment will help my mission of good offices and assist me in the event of
comprehensive negotiations with the parties.
I also wish to place on record my warm appreciation for the important
contribution Mr. Cordovez made in the search for a comprehensive settlement of
the Cyprus problem. I am glad to say that he will continue to be available to
me as a Special Adviser, primarily on issues relating to Latin America.
I should be grateful if you would being this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed)
----99-18854 (E)

250699

Kofi A. ANNAN
