asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6891

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6891st meeting
Tuesday, 18 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2012/923)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-65327 (E)

*1265327*

S/PV.6891

Nations country teams, as well as with diplomatic
presences in the subregion. We have also strengthened
our cooperation with the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA) in the framework of our joint
efforts to respond to the common, multidimensional
challenges.

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2012/923)
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/923, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on
areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): It is a signal honour
and privilege for me to appear before the Council to
present the third report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/923) on the situation in Central Africa and the
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA).
As Council members know, my Office was
established in March 2011. Since then, it has played
an ever more significant role in helping the States
of the subregion in their efforts to confront the
challenges they face. As described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, my Office has therefore focused on
political governance, institutional capacity-building,
preventive diplomacy — especially mediation and good
offices — and developing a subregional strategy to fight
terrorism and arms proliferation in Central Africa.
In that regard, allow me to thank my colleagues in
the Policy and Mediation Division of the Department
of Political Affairs and on the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force for their invaluable
contribution to the implementation of several initiatives.
Along the same lines, we have continued to build and
maintain fruitful cooperation with a number of United

2

Moreover, my Office has continued to work in
close cooperation with various stakeholders and
partners — including the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa — in addressing the new threats represented by
piracy at sea and armed or terrorist groups such as the
Mouvement du 23 mars, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and Boko Haram. Indeed, safeguarding peace
and security in our subregion requires us to coordinate
our efforts even better in order to meet these challenges.
(spoke in English)
A critical element for the advent of sustainable
peace and security in Central Africa is subregional
integration. This explains why UNOCA has continued
to work closely with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS)and other subregional
entities, such as the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, as well as the highest political
authorities of the subregion, in the pursuit of that goal.
While the overall peace and security situation
remains stable and significant progress has been
registered in curbing the activities of armed groups and
negative forces, Central Africa continues to experience
some challenges in this domain. Violence perpetrated
by armed groups, including in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and countries affected by the
LRA, as well as a number of other developments
with regional and cross-border consequences, greatly
challenge our efforts to promote sustainable peace and
stability in the sub-region.
However, as the Secretary-General’s report shows,
there is also good news coming out of Central Africa,
particularly on the economic front, as countries
continue to register significant growth rates. We have
also noted the increasing confidence being placed in
the conflict-prevention work of the United Nations,
particularly UNOCA, by regional actors in Central
Africa, including Governments, regional organizations,
political leaders and representatives of civil society.
Our growing interactions with those actors, and above
all their multiple requests for support, show that there
is a growing appreciation that establishing a regional

12-65327

S/PV.6891

political office in Central Africa was both useful and
timely. They increasingly acknowledge that the creation
of UNOCA has filled a preventive-diplomacy gap.
The requests we received during the reporting
period pertain to but are not limited to the following
areas: mediation and facilitation of dialogue between
opposition political parties and those in Government;
support for capacity-building for regional organizations;
mobilization of support and resources from the
international community for actors in the subregion;
and facilitation of workshops, seminars and training.
I would like to inform members of the Security
Council that, during the period under consideration,
political leaders at the highest level in Central Africa
showed strong determination and commitment to
supporting and facilitating the work that UNOCA is
doing. This is the case with our efforts to address the
impact of the activities of the LRA, which the Security
Council, in its presidential statement S/PRST/2011/21,
requested my Office to coordinate.
As requested by the Security Council, UNOCA
is coordinating the implementation of the regional
strategy to address the threat posed by the LRA.
The challenges of doing so are numerous. However,
perhaps the most urgent step revolves around the
need to promptly finalize the LRA programmatic
document and mobilize sufficient resources for its full
implementation. Once the programmatic document is
finalized, my Office, in partnership with the Office of
the African Union Special Envoy for the LRA, plans to
organize a resource mobilization forum early next year
with the aim of raising funds for the most critical areas
of the strategy.
Another example of political commitment
demonstrated at the highest level by regional leaders is
reflected in the ongoing efforts to organize a regional
summit on piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea. It will be recalled that in its resolution 2039
(2012) of 29 February 2012, the Council requested the
two regional offices, UNOWA and UNOCA, to support
efforts towards the convening of a regional summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Gulf of Guinea.
UNOWA and UNOCA have been working closely
with regional organizations, including ECCAS, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, on the preparation of this
summit.

12-65327

As part of those efforts, on 7 December the
Secretary-General of ECCAS delivered a special
message from President Idriss Deby Itno of Chad, in
his capacity as Chair of ECCAS, to President Paul
Biya of Cameroon on the convening of that important
summit. Another example of the collaborative spirit in
the subregion is the chairing by President Denis Sassou
Nguesso of Congo of the celebration, on 7 December in
Brazzaville, of the twentieth anniversary of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.
These are just a few examples of the level of political
engagement and commitment among the political
leadership in the subregion on issues of peace and
security. I am glad to note that such mobilization points
to a renewed sense of community and commitment on
the part of the leaders and organizations in Central
Africa. UNOCA will continue to play its role, as
mandated, to mobilize all stakeholders in the subregion
and help shore up these positive trends.
In spite of the some of the encouraging news coming
out of Central Africa, the report before the Council also
shows that actors in Central Africa, including UNOCA,
continue to face critical challenges that hamper the
effectiveness of our combined efforts. With increasing
and competing priorities in the pursuit of its mandate,
there is a clear disparity between the resources
available to UNOCA and tasks that it is required to
perform. This is all the more so as the expectations of
regional actors regarding the potential role of UNOCA
in addressing some of the peace and security challenges
facing the subregion continue to grow. I have no doubt
that members of the Security Council are aware of this
pressing situation as we endeavour to cope with this
predicament by strenuously trying to do more with less,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.
As we stand on the threshold of a new year, UNOCA
will place a premium on building on and consolidating
the achievements registered during the current year.
This will include redoubling our efforts to accelerate the
operationalization of the regional strategy to address the
threat posed by the LRA through the early finalization
of the relevant programmatic document, the pursuit
of ongoing efforts to organize the regional summit
on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as recommended by
this organ in its resolution 2039 (2012), and enhancing
our capacity-building and institutional strengthening
in support of subregional organizations, particularly
ECCAS. We will also continue to focus our attention on

3

S/PV.6891

the development and finalization of a regional strategy
to fight against terrorism and the proliferation of arms
in Central Africa, pursuant to the Bangui Declaration
adopted by Standing Advisory Committee at its 33rd
ministerial meeting.
I thank the members of the Security Council for
their strong and continued support to UNOCA.
The President: I thank Mr. Moussa for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank Special Representative Moussa for his statement
and for his continued work on the issues under
consideration.
For over 20 years, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) has blighted the heart of Africa. Led by the
odious Joseph Kony, the LRA remains a murderous
band of criminals that preys on civilians, targets women
and children and terrorizes communities across Central
Africa. But an end to that scourge is in sight. The
concerted efforts of the countries affected, the African
Union (AU), the United Nations and other partners
have substantially weakened the LRA. Permanently
eradicating the threat it poses is now within our reach.
But that can be achieved only through sustained focus
and by creating and consolidating security and stability
in the affected countries.
The release of the United Nations regional strategy
on the LRA was a welcome step towards achieving
that aim. The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
already made in putting the strategy into effect.
However, for further progress to be made, we need the
LRA-affected countries, the African Union and the
United Nations political, development, humanitarian
and peacekeeping missions in those countries to deliver
fully on all the pillars of the strategy. In that regard,
the United Kingdom believes that the development of
an implementation plan for the strategy will be the
key to success. Such a plan should outline the priority
actions, articulate key milestones and outcomes and
be fully costed. It should also identify and articulate
underfunded parts of the strategy to the broader donor
community.
The United Kingdom also urges the Governments
of the LRA-affected coutries to renew and strengthen
their collaboration to end the threat posed by the LRA to
thousands of innocent civilians. I encourage the heads

4

of State of those countries, alongside the United Nations
and the African Union, to convene a high-level meeting
to discuss how to implement successfully the African
Union Regional Cooperation Initiative. Furthermore,
the United Kingdom urges the LRA-affected countries
to develop and agree their concept of operations for
the AU Regional Task Force. That will significantly
improve tactical coordination, information-sharing and
joint planning among the relevant militaries.
Alongside the efforts of regional countries,
the United Kingdom believes that the international
community also has a responsibility to support the
region. That is why the United Kingdom is proud to
have pledged recently ₤500,000, over a period of two
years, to a UNICEF programme that will ensure that
the Regional Task Force is trained in best international
practice to improve the care and handling of children.
We urge other members of the international community
likewise to contribute resources.
The United Kingdom commends the increased
cross-border cooperation of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the LRA-affected countries,
in particular the development of region-wide
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration initiatives.
I would now like to comment on the broader role
in the region of the United Nations Office in Central
Africa (UNOCA). UNOCA’s ultimate aim should be to
play a strong and constructive regional coordination
role. The United Kingdom therefore welcomes
UNOCA’s recent efforts to facilitate and encourage
closer regional cooperation in Central Africa.
UNOCA’s work with other regional bodies, such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, has
helped to improve cooperation in areas such as conflict
prevention and governance.
The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
threats to maritime security on Africa’s western
seaboard. We welcome the leadership shown by
the United Nations on this issue. UNOCA has an
important role to play in ensuring that the international
community works together to build maritime capability.
A regional response is essential in order to minimize
the impact on economic development and stability.
Successful maritime policing could bring real benefits
to the region, including through fishing revenues and
increased regional trade.

12-65327

S/PV.6891

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abou Moussa for his briefing.
Most Central African States have maintained
overall stability and achieved economic development.
The regional integration process is proceeding steadily.
China is pleased with those developments.
We take note of the fact that the spillover effect
of the crisis in the Sahel, the re-emergence of conflict
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the lingering threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and the serious problem of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea have had a negative impact
on the security situation in the region. The countries
of the region continue to face many challenges in
achieving lasting peace. China expresses its concern
about that situation.
We support the countries of the region in
strengthening cooperation in order to address the
threats and challenges I have mentioned. We hope
that the international community will continue to pay
attention to the Central African region and, on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty of the countries of the
region, provide concrete to support to countries and
regional organizations.
China strongly condemns the continued movement
and activities of the LRA in various countries. We
are deeply concerned about the humanitarian issues
generated by that. We demand that the LRA immediately
lay down its weapons, halt all hostilities and violence
and disarm.
China appreciates the efforts made by the countries
of the region to combat the LRA. We support the
African Union in its efforts to continue to implement
its Regional Cooperation Initiative. We welcome the
United Nations cooperation with the AU and look
forward to the effective implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy for the LRA.
China calls upon the members of the international
community
to
strengthen
coordination
and
communication in order to vigorously support the
efforts by the countries of the region.
Since its inception, the United Nations Office
in Central Africa (UNOCA) has conscientiously
implemented the mandate of the Security Council
and made positive efforts aimed at the maintenance
of international peace and security. China appreciates

12-65327

that and hopes that UNOCA will continue to effectively
carry out its communication and coordination efforts
and promote synergy among the efforts of the United
Nations system, regional organizations and the
countries in the region, so as to make its contribution
to the achievement of lasting peace and security in the
region.
China will continue to support the work of UNOCA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting to discuss the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office in Central Africa (UNOCA) in
the implementation of its mandate. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abou Moussa for his comprehensive briefing. Our
thanks are also due to him for the report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNOCA and the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) (S/2012/923).
We appreciate the efforts of countries in Central
Africa to overcome the negative effects of decades of
instability and conflict, including through bilateral and
regional cooperation. UNOCA has been effectively
coordinating those efforts and has facilitated a number
of meetings and promoted greater international
attention on the region. We welcome and support those
activities.
We have noted that the region has enjoyed overall
political stability and that successful elections were
held in two countries during the reporting period.
However, socioeconomic trends present a mixed
picture. The region as a whole has a high incidence of
youth unemployment and poverty. Limited progress has
been registered in the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. The region continues to face
serious challenges, such as the proliferation of weapons,
transnational organized crime, illicit drug trafficking
and terrorism. There has been an alarming increase
in incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea. The deteriorating situation in the Sahel
region has also aggravated problems for the Central
African region. Unless they are addressed seriously,
those problems have the potential to derail the gains
made thus far, as well as to threaten peace, security and
stability in the region.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) also continues
to remain active in the region, in particular in the

5

S/PV.6891

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. It is also reported that it has
established bases along the Central African RepublicSouth Sudan border areas.

United Nations to address the challenges facing the
countries of the Central African region, particularly in
the fields of capacity-building and human-resource and
socioeconomic development.

It is in that overall context of the situation in the
region that the activities of the United Nations Office
in Central Africa (UNOCA) take on significance, in
particular in the areas of conflict prevention, early
warning and partnering with countries to achieve their
socioeconomic development goals. UNOCA should
promote regional strategies to comprehensively address
the challenges facing the region. UNOCA should further
strengthen this collaboration with the United Nations
Office in West Africa, the Economic Community of
Central African States and other United Nations offices
and assist the efforts of Governments and regional and
subregional organizations.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish to thank Special Representative Moussa for his
briefing today.

With respect to the LRA, we welcome the steps
taken by UNOCA and the African Union (AU) towards
the implementation of the LRA regional strategy.
We have noted that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Moussa convened a meeting with
national, regional and international partners in July
to develop a joint road map, and that the participants
agreed to convene a general coordination meeting
every six months to assess the progress made in the
implementation of the regional strategy, in particular
the five strategic objectives. We welcome the decision
stating that UNOCA and the AU will organize a joint
resource-mobilization forum to raise additional funds
for the implementation of the strategy.
The focus of the Council should lead to galvanizing
the international community to provide adequate
resources for national and regional endeavours,
particularly in the strengthening of national capacities,
with regard to civilian administration; police and
security forces; security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
socioeconomic development.
Given the fragility of political institutions in
several countries, it is also important for the national
and regional authorities to pay attention to the need
for inclusive political processes, including electoral
reforms. In that connection, it is important that United
Nations missions in the region not be burdened further
without augmentation of their resources.
In conclusion, India stands ready to support and
contribute to the efforts of the African Union and the

6

The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) remains a
vicious and persistent menace to the people of Central
and East Africa. Although its capacity is diminished
and it is on the run, the LRA’s brutal attacks and
abductions continue. We must put an end to this horrific
organization and its atrocities.
The United States commends the Governments of
Uganda, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan for their
steadfast efforts to do so. The United States is taking
action in partnership with the African Union and the
United Nations to provide wide-ranging support to
regional efforts to counter the threat posed by the LRA.
We also support the International Criminal Court cases
against Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen, who must be held accountable.
Despite significant challenges, the region is making
progress. The LRA has been weakened and pushed out
of many areas. Communities at risk are better connected
and sharing information. Defections from the LRA
are rising, and the United States is working with the
region’s Governments, United Nations missions and
non-governmental organizations to encourage more
defections by air-dropping more leaflets, expanding
radio broadcasts and establishing safe reporting sites.
Our collective efforts have made an impact, and yet
the LRA continues to sow fear and victimize populations
across the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. According to
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/923), the LRA
continues to perpetrate attacks in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and has displaced an estimated 443,000 people.
Clearly, more must be done to protect civilians, to
improve the flow of information on LRA activities and
to increase humanitarian access. The United Nations
has a critical role to play in each of those areas.
The United States fully supports the United
Nations comprehensive regional strategy to counter
the LRA. We welcome the efforts made by Special

12-65327

S/PV.6891

Representative of the Secretary-General Moussa and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to implement the United Nations strategy
and urge a continued push for implementation.
As we said in June, the real test of the strategy
is how it translates into action on the ground and
the results it produces. The United Nations strategy
rightly emphasizes the protection of civilians. Both the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan have mandates to
help protect civilians from LRA attacks, which we
encourage them to pursue aggressively, including via
targeted patrols in LRA-affected areas.
Strengthening civilian protection requires affected
communities to become more resilient. Thus the United
States is funding programmes to help LRA-affected
communities develop protection plans and better
communicate with other communities.
Expediting and enhancing the flow of information
about LRA activities is essential to protecting civilians
and hunting down the LRA’s top leaders. The SecretaryGeneral’s report expresses concern about a possible
LRA presence in and around the disputed area of Kafia
Kingi, along the Sudan-South Sudan border. Earlier
this year, the LRA carried out attacks farther west than
ever before, near Bangassou, Central African Republic.
There are credible reports of the LRA poaching
elephants in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
illegally trafficking ivory.
With United Nations leadership, we must together
develop a common operating picture of the LRA’s
positions in the region and target its logistics networks.
The Security Council has directed four United
Nations missions in the LRA-affected regions,
including the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, to share information on the LRA
and cooperate on efforts to combat it. Designating
a focal point in each mission for that purpose would
improve such cooperation and help to facilitate a truly
regional response to this menace.
Finally, we must continue providing for the
humanitarian needs of local populations. We commend
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and its partners for expanding the delivery of
humanitarian aid to LRA-affected communities.

12-65327

But many LRA-affected areas in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are still inaccessible owing to poor infrastructure and
insecurity. Increasing humanitarian access must remain
a priority for all stakeholders. We urge UNOCA to work
with United Nations missions in the region to facilitate
better access by humanitarian actors to vulnerable
populations in remote areas affected by the LRA.
Eliminating the LRA threat in Central Africa
depends on the unwavering resolve of the Governments
in the region, which have the primary responsibility
for protecting their citizens. The African Union can
solidify regional cooperation through its Regional Task
Force. We hope that the United Nations will do all it can
to help the African Union’s initiative succeed.
Countering the LRA is a critical part of UNOCA’s
agenda, but the United States also welcomes UNOCA’s
support for regional coordination and capacity-building
to combat terrorism as well as piracy and maritime
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOCA’s
preventative diplomacy and peacebuilding efforts
contribute to regional stability.
We share the Secretary-General’s concerns
about the challenges faced by women and girls in the
subregion, including female genital mutilation, early
forced marriage, denial of access to education and low
political participation. We urge UNOCA’s continued
attention to those priorities and ongoing efforts to
advance human rights, media freedom and peaceful,
free elections.
Central Africa is beset by problems but filled with
promise, which it cannot realize fully until the LRA is
no more. From the countries of the region to New York
and Addis to the capitals of those sitting around this
table, we share a common interest in bringing about the
demise of the LRA. We all want those whom the LRA
has displaced to return home and the communities it
has plagued to heal.
We seek lasting security and economic development
for the people of Central Africa. We demand that those
who commit atrocities and terrorize innocent civilians
be brought to justice. Those goals are worthy, they are
possible, and the United States will not rest until they
are achieved.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Mr. President, we
would like to thank your delegation for having organized
this discussion today. My delegation wishes to thank

7

S/PV.6891

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing on
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
The political, economic and security situation in
Central Africa continues to improve. During the past
few months, we have witnessed successful and peaceful
elections in certain countries of the region. There have
also been electoral reforms in countries of the region
aimed at ensuring credible and transparent elections.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/923), the concern remains that election-related
violence could be a source of instability in the absence of
transparent legal, participatory and inclusive processes.
South Africa commends the excellent economic
growth rate of over 5 per cent that has been registered
by many countries in the region despite the current
difficult economic and financial climate. That
notwithstanding, efforts must be employed to translate
that growth rate into the alleviation of poverty in
order to benefit the majority of the vulnerable and
marginalized communities.
We remain convinced that economic development
and security are mutually reinforcing, and we therefore
commend the work of UNOCA in supporting States
of the region in strengthening conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and dealing with cross-border threats. The
proliferation of weapons and the spread of transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups continue to pose
a threat to the region’s security. Insecurity in the Sahel
region is of particular concern, because of its impact on
peace and stability and on socioeconomic development
in the Central African region.
The activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army
remain a grave threat to peace, security and stability
in the region, with serious humanitarian consequences.
South Africa is concerned about the devastating effects
of the LRA and its continued activities in a number of
African countries, including the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. The brutality of those activities
continues to haunt thousands of innocent civilians,
including women and children, and has resulted in
the massive displacement of about 443,000 people
and an acute humanitarian crisis. The African Union
has declared the LRA a terrorist organization, and
the Security Council should therefore deal with the
LRA in the same manner. The five strategic areas of

8

intervention in the United Nations Regional Strategy to
Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the
LRA remain critical in the global efforts to combat the
scourge of the LRA. Our energies should be focused on
its full implementation.
South Africa commends the ongoing military
cooperation between the countries affected by LRA
activities in addressing that challenge. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative in convening a meeting with national,
regional and international partners in Entebbe, Uganda,
to develop a joint road map for the implementation of
the Regional Strategy on the LRA in July 2014. That
road map would, inter alia, strengthen the operational
capabilities of the countries affected by the atrocities
of the LRA and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid to affected areas. We also welcome the efforts by
Uganda and South Sudan in contributing a total of
2,500 troops to the African Union Regional Task Force
during September 2012.
In that regard, it is vital for the international
community to support the African Union by mobilizing
international assistance and by providing all necessary
assistance for operationalizing the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA,
particularly in logistical, financial and technical terms,
so as to facilitate the effective functioning of the various
components of the Initiative. It is also necessary to build
the capacity of the armed and security forces of the
affected countries. Inter-mission cooperation among
the various United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the region, such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
would also be a useful tool in the common approach to
addressing the LRA issue.
We reaffirm that military action against the LRA
should be conducted in a manner that minimizes civilian
casualties and should be in compliance with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law. South Africa wishes to
reiterate that those military operations should be part
of a broader strategy that should include the granting
of amnesty, policies for facilitating defections and
reintegration, and the arrest of LRA commanders
indicted by the International Criminal Court. In that
respect, we call on all States to cooperate with Uganda
and the International Criminal Court to effect the arrest
warrants issued against LRA leaders.

12-65327

S/PV.6891

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by UNOCA under the
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abou Moussa. It must be emphasized that for
UNOCA to be able to implement all of its plans and
programmes for the region, it needs to be equipped with
all of the resources it requires.

The international community is at a critical
juncture with regard to the LRA problem. It is critical
that, under the guidance of the United Nations and in
coordination with the African Union (AU) and the LRAaffected countries, efforts be intensified to remove the
threat posed by that armed group and build upon the
institutional progress achieved over the past two years.

My delegation supports the presidential statement
that will be adopted by Council later today.

Portugal affirms its support for the United Nations
Regional Strategy on the LRA and welcomes the current
and future efforts in the five identified areas. In that
regard and with a view to fulfilling the strategic goals
set forth in that document, we encourage the Secretariat
to pursue its ongoing efforts to draw up a prioritized and
sequenced implementation plan to support the Strategy.

Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
you very much, Sir, and the delegation of Morocco
for organizing this timely and necessary debate. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his very
comprehensive briefing.
As was reaffirmed during the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continues to pose a
serious threat to civilians in four affected countries,
in particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, countries where the
LRA continues to perpetrate brutal attacks against
the civil population, causing death and abductions
and spreading fear, which has led, so far, to more than
443,000 displaced people in LRA-affected areas.
Portugal reiterates its strong condemnation of the
continued violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law by the LRA, in particular those
against women and children, including the recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
violence and abductions. We firmly demand that the
LRA cease those practices, release all abductees,
disarm, demobilize and surrender. We also encourage
all States to cooperate in implementing the arrest
warrants of the International Criminal Court against
Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen in
order to bring them to justice.
Portugal commends the efforts that international
and local organizations have been undertaking to
provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population in LRA-affected areas. However, we are
deeply concerned by the fact that LRA attacks continue
to impede humanitarian access to displaced persons
and host communities, and we therefore reaffirm the
need for all parties to promote safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian organizations to the civilian
population.

12-65327

With respect to the first objective of the Strategy,
we welcome the steps already taken by the four
affected countries to operationalize the AU Regional
Cooperation Initiative, especially the Regional Task
Force, which remains instrumental for ending the LRA
threat. In that context, we encourage the Governments
of the affected countries to fulfil their commitments
under the AU Regional Cooperation Initiative and
strengthen their political and technical coordination
under the auspices of the African Union and its Special
Envoy, Francisco Madeira, so as to swiftly agree on a
concept of operations for the Regional Task Force.
While noting that the affected States have
the primary responsibility to protect civilians, we
encourage the various United Nations bodies, especially
the peacekeeping missions concerned, to continue to
enhance coordination in that regard among themselves,
as well as with the other relevant international and
regional actors, in the fields of technical coordination,
information-sharing and joint planning. In parallel,
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration initiatives, including those developed by
the local civil society, must be robustly pursued and
supported by the international community.
Let me now turn to the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), whose work is
of great importance for enhancing United Nations
engagement in efforts to achieve peace and security
in Central Africa, in close coordination with the
relevant regional and subregional organizations and
United Nations bodies, not only regarding the LRA
threat, but also with regard to other crucial challenges,
including security and terrorism, the fight against drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the illicit

9

S/PV.6891

flows of arms and fighters. We deplore the growing
threats to the personal security of some United Nations
personnel in Central Africa, and strongly condemn the
fact that some of them were recently attacked and killed
while carrying out their duties.

the efforts of regional stakeholders, with the support
of the United Nations, to implement resolution 2018
(2012), on maritime security. We also look forward to a
ministerial meeting on the Gulf of Guinea and a heads
of State summit to be held next year.

Let me conclude by referring to UNOCA. We
reiterate our strong support for its innovative efforts,
specifically those addressed to preventing the emergence
of new conflicts, resolving existing ones by peaceful
means and promoting democratic and accountable
governance in the Central Africa subregion.

The high poverty and unemployment rates are also
matters of concern that require redoubled efforts from
the countries in the subregion, with the support and
assistance of the international community, with a view
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Let me briefly refer to the LRA, which is a topic
to which my country attached the utmost importance
during our current mandate on the Security Council.
I would like to underline once again the need for the
Council to remain closely engaged on this issue. In that
regard, we firmly support the adoption of a Security
Council presidential statement on the LRA as soon as
possible. Portugal will continue to spare no effort to
continue to mobilize the international community and
to improve the United Nations response to that scourge.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having organized the present meeting,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas (S/2012/923).

We commend the efforts of UNOCA to contribute to
peace and security in Central Africa, including in such
fields as conflict prevention, governance, mediation
and good offices. In that regard, we stress the particular
importance of the increased cooperation by the Office
with regional and subregional institutions.
Despite the progress achieved in addressing the
threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
that group continues to destabilize the security situation
in the region. We strongly condemn the ongoing brutal
attacks and atrocities committed by the LRA, as well as
its continued violations of international humanitarian
law and abuses of human rights. We support the efforts
aimed at bringing all those responsible for atrocious
crimes to justice.

We take positive note of the progress observed
during the reporting period in Central Africa, especially
the successful and peaceful conduct of elections, the
implementation of electoral reforms, and efforts to
promote economic growth, regional integration and
cooperation.

It is essential that the United Nations and the
African Union continue their collaboration and work
with the respective Governments in addressing the
LRA threat. It is also important that the LRA-affected
countries accelerate their efforts to implement the goals
set out in the United Nations regional strategy on the
LRA, as well as to make further progress towards the
operationalization and implementation of the African
Union Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA.

At the same time, cross-border challenges, the
deteriorating crisis in the Sahel region, the flow of
illegal arms and the activities of criminal and terrorist
groups continue to threaten the security and stability of
the region. It is important that countries in the Central
Africa subregion continue to confront the cross-border
and related security challenges together, as well as to
strengthen partnership and promote peacebuilding
initiatives to that end.

Furthermore, strengthening the response capacities
of the affected countries, addressing the long-term
development needs and providing humanitarian
assistance in the affected areas require constant attention
by the Governments concerned and international donor
support. We also underline the importance of improving
transport and telecommunications infrastructures in
remote areas in order to better respond to the LRA
threat.

Maritime insecurity and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
are further aggravating the security situation and have
a negative impact on the economic development of
the countries concerned. In that regard, we commend

It is also essential to further encourage the
remaining LRA fighters to leave the group’s ranks
and participate in the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration process.

10

12-65327

S/PV.6891

Last but not least, increased coordination and
information-sharing between the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan are an
important prerequisite for better anticipating LRA
movements and threats of attack. Cooperation among
those missions has proven to be relevant and useful, and
we encourage them to further enhance their interaction.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation is grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his presentation
updating us on the most recent developments and for
the recently circulated report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/923).
The presence and action of UNOCA in facilitating
regional and subregional initiatives has undeniably
had a positive impact on the recently held electoral
processes and in preventing conflicts in Central Africa.
The work carried out by the Regional Office is a clear
example of improved regional coordination that takes
into account the major challenges facing the population
and catalyzes initiatives of other regional actors, as well
as of the United Nations itselft, to tackle the principle
challenges to development.
Despite the progress made, we are aware that
new challenges are emerging, especially in terms of
security. That is why we take a positive view of the role
currently being played by UNOCA, jointly with the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in responding to
the insecurity created by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and to youth unemployment. In that regard, we hope
that the recommendations of the joint meeting of the
committee on maritime security of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, held in October, can be implemented,
specifically with regard to the holding of a ministerial
meeting in the month of February next year to address
this topic.
With regard to the threat that the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to pose, we reiterate our
concern regarding the effects of that armed group
and its activities on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and

12-65327

Uganda. Their acts of brutality continue to menace the
lives of innocent civilians, particularly children. We
condemn the atrocities that that group continues to
commit, including kidnappings and the recruitment of
minors for criminal activities, as well as the recent acts
that resulted in the deaths of a number of humanitarian
personnel.
Guatemala condemns in the most emphatic terms
the constant violations of international law and of
international human rights standards committed by the
LRA. The group’s campaign has the potential to trigger
greater instability in the Central African region, as
well as to make it more difficult for countries to move
towards peace and security. It is important to eliminate
the threat of the LRA in order to create and build a safer
and more stable environment in the countries affected.
Our delegation commends the initiatives taken
to implement the United Nations regional strategy to
counter the LRA. Those initiatives are based on the
framework for action provided by the five objectives
established in the strategy, which incorporate priorities
and mechanisms over the medium and long terms to
reduce the threat posed by that group. We request the
authorities of each of the affected countries to support
and cooperate with the strategy, in the interests of the
populations that have endured the scourge of that armed
group for decades.
We call for the execution of the arrest warrants
issued by the International Criminal Court for the three
leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army on charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder,
rape and child recruitment through kidnapping. We call
on all States to cooperate with the Court in executing
the warrants and to ensure that those responsible for
such atrocities are brought to justice.
Finally, we express our support for the prompt
adoption of a draft presidential statement on this matter.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for
coming to New York and for his briefing today. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/923)
on the activities of UNOCA and on the progress made
in the fight against the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Many political and security challenges persist in
Central Africa that require the joint cooperation of all

11

S/PV.6891

actors. We encourage UNOCA’s efforts to strengthen
its links with the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
On the security front, the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea is a source of concern to the Council.
We welcome the summit of Heads of States on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea planned for April 2013, with
UNOCA’s support. We also welcome UNOCA’s active
promotion of the Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can
Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly,
and its promotion of the road map for efforts to combat
terrorism and for the non-proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in Central Africa.
On the political front, we reiterate the need for free,
transparent elections in order to ensure lasting peace
in Central Africa, and encourage UNOCA to continue
supporting national efforts in that area.
Among the peace and security challenges in
Central Africa, the Lord’s Resistance Army remains
a major concern. The rebellion of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and tensions between the Sudan and South
Sudan, as well as last week’s escalation of attacks by
rebel groups in eastern Central African Republic, are
of serious concern. However, they must not cause us to
forget the ongoing threat of the LRA in the subregion.
In the past year, at least 180 attacks were carried
out against civilians by that armed group, causing 39
deaths. UNOCA has played a key role in formulating the
United Nations regional strategy on the fight against the
LRA. The strategy defines effective measures, based on
five key pillars, aimed at strengthened coordination of
the actions of all partners involved in the fight against
the LRA.
Six months after the adoption of the strategy,
implementation of all of those pillars should be
prioritized. In order to reinvigorate the momentum,
we need a plan of action on implementing the strategy
that sets timetables and specific goals for each United
Nations entity involved. UNOCA could also promote
a high-level meeting of the States involved in the fight
against the LRA, aimed at increased cooperation on the
next steps.

12

Today, it is critical for the African Union (AU)
to launch coercive actions against the LRA. To that
end, the AU’s Regional Task Force against the LRA
must take shape. In that respect, we commend the
commitments of Uganda, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, which have already made contingents
available to the Force. We encourage other States of the
region to do the same. We call for the finalization of a
concept of operations to define the chain of command
and the modalities of the Force, which must be able to
intervene in all areas affected by the LRA.
Civilian protection measures must be strengthened.
That will entail increased sharing of information
and intelligence among United Nations offices and
operations in the region, as well as between the United
Nations and the AU Regional Task Force. Radio and
cellular early warning communications systems should
also be developed in order to quickly locate groups
associated with the LRA and to warn and protect
civilians.
Defections by LRA members should be encouraged.
Existing disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) programmes
must be extended to all affected areas, with special
emphasis on reintegration by establishing appropriate
accommodation structures. It is important that the
offices and missions of the United Nations develop a
common DDRRR approach, and establish standard
procedures for accepting deserters, in particular
children who had been recruited.
At the same time, efforts under way to arrest and
prosecute the primary leaders of the LRA, including
Joseph Kony, should continue. We encourage the States
involved to strengthen their cooperation with the
International Criminal Court towards that goal.
France supports all of those efforts through its
contributions to the European Union African Peace
Facility. France also provides bilateral support to States
affected by the LRA, inter alia through our ongoing
and substantial cooperation with the Central African
Republic in the military sector. To the four countries
concerned, we also provide humanitarian assistance
to civilians affected by the attacks, particularly
through food assistance, and carry out socioeconomic
reintegration programmes for child soldiers.
The States affected by the LRA have a major role to
play. We encourage them to continue their efforts to put

12-65327

S/PV.6891

an end to the threat of the LRA and thereby relieve the
affected populations. We stand beside them.

and improve the enjoyment of and respect for all the
rights and freedoms of the populations.

Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for his
briefing and his leadership in heading that Office. We
welcome the progress made by UNOCA in fulfilling its
mandate and in strengthening the coordinating role of
the United Nations presence in the region on the issues
covered by its mandate.

We welcome UNOCA’s links with regional and
subregional organizations and its efforts to closely
coordinate work with them and to strengthen those
institutions as a priority of its mandate. Activities
aimed at implementing framework cooperation
agreements must continue, and we encourage the
Special Representative to pursue a fluid dialogue
leading to a clear definition of priorities and goals for
action, in which matters such as conflict prevention and
the fight against illicit trafficking, terrorism, piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea will be covered in
a comprehensive and coordinated fashion.

In recent months, we have seen improvements in the
democratic systems of the region. The general elections
in Angola and parliamentary elections in Congo took
place in a generally peaceful environment. Differences
were expressed via the legal and institutional channels
provided for that purpose, thereby demonstrating that
democratic values and institutions are making progress
in becoming the cornerstones of representative and
legitimate power in the region. With a view to further
progress, UNOCA must continue to support national
authorities in strengthening national capacities through
providing requested assistance to improve their
electoral systems and legislation.
The progress made in the region has also materialized
as major economic growth. Despite the complex global
economic environment, the region has managed to
maintain good levels of macroeconomic performance,
and it is foreseen that growth rates will continue along
those lines. Nevertheless, efforts must be pursued in
order to ensure that the benefits of economic growth
lead to improved living conditions of the population.
The formulation of equitable macroeconomic policies
aimed at achieving inclusive socioeconomic growth is a
purpose for which the United Nations must support the
States in the region through assistance with specialized
training.
To facilitate consistent human rights action among
the various United Nations actors in the region, we
must focus on the priority creation and strengthening of
national capacities and institutions in that context. In that
respect and in order to carry out its mandate, UNOCA
must promote closely coordinated, complementary
efforts among the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UN-Women and
other relevant actors of the system so as to enable the
States of the region to gradually and effectively achieve

12-65327

The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continues
to threaten the peace and stability of the countries of
the region, and the effects of its activities continue
to seriously harm the civilian population. There are
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons and
refugees. Violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights continue to characterize the violent
actions of that armed group. We welcome the progress
made in the implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA, and towards the launching of
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
against the Lord’s Resistance Army.
The countries of Central Africa must respond to the
many challenges to their security. The political will of
the countries of the region must therefore be maintained
and supported so that they can mount a sustained attack
against the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Strategic, ongoing dialogue between the United Nations
and the African Union is crucial if action against the
LRA is to remain a priority and if firm steps are to
be taken towards defining the pending elements of the
African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative.
In order to achieve the implementation of the
five goals established in the strategy, it is essential
that sufficient resources be made available. All of the
components of the strategy are equally important and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore believe that a clear
division of responsibilities, the definition of parameters
and a timeline for their implementation will require
an appropriate balance that takes into account the
key importance of such aspects as the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, care for the
victims, and the effective improvement of the social and

13

S/PV.6891

economic conditions of the populations of the region
affected by the presence of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
I note the activities of UNOCA to strengthen
coordination among the various agencies of the
United Nations system, participation in peacekeeping
operations, and support for the special political offices
in the region. We must therefore continue to promote
the coordinating role of UNOCA within the United
Nations in the tasks assigned to it.
Finally, we express our willingness to adopt a draft
presidential statement on this topic.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me first
to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his detailed briefing, and
to reiterate our congratulations to the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), the
African Union (AU) and all United Nations missions
in Central Africa for the tireless efforts they undertake
every day to promote the maintenance, restoration and
building of peace and security in that region.
Togo welcomes the progress made in recent months
by most countries of the region in terms of political and
economic governance. My country urges the leaders
and all political players of the countries involved to
continue their efforts by promoting dialogue and the
tireless quest for consensus in order to preserve and
build upon their democratic gains by strengthening,
in particular, their democratic institutions. We also
welcome efforts undertaken in coordination with
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
to convene a summit of States of the region on the
pressing issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The fight against extreme poverty, youth
unemployment, hunger and insecurity is clearly crucial
to peacebuilding and the consolidation of democracy
in the region. In that regard, we welcome the action
pursued by most Governments of the countries of the
region in these areas, and we call on them to invest
more in the related sectors.
While we welcome the encouraging progress made
in peacebuilding by most of these countries, particularly
Burundi and the Central African Republic, the current
security and humanitarian situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a key
source of concern. In fact, the fragility and volatility
of the situation in North Kivu continues to seriously
threaten the stability of the country and the entire
region. That is why we will continue to reiterate that

14

a negotiated political settlement to the crisis remains
the key condition for easing the plight of civilians
oppressed by more than a decade of insecurity.
My delegation remains deeply concerned by
the serious threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) — a movement that has been declared a
terrorist group by the African Union — to the civilian
populations of the region. Even weakened as it is by
the concerted and determined efforts of the countries of
the region and the international community, that group
retains the capacity to cause serious harm. The toll of
its attacks is alarming. While all countries of the region
and beyond are exposed to it, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are particularly affected, and women and children are,
unfortunately, the primary victims. This is tangible
proof that the work ahead to meet the challenge of the
LRA remains immense.
We therefore firmly support the Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the Lord’s Resistance
Army, and commend the actions pursued in this context,
in particular in recent months by UNOCA, the African
Union and the countries of the region. The tracking
down of LRA fighters must continue, and the capture
of its leader, Joseph Kony, remains a priority. That
individual, the principal leaders of the group and all
those who have been accused of serious crimes must be
held accountable for their acts before the international
justice system. Togo urges all States to cooperate to this
end.
From this standpoint, my country welcomes the
holding in recent months of a number of meetings
focused on the LRA. We also welcome the fact that,
in September, Uganda and South Sudan made military
units available to the AU that will become part of the
Regional Task Force set up by the AU to fight that
group. We urge other States of the region to follow the
example of these two countries. The entire international
community must step up its efforts, particularly on
the financial and logistical fronts, in order to ensure
an effective implementation of the regional strategy to
counter that group.
In conclusion, my country supports the draft
presidential statement presented by the United
Kingdom, which the Council is prepared to adopt.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I, too, want to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his briefing.

12-65327

S/PV.6891

Let me first refer to the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and, secondly, comment on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The LRA continues to pose a serious threat to
civilians, mainly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan,
and of course children continue to bear the brunt of
LRA attacks and atrocities. The conceptual tools are
in place, namely, the African Union (AU) Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the Lord’s Resistance
Army and the United Nations regional strategy. It is
now critical to swiftly implement and follow up on the
Regional Cooperation Initiative.
We welcome the progress made so far. We reiterate
our call on the countries in the region to take the lead
in resolving the LRA problem, to fully commit to the
AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative, to strengthen
their cooperation at all levels, and to observe their
primary responsibility to protect civilians. We call upon
all States to cooperate with the Ugandan authorities in
the International Criminal Court in order to implement
the arrest warrants for LRA leaders.
We welcome the AU’s leadership role in
coordinating efforts against the LRA, and commend
the close cooperation between Special Representative
Moussa and the Special Envoy of the African Union
for the LRA issue. Strengthening coordination,
information-sharing and trust among the security and
defence forces of the LRA-affected countries remains
important. The African Union should also continue
to persuade Khartoum to participate in the efforts to
address the LRA threat.
We reiterate our encouragement to share the concept
of the military planning of the African Union Initiative
and to agree on a realistic concept of operations for the
AU Regional Task Force. That is important in order to
enable the United Nations and international partners to
consider providing additional support, where feasible.
In every military action, the protection of civilians
needs to be a priority, well monitored and reviewed.
We appreciate UNOCA’s leading role in
coordinating the implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the LRA theat. We commend
all United Nations actors for their contributions and
welcome the progress achieved, notably in inter-mission
and cross-border cooperation. But further efforts are
needed. The successful implementation of the strategy
requires the full commitment of all United Nations

12-65327

actors and external partners. We encourage focusing on
the protection of civilians; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
(DDRRR) efforts for former LRA members, ensuring
humanitarian assistance and fostering peacebuilding
and development activities in LRA-affected areas.
Germany remains committed to contributing to the
implementation of the regional strategy. We provide
continuous humanitarian assistance and have supported
the expansion of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s standard operating procedures for DDRRR
across the region.
In order to enhance the protection of civilians,
we have recently allocated $1.3 million to a UNICEF
project. The project aims at responding to the specific
protection concerns of women and children arising from
LRA operations. We encourage Special Representative
Moussa and UNOCA to ensure close monitoring of the
implementation process of the United Nations regional
strategy, its elaboration and flexible adaptation of all
actions to needs and developments on the ground.
Turning finally to UNOCA’s overall mandate and
activities, we commend UNOCA for prioritoritizing its
work programme and for its focus on specific activities.
We welcome UNOCA’s contribution to strengthening
the mediation capacities of the Economic Community
of Central African States in the field. Enhancing early
warning and early political action in the region should
also be pursued. We encourage the development of the
integrated counter-terrorism and small arms and light
weapons control strategy for Central Africa, and hail
UNOCA’s assistance provided to the States members
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa in that
context. We also commend UNOCA’s contribution to
implementing the recommendations of resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) on maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea, and encourage continued close cooperation
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
regional organizations for the purpose of developing
a regional strategy against piracy and other forms of
maritime crime.
Allow me to conclude, Sir, by expressing our
support for the work of Special Representative Moussa
and the Regional Office. Their contribution to conflict
prevention in Central Africa is important and much
appreciated.
15

S/PV.6891

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his briefing, and
we note the progress in consolidating the democratic
processes in a number of States of Central Africa,
including the peaceful holding of elections this summer
in Angola and the Congo.

We note the contribution of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in the collective
efforts to fight the Lord’s Resistance Army, and its
importance in preventing conflict, ensuring peace and
security, and strengthening the coordination of United
Nations activities and the regional and subregional
organizations in Central Africa.

We welcome the efforts of the Central African
countries to advance their integration processes and
cross-border cooperation. We support the focus of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
on building partnerships with subregional bodies
and assisting them in capacity-building. We note the
growing engagement of the Office with the countries
of the subregion on issues of counter-terrorism and the
illegal trafficking of small arms and light weapons.

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing and his important
contribution as Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We support the
important role of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa in addressing issues in the Central
African subregion, in line with its mandate. The role of
the Office in the areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and mediation remains crucial and needs to
be further reinforced and strengthened.

We are concerned by the growing threat of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. Support must be maintained
for the increasing efforts of Central and West African
countries to implement the provisions of resolution
2018 (2011) on maritime security. An important step to
that end will be the regional summit on counter-piracy
issues to be held in April 2013 in Yaoundé.
We cannot help but be concerned by the ongoing
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army. Because
of those thugs, 450,000 people remain refugees and
internally displaced persons. The activities of that
group seriously destabilize the military, political and
humanitarian situation in the affected countries, and
undermine efforts towards their post-conflict recovery.
We advocate a comprehensive approach to
addressing this challenge. In that regard, we support
efforts to implement the comprehensive United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army. The
priority tasks include assisting in the establishment
of the African Union Regional Task Force. We share
the view on the need to speed up its deployment
and to promptly agree and adopt the concept of
operations for the African Force. Of equal urgency is
the implementation of tasks with regard to protecting
civilians, the provision of humanitarian assistance,
and the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of LRA fighters, as well
as providing the countries of the subregion with support
in terms of peacebuilding and establishing Government
authority in remote regions.

16

An increase in the incidence of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea is a matter of grave concern and requires
a comprehensive regional strategy specific to the
regional circumstances. Such a regional strategy will
strengthen the legal framework at the national and
regional levels for criminalizing and prosecuting acts
of piracy, developing mechanisms for cooperation
and information-sharing between law enforcement
agencies of the States of the region, and addressing
the underlying causes of piracy. The early convening
of the Heads of State summit of the Gulf of Guinea on
piracy and maritime security, with the help of UNOCA,
will be a crucial step towards forging a comprehensive
regional and international response to the challenge of
piracy.
The presence and activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) remain a major threat to the security
and safety of civilians in the subregion. Addressing
the scourge of the LRA will require a comprehensive
approach aimed not only at eliminating and bringing to
justice its remaining leadership, but also at strengthening
the capacities of the relevant States. At the same time,
it will be crucial to address the long-term development
needs of the areas affected by the LRA.
Effective implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy against the LRA, especially the early
implementation of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the LRA, remains
crucial to addressing this threat. We welcome the
troop contributions made so far by the countries of the

12-65327

S/PV.6891

region to the African Union Regional Task Force under
the Initiative, and look forward to learning about its
concept of operations. The international community
should provide the necessary political, technical and
financial support for the sucessful implemention of the
Initiative, in line with the priorities identified by the
African Union and the principle of national ownership.

African States (ECCAS) should remain a priority,
particularly in the light of recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
framework agreement for cooperation among regional
offices, as well as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, in strengthening coordination in
conflict prevention and mediation.

We welcome the important role that UNOCA,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic and United Nations
peacekeeping missions continue to play in the region in
the fight against the LRA. In particular, we commend
the important work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Mission’s role, through training and
capacity-building of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo, support for the Joint
Information Operations Centre, and implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes remains an
important and integral component of the international
response to the LRA.

We also hope that the Regional Office and
Mr. Moussa will continue to strengthen regional
cooperation on an inter-State or interregional basis
in order to respond to the many challenges the region
is facing. We particularly welcome the cooperation
between UNOCA and the United Nations Office
for West Africa, aimed at responding to common
challenges and threats, especially in the Sahel region
and the Gulf of Guinea, such as transnational organized
crime, the traffic in small arms and light weapons, and
the fight against terrorism. Central Africa must rise to
this challenge, and Morocco welcomes the efforts of the
States of the region, as well as those of regional offices,
to support interregional cooperation, particularly in
responding to the challenges of terrorism and the traffic
in small arms and light weapons in Central Africa.

Pakistan remains committed to peace, security and
stability in the Central African subregion. We hope that
the region will continue to receive the full support of
the international community and the Security Council
to help it address the numerous challenges it is facing.
Pakistan will continue to play its part in that regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report (S/2012/923), submitted pursuant to the
request of the President of the Council in the presidential
statement of 29 June 2012 (S/PRST/2012/18). I
would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), for his briefing on UNOCA’s activities and
on areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
The situation in Central Africa has improved
overall in terms of restoring peace and regional
cooperation. We welcome the work and role of UNOCA
to that effect, as well as Mr. Moussa’s efforts to support
the various Central African countries and subregional
organizations, especially in the area of capacitybuilding. On that front, support for such organizations
as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central

12-65327

As indicated in the report, piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea has grown to considerable proportions in recent
years, to the extent that it now threatens stability and
development in the region. Piracy has even affected
countries that are geographically distant from the Gulf,
and its economic impact has been felt on an international
level. In order to respond to this scourge — which is,
unfortunately, spreading throughout Africa — we must
take action, and that can be done only through regional
coordination between ECOWAS and ECCAS, as well as
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea region.
We welcome the efforts of the regional Office to
facilitate organization of the regional summit on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, to be held in April 2013. We
also welcome the efforts of ECOWAS and ECCAS, as
well as those of the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We
invite Mr. Moussa to make the most of the opportunity
offered by the NATO ministerial meeting to consider
interregional cooperation and all the security challenges
and respond to them.
Turning now to the Lord’s Resistance Army, that
group continues to threaten the stability and lives of
thousands of men, women and children in the Central
African region. We emphatically condemn its activities,
which violate international humanitarian law and
international human rights. In this context, we welcome
17

S/PV.6891

the regional strategy of the United Nations, with its five
pillars and unified framework, aimed at responding to
LRA atrocities. We further welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to respond to
the LRA and to strengthen the armed capacity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as its efforts
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
for former combatants.
Through its participation in peacekeeping forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Morocco
will continue to provide protection for the civilian
population, humanitarian aid and medical assistance.
We will continue to support the countries of the region,
especially in the areas of human development and
capacity-building.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Moussa to respond to
comments and questions raised by several members of
the Council.
Mr. Moussa: Having listened to all the comments
made by the members of the Security Council this
afternoon, I would just like to indicate that the
importance of those comments and suggestions on the
early implementation of the Lord’s Resistance Army
strategy cannot be overemphasized.
I have also noted with attention all the comments
made this afternoon, be they on regional coordination,
joint planning or the need to strengthen collaboration.
I have taken note as well of the need for further
inter-mission cooperation and inter-region cooperation;
the importance of the protection of civilians; the issue
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;

18

human rights; and continued humanitarian support for
affected populations.
I have further taken note of members’ comments
on elections. As much as we welcome what has
happened, we should continue — and my Office should
continue — to support the Governments of the region
to make sure that the issue of governance continues to
remain at the top of their agendas. I also note the issue
of information-sharing and the response to piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea.
I thank the Council for the comments I have heard
about the work being carried out by my colleagues
in the United Nations peacekeeping missions in the
subregion.
I wish to say that I feel honoured and pleased
to have received so many positive comments this
afternoon, and I want to thank all the members of the
Council. I will make sure that I share their comments
and positive remarks on the work of my Office with all
my colleagues, who are called upon on a daily basis to
carry out these assignments.
I want to take this opportunity to wish the members
of the Council in advance a Merry Christmas and a
Happy New Year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Moussa
for his response and for his comments. I also thank him
on behalf of the Council for his participation in today’s
meeting. We wish him success in his efforts.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

12-65327
