A/RES/75/133

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 78
Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-third session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 15 December 2020
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/75/424, para. 7)]

75/133.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interes ts of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obst acles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would contribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of
promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonizati on
of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal

__________________
1

20-17190 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/75/17).

291220

*2017190*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain c lose cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active
in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;
2.
Commends the completion of the Legal Guide to Uniform Legal
Instruments in the Area of International Commercial Contracts (with a focus on sales)
prepared by the secretariat of the Commission in coordination with the Hague
Conference on Private International Law and the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law;
3.
Welcomes the entry into force on 12 September 2020 of the United Nations
Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation
(Singapore Convention on Mediation), adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 73/198 of 20 December 2018, and invites Governments and regional
economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to consider be coming a
party to the Convention;
4.
Notes with satisfaction the renewed commitment from the European
Commission to provide funding for a period of three years, which allows the operation
of the repository of published information under the Rules on Trans parency in Treatybased Investor-State Arbitration, 2 and that the Commission reiterated its strong and
unanimous opinion that the secretariat of the Commission should continue to operate
the transparency repository, which constitutes a central feature bot h of the Rules on
Transparency and of the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty -based
Investor-State Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on Transparency); 3
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a continuation of the project until the
end of 2023, to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the General
Assembly informed of developments regarding the funding and budgetary situation
of the transparency repository;
6.
Takes note with interest of the progress made by the Commission in its
work in the areas of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement,
investor-State dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce, insolvency law and
the judicial sale of ships, 4 and encourages the Commission to continue to move
forward efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes in those areas;
7.
Notes with interest the decisions of the Commission as regards its planned
work in the areas of warehouse receipts, railway consignment notes and legal issues
of the digital economy, and notes a new date for a colloquium on applicable law in
insolvency proceedings which was postponed owing to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic; 5
8.
Takes note of the proposal for future work by the Commission in the
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic submitted at the session by Japan on the
__________________

Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
Resolution 69/116, annex.
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/75/17), part two, chaps. IV–IX.
5
Ibid., chap. X, sect. C.
2
3

2/7

20-17190

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

stocktaking of dispute resolution in the modern context, and that the Commission
requested its secretariat to commence research on issues identified in the proposal,
noting their relevance to digital economy and COVID-19-related developments in the
area of dispute resolution;
9.
Also takes note of the proposal submitted at the session by the Russian
Federation, co-sponsored by Armenia and Viet Nam, to update the work programme
of the Commission in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, and that the Commission
requested its secretariat to commence exploratory work on matters of international
commercial law related to overcoming the consequences of the global pandemic and
other large-scale emergencies that create impediments to international trade referred
to in the proposal;
10.

Notes the endorsement by the Commission of the Incoterms 2020 rules; 6

11. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, including on legal
issues relating to the digital economy as reaffirmed by the Commission at its fifty third session, and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels
in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant international and regional
organizations to coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, to avoid
duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
modernization and harmonization of international trade law;
12. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, in that respe ct
encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and non-State actors
to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes with appreciat ion
the organization by the secretariat of the “UNCITRAL Latin American and Caribbean
Days” (“UNCITRAL LAC Days”) in partnership with Latin American and Caribbean
Governments and regional universities, aimed at promoting awareness and
encouraging the study and discussion of Commission texts;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draw s the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and a ppeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law trust fund for symposiums and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat
of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
__________________
6

20-17190

Ibid., part one, chap. V.
3/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work
and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 7
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member
States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity building, welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination
and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and recipients, and
notes the conclusion of the memorandums of understanding with China, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore and Hong Kong, China, to support technical assistance activities in relation
to Commission texts and international trade law;
13. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods
of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive deliberations, taking
into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III t o the report on
the work of its forty-third session, 8 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings
of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure
and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the work of the
Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and recalls in this
regard its previous resolutions related to this matter;
14. Commends the Commission for the temporal adjustments made in the
methods of work of the Commission in order to advance its work to the extent possible
in the light of prevailing travel restrictions owing to the COVID -19 pandemic on the
participation of delegations at sessions of the Commission and its working groups,
which demonstrates the adaptability and resilience of the Commission and its
secretariat in such exceptional circumstances as well as the fruitful efforts to preserve
transparency, inclusiveness, flexibility, multilingualism, effectiveness and equality in
carrying out its work;
15. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources,
including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional centres of the
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;
16. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members
of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary -General,
in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
__________________
7
8

4/7

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
20-17190

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in those countries
to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
17. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries, at their
request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, and notes the contributions
from France, the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Dev elopment and
Cooperation to the trust fund, which would facilitate the participation of
representatives of developing States in the deliberations of Working Group III;
18. Takes note of the proposal for the enlargement of the membership of the
Commission submitted by Israel and Japan at the fifty-second session of the
Commission, 9 of the progress made through the consultations organized by Japan
during the intersessional period and of the willingness of Japan to organize further
consultations, and that the Commission encouraged its member States to continue to
consult with each other and other interested States on the proposal during the
intersessional period and requested the Secretariat to continue to facilitate those
intersessional consultations;
19. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations
should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law at the national and international levels, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
20. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of law, respective
discussions in the Commission at its fifty-third session, 10 and the comments
transmitted by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 20 of General Assembly
resolution 74/191 of 18 December 2019, highlighting the relevance of its current work
to the promotion of the rule of law and the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals; 11
21. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
22. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015,
States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at
__________________

Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), para. 311.
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/75/17), part one, chap. XI.
11
Ibid., chap. III, para. 25.
9

10

20-17190

5/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
23. Recalls its resolution 74/276 of 1 June 2020, in which it decided to
convene the special session of the General Assembly on challenges and measures to
prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international cooperation in 2021, and
notes the request from the Commission to the Chair of the Commission at its fifty third session, other members of the Bureau of that session, States and its secretariat
to take appropriate steps to ensure that the Commission’s contribution to the
implementation of the international anti-corruption agenda is duly acknowledged in
an outcome document of that special session;
24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 12 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular chara cteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission; 13
25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration of
its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts;
26. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
27. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international
trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
28. Commends the Commission for holding a series of online panels during
the first part of its fifty-third session to discuss the connection between the work of
the Commission and the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
notes that several legislative tools that the Commission has developed can play an
important role in assisting States in mitigating the effects of the measures required to
control the pandemic, as well as in their economic recovery efforts; 14
29. Also commends the Commission for inviting States to consider adopting
Commission instruments capable of mitigating the disruption of international trade
and business caused by necessary response measures to the COVID -19 pandemic by
making it possible to conduct business transactions and transmit and use documents
by using electronic means, as well as Commission instruments that may particularly
support micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises by facilitating simplified
business registration, reducing the cost of financing business transactions and helping
in the restructuring or orderly liquidation of distressed businesses, or to promote

__________________

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
14
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/75/17), part one, chap. XIII.
12
13

6/7

20-17190

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-third session

A/RES/75/133

effective settlement of commercial disputes, 15 and appeals to Governments to adopt
such Commission instruments, as appropriate;
30. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), note s the resource-intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, in this regard welcomes the renewed efforts by the Commission and its
secretariat towards building partnerships with interested institution s, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising
awareness as to the availability and usefulness of the CLOUT system in profe ssional,
academic and judiciary circles and in securing the funding required for the
coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat
of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the promotion of ways and means of
interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
31. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT system,
in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the
promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by
building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other lega l practitioners to interpret
those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade,
and notes the satisfaction of the Commission with th e performance of the New York
Convention website 16 and the successful coordination between that website and the
CLOUT system;
32. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 17 commends the fact that the website of
the Commission has been migrated to a mobile device-friendly platform and that it
continues to be published simultaneously in the six officia l languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website, and to enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media
features in accordance with the applicable guidelines. 18
45th plenary meeting
15 December 2020

__________________

Ibid., chap. III, para. 27.
www.newyorkconvention1958.org.
17
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B,
sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV,
paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
18
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
15
16

20-17190

7/7
