S/PRST/2008/23

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 June 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5921st meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 June 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns the campaign of violence against the
political opposition ahead of the second round of the presidential elections
scheduled for 27 June, which has resulted in the killing of scores of opposition
activists and other Zimbabweans and the beating and displacement of
thousands of people, including many women and children.
“The Security Council further condemns the actions of the Government
of Zimbabwe that have denied its political opponents the right to campaign
freely, and calls upon the Government of Zimbabwe to stop the violence, to
cease political intimidation, to end the restrictions on the right of assembly and
to release the political leaders who have been detained. The Council urges the
international monitors and observers to remain in Zimbabwe while the crisis
continues.
“The Security Council regrets that the campaign of violence and the
restrictions on the political opposition have made it impossible for a free and
fair election to take place on 27 June. The Council further considers that, to be
legitimate, any government of Zimbabwe must take account of the interests of
all its citizens. The Council notes that the results of the 29 March 2008
elections must be respected.
“The Security Council expresses its concern over the impact of the
situation in Zimbabwe on the wider region. The Council welcomes the recent
international efforts, including those of SADC leaders and particularly
President Mbeki. The Security Council calls on the Zimbabwean authorities to
cooperate fully with all efforts, including through the United Nations, aimed at
finding a peaceful way forward, through dialogue between the parties, that
allows a legitimate government to be formed that reflects the will of the
Zimbabwean people.
“The Security Council further expresses its concern at the grave
humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe and condemns the suspension by the
Government of Zimbabwe of the operations of humanitarian organizations,
which has directly affected one and a half million people, including half a

08-39542 (E) 230608

*0839542*

S/PRST/2008/23

million children. The Council calls on the Government of Zimbabwe to
immediately allow humanitarian organizations to resume their services.
“The Security Council will continue to monitor closely the situation and
requests the Secretary-General to report on ongoing regional and international
efforts to resolve the crisis.”

2

08-39542
