A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/104
17 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 157
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/612)]
54/104. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,2 the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host
country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has guided the deliberations of the
Committee on issues affecting the United Nations community and the host country,

1
2
3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/54/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
See resolution 169 (II).

00 24115

/...

A/RES/54/104
Page 2

Noting also that the membership of the Committee has been increased by four additional Member
States,4 and welcoming their participation in the work of the Committee,
1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country contained in paragraph 43 of its report;1
2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations
and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interest of the United Nations and all Member
States, and requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference
with the functioning of missions;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised
at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance
with international law;
4. Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country
on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect,
and requests the host country to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions
of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
5. Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking
of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the
growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this important
issue;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the
United Nations with the host country;
7. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution
2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999

4

Cuba, Hungary, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Malaysia.
