296

42/155.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions
2395 (XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970 and 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, and its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, as well as Security Council resolutions
405 (1977) of 14 April 1977, 419 (1977) of 24 November
1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and 507 (1982) of
28 May 1982, in which the United Nations denounced the
practice of using mercenaries, in particular against developing countries and national liberation movements,
Recalling in particular its resolution 41/80 of 3 December 1986, by which it decided to renew the mandate ofthe
Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principies of sovereign equality, political independence,
territorial integrity of States and self-determination of
peoples, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and developed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, 3
Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary to fundamental principies of international law, such
as non-interference in the interna! atfairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede
the process of self-determination of peoples struggling
against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of
foreign domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and
codification of the rules of international law on the activities of mercenaries would con tribute immensely to the implementation of the purposes and principies of the
Charter,
Welcoming the wide and etfective participation of members of the Ad Hoc Committee in the work of the Committee and the participation of a large number of observers in
that work,
Taking account of the progress achieved by the Ad Hoc
Committee at its sixth session,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against
the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries; 29
2. Decides to renew the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee with a view to completing as soon as possible a draft
international convention against the recruitment, use, fi.
nancing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to use the draft articles contained in chapter

29 Ojficial Records of rhe General Assembly. Forty-second Session.
Supplemenr No. 43 (A/42/43).

111 of its report, 29 entitled "Second revised consolidated
negotiating basis of a convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries" as a basis for
future negotiation on the text of the proposed international convention;
4. Invites the Ad Hoc Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals ofMember States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments ex¡ressed at the fortieth, 30 forty-first 31 and
forty-second 3 sessions of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee;
5. Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall hold its
seventh session from 25 January to 12 February 1988;
6. A lso decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall accept
the participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its drafting and working
groups;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, on a priority basis, the Ad Hoc Committee with any assistance and
facilities it may require to hold its seventh session in 1988;
8. Reaffirms the importance that pre-session consultations among the members of the Ad Hoc Committee and
other interested States may have in facilitating the smooth
conduct of its work towards the fulfilment of its task, inter alía, as regards the composition of the Bureau and the
organization of work;
9. Invites the Ad Hoc Committee to make every etfort
to submit its final report containing a draft international
convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries to the General Assembly if possible at its forty-third session;
1O. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Report ofthe Ad Hoc
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries".
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/156.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-ninth session, 12
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
ofintemational law and its codification in order to make it
a more etfective means of implementing the purposes and
principies set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principies of Intemational Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 3 and to give increased importance to its role in relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
that might be submitted to the International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
30 !bid.. Fortieth Session. Sixth Committee, 13th to 17th, 44th and
48th meetings.
31 /bid .. Forty-ftrst Session, Sixth Committee, 25th, 26th, 46th and
47th meetings, and corrigendum.
12 !bid.. Forty-second Session. Sixrh Committee, 12th to 15th and
55th meetings, and corrigendum.

IX.

297

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

progressive development of international law and its
codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
intemational law which, given their new or renewed interest for the contemporary international community,
may be suitable for the progressive development and
codification of international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
Considering that experience has demonstrated the usefulness of structuring the debate on the report of the lnternational Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such
a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated
attention on each of the main topics dealt with in the report, and that this process is facilitated when the Commission indicates specific issues on which expressions ofviews
by Governments are of particular interest for the continuation of its work,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-ninth session;
2. Expresses its apprecíation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should continue its work on the
topics in its current programme, bearing in mind the desirability of reaching the goals indicated in paragraph 232 of
its report;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the establishment
within the Intemational Law Commission, in order to increase its effectiveness, of a Working Group on Methods
of Work, and with the conclusions and intentions of the
Commission concerning its procedures and methods of
work, as set forth in chapter VI, section D of its report;
5. Requests the lnternational Law Commission:
(a) To keep under review the planning of its activities
for the term of office of its members, bearing in mind the
desirability of achieving as much progress as possible in
the preparation of draft articles on specific topics;
(b) To consider further its methods ofwork in all their
aspects, bearing in mind that the staggering of the consideration of sorne topics might contribute to the attainment
of the goals referred to in paragraph 3 above and also to a
more effective consideration of its report in the Sixth Committee;
(e) To indicate in its annual report, for each topic,
those specific issues on which expressions ofviews by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written
form, would be of particular interest for the continuation
of its work;
6. Recommends the continuation of efforts to improve
the ways in which the report of the International Law
Commission is considered in the Sixth Committee, with a
view to providing effective guidance for the Commission
in its work, and to this end decides that the Sixth Committee shall hold consultations at the commencement of the
forty-third session ofthe General Assembly, including, inter alia, consultations on the question of establishing a
working group, the character and mandate ofwhich are to
be determined, to meet during the debate on the report of
the Intemational Law Commission in order to allow for a
concentrated discussion on one or more of the topics on
the agenda of the Commission;
7. Takes note of the comments of the International
Law Commission on the question ofthe duration ofits session, as presented in paragraph 243 of its report, and ex-

presses the view that the requirements of the work for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification and the magnitude and complexity of the subjects on the agenda of the Commission make it desirable
that the usual duration of its sessions33 be maintained;
8. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Aft'airs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
summary records and other documentation of the International Law Commission;
9. Urges Governments and, as appropriate, international organizations to respond in writing as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International
Law Commission for comments, observations and replies
to questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
10. Further urges Governments to give full attention to
the request of the International Law Commission, transmitted through the Secretary-General, for comments and
observations before l January 1988 on the draft articles on
jurisdictional immunities of States and their property 34
and on the status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, 35
adopted on first reading by the Commission;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to update in a
timely manner the "Survey of Intemational Law" 36 of
197 l and to make the updated version available to the International Law Commission, and to bear in mind the
desirability of updating it every five years thereafter;
12. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is ofinterest for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification;
13. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with the sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be given the opportunity to attend those seminars, and appeals to States
that can do so to make the voluntary contributions that
are urgently needed for the holding of the seminars;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
lnternational Law Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the
forty-second session of the General Assembly and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/157.

Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, by which it established the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthen-

33 See resolution 3315 (XXIX), para. S.
34 See Official Records of the General Assembl_v.

Forty-Jirst Session.
Suff1ement No. JO (A/41/10). chap. II, sect. D.
/bid., chap. III, sect. D.
36 Yearbook ofthe Internationa/ Law Commission, 1971, vol. II (Part
Two) (United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.72.V.6 (Part II)).
document A/CN.4/245.
