S/2003/1198

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 19 December 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I write with reference to the letter dated 11 December 2003 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Immigration of Papua New Guinea, the Honourable Sir
Rabbie L. Namaliu, addressed to me regarding developments in Bougainville and
the request of his Government for a continued United Nations political presence on
the island.
As is evident from the letter and the Council’s consideration of the matter on
15 December 2003, the peace process in Bougainville continues to make slow but
steady progress. In this connection, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), the mandate of which expires on 31 December 2003, has
played a significant role. However, the process has not yet reached its logical
conclusion, that is, the establishment of an autonomous government. In the light of
this, and in accordance with the request of the Government of Papua New Guinea,
supported also by the Bougainville parties, I intend, with the concurrence of the
Council, to establish a small, follow-on United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville (UNOMB) with the following functions:
(a) Chair the Peace Process Consultative Committee, which will consult with
the parties on the peace process in general, and make preparations for elections, in
particular;
(b) Report on the security and the subsequent destruction of the contained
weapons;
(c) Monitor the constitutional process leading to the adoption of the
Bougainville Constitution;
(d) In accordance with the amended Constitution of Papua New Guinea, and
if requested by any of the parties, verify and certify substantial compliance by the
parties in the handing in of weapons and whether the level of security is conducive
to the holding of elections;
(e) Perform other good offices, as appropriate, or when requested to do so by
the parties.
Given the strong commitment of the Government of Papua New Guinea and
the Bougainville leaders to the Peace Agreement, UNOMB should finish the
residual tasks of UNPOB and support the efforts of the parties in the transitional
period leading to the elections. The Observer Mission, comprising a Head of

03-67104 (E)

231203

*
0
3
6
7
1
0
4
*

S/2003/1198

Mission, one political adviser and two support staff, would be established for a sixmonth period. Its staffing structure and a modified mandate are expected to result in
substantial savings of resources, compared to UNPOB.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
