S/2001/1131

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 27 November 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 31 October 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-66958 (E) 301101

*0166958*

S/2001/1131

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 October 2001) there were just over 42,800
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre. The change of command of KFOR
took place on 3 October, when General Thorstein Skiaker handed over to Lieutenant
General Marcel Valentin who will be in command for one year.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during October remained relatively calm
despite underlying inter-ethnic friction and harsh economic and social conditions.
Acts of inter-ethnic violence and intimidation which took place included some that
may have been politically motivated with the approach of the election date of 17
November.
Security
3.
During the reporting period, a number of inter-ethnic incidents were reported,
including stoning of people, houses and trains, vandalism and theft. On 1 October, a
mine with a tripwire, found on a Kosovo Serb property near Kosovaska Kamenica,
was deactivated by KFOR. On 3 October, two Kosovo Albanians were arrested for
killing a Bosniac man in Vitomirica, near Pec. On 17 October, three Kosovo
Albanian loggers were fired on near Radisevo near the Kosovo Serb enclave of
Banja. One Kosovo Albanian was killed in this incident. Four small shops in
Deneral Jankovic (near the Blace crossing point) were burned in suspected arson
attacks. The passenger train between Kosovo Polje and Zvecan has been stoned, as
has a Kosovo Serb convoy going to Suvi Do. Violent acts of criminal intimidation
have been reported in Istok.
4.
Politically motivated acts of violence included: a drive-by attack on the
President of the Balli Kombtar Party on 19 October, which resulted in the deaths of
his bodyguard and a journalist, and the wounding of another person; a bomb attack
on the house of a Kosovo Albanian and former leader of the Democratic League of
Kosovo in the predominantly Roma district of Mali Alas, on 23 October; and an
attack by unknown persons with automatic weapons on the office of the Democratic
League of Kosovo in Srbica, on 24 October.
5.
In Mitrovica, acts of violence, inter-ethnic intimidation and harassment
continue to be reported, although they are for the most part minor. On 25 October, a
Kosovo Albanian was assaulted by three Kosovo Serbs. On 26 October, there were
two incidents, including the harassment of three Kosovo Albanian women by
dissident Serb activists, and the stoning of Kosovo Serb children by a group of
Kosovo Albanian teenage boys. On 28 October, young Kosovo Albanians in North
Mitrovica provoked KFOR soldiers after being denied entry into a Kosovo Serb
area, a person stoned a KFOR guard, and two young Kosovo Albanians were
arrested by police of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) after pouring petrol on the eastern bridge and setting it alight.
6.
On 1 October, a mob of 60 civilians surrounded a KFOR patrol after a vehicle
was stopped for dangerous driving. The driver was detained for questioning by
UNMIK police. A KFOR soldier died after being shot in the head on 24 October by
a Kosovo Serb near Bozevca.

2

S/2001/1131

7.
KFOR continues to uncover weapons, ammunition and military equipment
throughout the province on a daily basis, including such items as grenades, rifles,
automatic weapons, shotguns, pistols, mortars and military uniforms. A number of
people have been arrested in connection with these operations. On 28 October, three
ethnic Albanians with Skopje addresses were arrested for illegal possession of
weapons and ammunition. In a campaign against counterfeiters, KFOR arrested a
man on 18 October wanted by UNMIK police.
8.
During the reporting period, 145 weapons were destroyed, bringing the total
number of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction programme to 10,132.
One Allied Government has expressed interest in funding a new weapons
destruction programme for KFOR.
Border/boundary security
9.
KFOR continued its activities along the borders with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedoniaa and with Albania to confiscate weapons, detain persons
illegally crossing the borders and deter others attempting to enter the province.
During the reporting period, 32 weapons, 201 grenades and mines, and 27,180
rounds of ammunition were seized. Sixty-five people were detained and handed over
to UNMIK police. The number of attempted illegal border crossings continues to
decrease. In anti-smuggling operations, a Kosovo Albanian was caught on the
administrative boundary with Montenegro and handed over to UNMIK police.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
10. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), initiatives taken included a
review of Directive 035 of the Commander of KFORb and the issue of the
Commander’s Training Directive for 2002.
11. Two cases of non-compliance were reported during October. These related to
misuse of position and authority, and celebratory fire. Four cases for dismissal
relating to continued and unjustified absenteeism were brought forward, and four
cases were closed, leaving 26 cases open. The open cases are either pending
investigation or the implementation of recent directives of the Joint Security
Execution Committee, or awaiting presentation to the judicial system. On 11
October, five officers of the Kosovo Police Service were detained by the Serb Army
(VJ) for being inside Montenegro.
12. KPC continued to carry out a variety of humanitarian projects throughout the
province, which are monitored by the International Organization for Migration. The
project for the Gjiliane sports and recreational ground received extra funding. This
project involves 30 KPC members working under the supervision and support of the
Multinational Brigade (East).
13. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.

__________________
a Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.
b Directive 035 emphasizes support of the KPC leadership, improvement of the relationship

between KFOR and KPC, intensified training and education towards more professionalism, and
promotion of a positive image of KPC.

3

S/2001/1131

Cooperation with international organizations
14. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
15. Only 1,600 Serbs returned to Kosovo in 2000, and only a very small number
have returned in 2001. The Commander of KFOR and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General plan to facilitate the return of Kosovo Serbs through the
mechanisms of the Joint Committee for the Return of Kosovo Serbs, in close
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
16. The number of refugees from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
estimated to have remained in Kosovo is 23,863.
Southern Serbia
17. The new multi-ethnic police force began patrols on 22 October in Presevo,
Medvedja and Bujanovac, three municipalities in the Presevo Valley.
Elections on 17 November
18. Active campaigning for the Assembly elections began on 3 October. Although
some unauthorized rallies have taken place, only minor incidents have been
reported. KFOR, whose role is to maintain a safe and secure environment, has
increased its presence on the ground.
19. The Presidential and Parliamentary endorsement by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia of the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the elections was given on 2
November. Over 150,000 Serbs have registered to vote. The most recent meeting of
the Kosovo Transitional Council was held at the beginning of October, when it met
in joint session with the Interim Administrative Council.
Outlook
20. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be stable. The main focus of
KFOR is to ensure that voting on 17 November takes place in a safe and secure
environment.

4
