S/2020/1059

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The present letter is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2539
(2020), in which the Council welcomed my report on the assessment of the continued
relevance of the resources of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
(S/2020/473) and requested me to present the first elements of a plan to implement
the recommendations of that assessment. Planning and implementation are proceeding
in close collaboration between the Secretariat and UNIFIL and in consultation, as
relevant, with the parties, troop-contributing countries and Council members.
The first elements of implementation fall into the categories of capabilities,
operations, new technology, the Maritime Task Force and operations support. They
include:
(a)

Replacement of heavy armoured personnel carriers with lighter vehicles;

(b)

Augmentation of liaison and coordination capacity;

(c)

Adjustments to the Force headquarters configuration;

(d)

Consolidation of United Nations positions;

(e)

Improved use of new technology;

(f)

Reconfiguration of the Maritime Task Force;

(g)

Optimization of the mix of enabling capabilities;

(h) Repatriation of surplus equipment and shift from United Nations-owned
equipment to contingent-owned equipment;
(i) Review of the regional information and communications technology
support structure;
(j)

Review of civilian staffing.

Capabilities
Replacement of heavy armoured personnel carriers with lighter vehicles. Partial
implementation has already been achieved. Of a total of 10 infantry units, 5 have
already deployed lighter combat vehicles, in the form of high-mobility light tactical
vehicles and reconnaissance vehicles, in adequate numbers. For the remaining
battalions, UNIFIL is analysing the appropriate structure and suitable mix of combat
vehicles required in the light of the different terrains in which the battalions operate.
Initial informal coordination with troop-contributing countries suggests that some of
them do not have such vehicles in their national inventory, meaning that the process
to procure the vehicles and deploy them in UNIFIL may take up to two years.

20-14380 (E)

041120

*2014380*

S/2020/1059

Augmentation of liaison and coordination capacity. Implementation will be
achieved by deploying two additional teams, one on each side of the Blue Line.
UNIFIL has identified existing resources among its military staff officers, whose
functions will need to be reprofiled, in consultation with the troop-contributing
countries concerned, and six officers are being reassigned to the Liaison Branch. The
timelines for the establishment of the two new teams in the Branch and their
positioning in Israel, as well as potentially in the Lebanese Armed Forces
headquarters, will be subject to coordination with the troop-contributing countries
and an exchange of letters with the Israeli and Lebanese authorities. Initial contacts
in that regard with both parties have been positive. UNIFIL continues to advocate
with the Israeli authorities the establishment of a liaison office in Tel Aviv.
Within the tripartite framework, UNIFIL is exploring with the parties the
creation of additional subcommittees to address salient recurring matters and to
facilitate their agreement on contentious areas along the Blue Line.
Adjustments to the Force headquarters configuration. The mission has
implemented the adjustments to the Force headquarters configuration, with the aim
of enhancing civil-military functional integration in the areas of information analysis,
air operations, training, gender and technology, by co-locating relevant staff and
strengthening the coordination mechanisms, including the internal system for
intelligence coordination of the mission, and embedding the military technica l staff
of the Command, Control and Communications Branch within the Field Technology
Section of the Mission Support Division.
Operations
Consolidation of United Nations positions. UNIFIL has identified five positions
in its area of operations that will be closed, with their responsibilities being absorbed
by the remaining layout of the Force. Two of the positions will be closed during the
2020/21 budget period, and the remaining three during the 2021/22 budget period.
Troops from those positions will be accommodated in nearby United Nations positions
in proximity to the Blue Line. The proposed closure of those positions further supports
the reposturing of forces, the rebalancing of troop density and the increasing of focus
on Blue Line monitoring, without losing sites that are of high value operationally.
Improved use of new technology. UNIFIL has initiated discussions with the
parties regarding the improved use of new technology. The mission has completed a
comprehensive plan for enhanced video surveillance at 19 selected United Nations
positions along the Blue Line and reprioritized relevant resources to allow for the
procurement of the pilot phase of the camera system during the current fiscal period.
The remaining requirements will be included in the budget for the 2021/22 period.
Other technology assets will be deployed as contingent -owned equipment, such as
radar capabilities aboard Maritime Task Force vessels and ground radar augmentation.
The possibility of deploying uncrewed aerial vehicles is being carefully examined in
close consultation with the parties.
Reconfiguration of the Maritime Task Force. It was noted in the assessment that
the Maritime Task Force might be in a position to make a partial transition of some
maritime interdiction responsibilities to the Lebanese Navy if the efforts to build the
capacity of the latter were maintained. UNIFIL will continue to support further plans
by the Lebanese Armed Forces and Navy for the required gradual transition of United
Nations responsibilities to the Government of Lebanon, working with the international
community for continued and increased support. The Secretariat is assessing applicable
factors and requirements for the future configuration of the Task Force on the basis
of those elements and recent developments, including the impact of the explosions in
Beirut on 4 August 2020, as noted in Security Council resolution 2539 (2020).
2/3

20-14380

S/2020/1059

Mission operational support
Optimization of the mix of enabling capabilities. UNIFIL is reviewing the
current structure of its mission support components with a view to ensuring that it
maintains an effective mix of enabling troop-contributing country capabilities and
civilian-contracted services. The budget for the period 2021/22 will reflect the
necessary changes.
Repatriation of surplus equipment and shift from United Nations-owned
equipment to contingent-owned equipment. Discussions have been initiated with
troop-contributing countries to identify and agree on surplus contingent -owned
equipment, and adjustments have begun to reduce enabling capacity to meet the
current mission requirements, including by amending pertinent memorandums of
understanding. Subject to agreement with the relevant troop-contributing countries,
the surplus contingent-owned equipment will be repatriated in 2021/22.
The Secretariat is engaging with the appropriate troop -contributing countries to
decrease the reliance on ageing United Nations-owned equipment and ensure that all
such countries deploy with fit-for-purpose contingent-owned equipment, in accordance
with the reconfiguration under way. The shift being cost-neutral, it will be implemented
following the approval by the General Assembly of the next budget for UNIFIL and
the readiness of the relevant countries to deploy contingent-owned equipment,
beginning in mid-2022. The financial implications will be reflected in future budgets.
Review of the regional information and communications technology support
structure. The technical review of the regional information and communications
technology support arrangements will have implications for other entities in the
region. The Secretariat is planning to undertake a comprehensive review in 2021. Any
related changes in support arrangements will be reflected in the budget processes for
the period 2022/23.
Civilian staffing review. The review is close to completion. A UNIFIL internal
working group has completed comprehensive consultations with all components of
the mission and with the staff unions and the Secretariat. The structure of the Mission
Support Division and the staffing requirements for the strategic planning capabilities
in the Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander have been included, and the
civilian component of UNIFIL has been fully aligned with the reconfiguration of the
uniformed component. The review will be completed in time to ensure that all required
reconfigurations will be included in the budget submission for the period 2021/22.
I am confident that, with the cooperation of both parties and the continued
support of members of the Security Council and troop-contributing countries, the
implementation of all aspects of the assessment is feasible and will result in the
optimization of the mission’s configuration and operations. I also expect to see, as a
result, that the mission’s capacity to fully and efficiently implement its mandate is
enhanced. However, it is important to recall that that capacity also depends to a very
large extent on the full support and cooperation of the parties.
I should like to express my appreciation for the continued united support of the
Security Council for UNIFIL.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-14380

3/3
