S/2021/77

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 January 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 25 January 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Mexico,
Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (on behalf of the
A3+1 — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines),
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “Identical
letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council (S/2016/53)”, convened on Thursday, 21 January 2021. A statement was also
delivered by Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

21-01008 (E) 290121 240221

*2101008*

S/2021/77

Annex I
Briefing by Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Colombia
I wish to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to present the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on Colombia (S/2020/1301) and to brief the Security Council
on developments since the issuance of the report. I welcome the participation of
Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi and once again thank her for her support
for the Verification Mission.
The past four years since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) have seen remarkable progress in terms of Colombia’s path
towards sustainable and lasting peace, even in the face of arduous challenges,
including that of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The opportunities for peace
and development that Colombians enjoy today would have seemed unthinkable only
a decade ago, when the conflict between the FARC-EP guerrillas and the State was
still raging. Colombians in rural areas, who suffered the brunt of the conflict, are
beginning to see increased investments and State presence in their communities;
Colombian society is coming to terms with its past through a transitional justice
system centred on victims; and thousands of men and women who were in arms five
years ago are now building better lives for themselves and their families, alongside
local communities.
Credit for those strides forward goes to the two parties carrying out their
commitments under the peace agreement and to the efforts being made alongside
them by Colombian institutions and civil society, as well as to the international
community for its support.
Indeed, 2021 is year five of the 15-year time frame envisioned for the
implementation of the entirety of the peace agreement. It is incumbent to ensure
that 2021 is remembered as the year in which bold steps were taken to bring to
fruition the full promise of sustainable peace enshrined in the agreement. I urge both
parties and all Colombian actors to work together to protect the achievements made
so far and to accelerate momentum on pending issues, especially the five priorities
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report.
Violence against former combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders
and communities remains the most serious threat to peacebuilding in Colombia.
While multiple measures have been taken to try to address that violence, every
killing is a tragic blow to peace and a call to ensure that the security measures
undertaken by the authorities translate into effective improvements in the territories.
Since the publication of the Secretary-General’s report, four more former
combatants have been killed, bringing the total to 252 since the signing of the peace
agreement. The victims include a 22-year-old female former combatant, Yolanda
Zabala Mazo, who was shot and killed along with her 17-year-old sister in Antioquia
department on 1 January.
Social leaders, human rights defenders and members of political parties also
continue, unfortunately, to be victimized. On Christmas Eve, Pedro Alejandro
Pérez Doria, a municipal council member for the Conservative Party in Córdoba
department, was killed, demonstrating once again the need for protection measures
for members of all political parties. And on 11 January, Gonzalo Cardona Molina,
an advocate for the protection of endangered species, was found dead in Tolima

2/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

department. His killing underscores the danger facing environmental activists
across the country.
Some welcome steps have been taken during the last few weeks. On 5 January,
Vice-President Marta Lucía Ramírez announced measures to increase protection for
the members of the Special Forum on Gender, following threats reported against
10 of its 16 members. On 12 January, the Government and the United Nations country
team in Colombia jointly announced a $3.1 million investment from the United
Nations multi-partner trust fund to support prevention and collective protection for
former combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders and leaders of the illicitcrop substitution programmes in three priority regions: Chocó, the Pacific coast of
Nariño and Catatumbo, in Norte de Santander.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly warned in his reports about the
implications of continued budget shortfalls for the Specialized Subdirectorate
for Security and Protection of the National Protection Unit, a unit that provides
collective and individual close-protection schemes for former combatants. More
than 550 vacancies remain for bodyguards, and more than 1,000 close-protection
requests are still pending review. This issue should be prioritized, as it has direct
implications for the safety of former combatants. It is also important to ensure that
women former combatants have equal access to close protection.
Bringing to justice those responsible for these attacks is also critical. Support
for the work of the Special Investigations Unit in investigating and prosecuting
such crimes remains essential in that regard. It is also important to strengthen local
judicial capacity, including through regional specialized judges focused on this type
of crime.
Two weeks ago, four of the seven individuals arrested for the killing of former
FARC-EP leader Alexander Parra were released after they were not brought to
trial within the deadlines set by the Colombian legislation. Mr. Parra’s killing, in
October 2019, was especially notorious owing to his leadership in the reintegration
process and because it is one of only two killings that have occurred within a former
territorial area for training and reintegration. Although the trial remains open, the
individuals’ release on procedural grounds has prompted concerns and calls for a
thorough review of what occurred and how such circumstances may be prevented
in future.
Given the numerous killings of former combatants being reported at or near
new reintegration areas, it is key to develop a focused strategy to provide security
around those areas as well as the surrounding communities.
Regarding the second priority — the sustainability of the reintegration
process — promising developments have occurred since President Duque Márquez’s
meeting in November with former combatants who marched to Bogotá from around
the country in the “Pilgrimage for life and peace”. In addition to the land purchased
for the former territorial area for training and reintegration in Dabeiba, announced
by President Duque Márquez. in December, the Government has announced that
plots for five additional former territorial areas for training and reintegration
will be purchased by mid-February. Recently, through a joint effort on the part of
institutions at all levels, a plot of land was granted to 300 former combatants in Huila
department to undertake cattle-grazing and other productive projects. I trust that this
momentum will continue, including through the effective use of various avenues for
granting land to former combatants and progress on formalizing land arrangements
for the remaining former territorial areas for training and reintegration, in close
consultation with former combatants.

21-010083/30

S/2021/77

I also hope that the forthcoming sessions of the National Reintegration Council
in various departments agreed by President Duque Márquez and former combatants
at their meeting will lead to progress in ensuring the same level of institutional
support and productive opportunities for former combatants within and outside the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
As reported by the Secretary-General, several former territorial areas
for training and reintegration, new reintegration areas and former combatants’
productive projects have had to relocate or are pending relocation owing to threats
by illegal armed groups. It is crucial for those relocations to proceed in an orderly
manner so as to ensure that conditions in the new locations are apt for former
combatants to resettle. Moreover, I urge the national and local Governments to
ensure that the communities left behind in the former locations continue to receive
institutional support.
That brings me to the third priority outlined by the Secretary-General:
consolidating the integrated presence of the State in conflict-affected areas. For
illegal armed groups and criminal organizations that profit from limited State
presence, the implementation of the peace agreement represents a threat to their
criminal activities. They are determined to drive out State institutions and stamp
out the voices of social leaders through violence and intimidation. They cannot be
allowed to succeed. Authorities must remain firm in the continued implementation
of instruments such as the development programmes with a territorial focus, the
National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops and the
comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and organizations
in the territories. Consolidating the institutional presence, strengthening local
protection and conflict-resolution mechanisms and providing lawful economic
opportunities for vulnerable populations are the strongest bulwark against illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations.
Sustained dialogue between the parties is fundamental to the implementation
of all aspects of the peace agreement, which is why strengthening dialogue is the
fourth priority mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report. I welcome the parties’
decision to extend the mandate of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement, and I urge them
to make increased use of the Commission this year, including with the support of
the guarantor countries, to resolve their differences and find mutually agreeable
solutions to implementation challenges. In addition, I urge the parties to spare no
effort in working together, including through the tripartite mechanism with the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, on issues such as those related to
the former FARC-EP’s assets, bearing in mind that the ultimate aim in this process
is to contribute to reparations for victims of the conflict.
The final priority set out by the Secretary-General is to continue laying the
groundwork for reconciliation across the country. Victims and Colombian society
in general will be looking with great expectation this year at the Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, with the first sentences
set to be issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the continued work by the
Truth Commission in supporting reconciliation efforts and advancing in its final
report, and sustained progress by the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed
as Missing. A few weeks ago, thanks to the testimonies of parties to the conflict, the
participation of victims and strong inter-institutional coordination, the Special Unit
found alive, and then reunited, a mother and daughter who had both been declared
missing 17 years ago. That inspiring story is one of the many examples of the results
of the work of the Comprehensive System and illustrates why it is so important for
all actors to lend their full support to the System’s three entities and for all those who
4/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

took part in the conflict to contribute fully to efforts to determine the truth and to
undertake reparatory actions for victims.
In conclusion, the firm backing of the Council and of the international
community at large remains one of the key factors allowing Colombia to continue
to be a source of hope and inspiration for peaceful conflict resolution around the
world. Its unanimous and unequivocal support will remain essential as Colombians
continue to persevere in the full implementation of their landmark peace agreement.

21-010085/30

S/2021/77

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
China welcomes the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Her Excellency Claudia Blum de Barberi, at today’s meeting. We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
As the Colombian peace process enters its fifth year, peacebuilding continues
to make notable progress, and various tasks covered by the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo, including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, State governance,
economic development and rural reform, are moving forward. That is a success story
of the political settlement of a domestic internal conflict and peacebuilding with the
support of the United Nations. China highly commends the Colombian Government
and the parties concerned for their efforts.
Ensuring people’s safety and maintaining social stability are key elements
of the peace agreement. In several departments of Colombia, violent crime and
violence against former combatants and civilians are still endemic. We support the
Colombian Government in its efforts to improve governance capacity in rural areas,
enhance security and protection measures and step up its efforts to fight illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/1301), extreme poverty
is closely related to violence and other criminal activities, posing challenges to the
reintegration of former combatants into society. We encourage Colombia to increase
investment in development, address gaps and weaknesses in all areas of the economy
and society and lay a solid foundation for lasting peace and security.
We appreciate the efforts being made by the Colombian Government to actively
promote balanced, inclusive and sustainable development, with a particular focus on
closing the gap between rural and urban areas and between various regions. We
support Colombia in continuing the implementation of the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops and intensifying drug control so as
to eliminate the breeding ground for crime. We are pleased to see that the Colombian
Government’s efforts to strengthen infrastructure, including that for transportation,
irrigation and electricity, and improve basic public services such as education, health
care and housing are producing tangible results.
China firmly supports Colombia’s efforts to comprehensively implement
the peace agreement. It is our hope that the Colombian Government will address
the pandemic and economic recovery in a holistic manner while consolidating and
advancing the peace process. Of course, implementing the peace agreement is a
lengthy process, and peacebuilding requires persistent efforts. We trust that the
Colombian Government will unite the people and lead them in properly addressing
all difficulties and challenges.
China supports Special Representative Massieu and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia in continuing their support for the implementation
of the Colombian peace agreement. We hope that the Mission will, on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty of Colombia, enhance coordination with the United
Nations country team to forge synergy.

6/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

Annex III
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing today and for his valuable work. I express Estonia’s strong support
for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I also warmly
welcome the presence of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Last year marked a significant milestone, namely, the fourth anniversary of
the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). Much has already
been achieved but more remains to be done. It is now crucial to stay on course and
to continue the full implementation of the peace agreement. For that, the continued
engagement of all parties remains crucial.
Colombia has been hit hard by the pandemic and its socioeconomic
consequences. We commend the efforts of the Government of Colombia to mitigate
that impact. The year 2021 will be important for recovering from the pandemic
and consolidating the achievements of the peace process, as well as addressing the
root causes of the conflict. We encourage the Government to work together with
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) on essential elements to
achieve progress in the implementation of the peace agreement. We are pleased to
see the steps taken regarding access to land for the former FARC-EP combatants as
part of the implementation of projects in the former territorial area for training and
reintegration. It is essential to ensure the sustainability of the reintegration process,
both economically and politically, and to address the pending issues.
The security situation remains the main challenge for the peace process. We
are deeply concerned about the continued killings of social and indigenous leaders,
human rights defenders and former FARC-EP combatants. Seventy-three killings of
ex-combatants in 2020 is an alarming number. Violence represents a fundamental
threat to the success of the peace agreement. It is essential to bring to justice those
who threaten or kill and to prevent attacks against people implementing the peace
agreement. We reiterate the need to increase the State presence in rural territories
to protect communities. The finalization of the Government’s public policy on
dismantling illegal armed groups and their support networks would also represent
an important step.
It is also important to make progress in implementing the gender provisions
of the peace agreement, such as equal access to security and protection schemes for
former female combatants, and to address the challenges faced by indigenous and
Afro-Colombian communities.
We encourage the Government to continue to make full use of all mechanisms
and to guarantee the independent functioning of all institutions established under
the peace agreement, including the transitional justice mechanisms, which play an
essential role in guaranteeing the rights of victims to truth, justice reparation and
guarantees of non-repetition. Progress can be achieved only through the support and
full cooperation of all State institutions with the transitional justice mechanism. The
year 2021 will be crucial for the issuing of the first sentences by the peace court
and the final report by the Truth Commission. We support a role for the Verification
Mission in verifying compliance with the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, as envisaged in the Final Agreement.
21-010087/30

S/2021/77

Building peace is hard work. The Colombian peace process has been
steadily progressing; however, it remains fragile and requires our continued
support. Estonia strongly supports the firm commitment of both parties — the
Government of Colombia and FARC — to continuing the implementation of the final
peace agreement.

8/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos
Ruiz Massieu for his comprehensive and enlightening briefing. I also welcome the
participation of Ms. Blum de Barberi in our meeting.
It is now more than four years since the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace was signed. Building peace is
a long and demanding road. France therefore welcomes the progress made by the
Colombian Government and people. But we must also look clearly at the road that
remains ahead of us. With regard to the ambitions set in 2016, the implementation
of several provisions of the agreement remains insufficient. I will come back to four
specific aspects.
First, the continuation of violence is worrisome. It affects children, young
people, former combatants, civil society figures, ethnic community leaders and
human rights defenders. France calls for an end to the violence and for those
responsible to be brought to justice. Colombian society aspires to greater security,
which was the whole purpose of the marches and mobilizations we witnessed at
the end of last year. As we know, the long-term solution is to strengthen the State
presence throughout the country, including in the most remote areas.
Secondly, we welcome all the efforts made with regard to the reintegration
of former combatants. That process is already bearing fruit. Efforts must continue,
with a focus on former combatants who reside outside the former territorial training
and reintegration areas.
Thirdly, comprehensive rural reform must be implemented. In that regard, it
is important to overcome the long-standing issue of access to land. Achieving peace
also means providing viable and fair socioeconomic opportunities for all and ending
once and for all the grip of drug trafficking. The illicit crop substitution programme,
which has demonstrated its effectiveness and represents immense hope for thousands
of families, therefore deserves to be strengthened with additional resources. The
sections of the agreement dealing with ethnic and gender issues should also receive
special attention, as should those related to political reform, which unfortunately is
progressing too slowly.
My fourth point is perhaps the most important. We note with great satisfaction
that the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition
has made progress. Many former combatants have engaged in a truth-finding
process. That is to be welcomed. A few days ago, the Colombian Government sent a
letter requesting that the Security Council extend the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. That is an extremely important gesture, which
France welcomes, and to which we are prepared to respond favourably.
The implementation of the peace agreement is a 15-year process, as the Special
Representative recalled. We are still at the beginning of that process, and there are
many challenges. But, four years later, the assessment gives us cause for optimism.
Colombia is an example for the international community. That is why France, as
well as the European Union, will continue to support all those in Colombia who are
mobilized daily to build peace.

21-010089/30

S/2021/77

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
I would like to begin by thanking Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to put on record our appreciation for his outreach to the
incoming members of the Security Council and the willingness of the entire team to
engage with us.
Colombia is witnessing remarkable progress in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The condemnation of violence, the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and its transformation
into a political party, and the commitment and resolve of the Government of Colombia
to the agreement and the central role of the United Nations in its implementation
have all positively contributed to the process of peacebuilding in Colombia.
Today democracy in Colombia is deepening through increased political
participation. The transitional justice system to ensure truth, justice and reparations
to victims is making headway, particularly under the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and the Truth Commission. The conflict-affected communities are witnessing the
fruits of long-overdue investments in their regions, contributing to socioeconomic
development. The extent of violence of this decades-long armed conflict is decreasing
and the security situation is slowly improving in the rural areas. We therefore
applaud the efforts of the people and the Government of Colombia in realizing the
achievements of the past four years.
The implementation of the peace agreement has gained further ground in
the past four months despite challenges, including those posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. The Colombian leadership and authorities have continued to
engage with former FARC-EP combatants to address problems in the reintegration
progress. The process of purchasing land for ex-combatants living in the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration has gained momentum. The National
Reintegration Council has started holding sessions at the regional level. The National
Commission on Security Guarantees is also expected to soon adopt a public policy
for dismantling illegal armed groups and criminal organizations. We welcome each
of those positive developments.
The path ahead in the implementation of the peace agreement remains both
complex and challenging, especially given the interconnected nature of the issues
involved. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, the long-standing gap in the integrated presence of the State between
urban and rural areas, especially those affected by the conflict, needs to be addressed
more effectively. There have been reports that suggest that during the pandemic
security vulnerabilities have increased, especially in remote areas where State
presence is limited. The enhanced presence of the State authorities will help tackle
the challenges posed by organized criminal groups and drug traffickers.
Secondly, the recent killings of former combatants, social leaders and human
rights defenders necessitate the strengthening of the Tripartite Protection and Security
Mechanism. The transitional justice mechanism should be more responsive to
ensuring justice for the victims of the conflict. Strengthening local judicial capacity,
particularly in the regions most affected by the violence, is also key to combating
such violence. The work of the Special Investigations Unit of the Attorney-General’s
Office, created by the peace agreement, therefore remains critical.
Thirdly, the implementation of holistic rural reforms, creating enabling
infrastructure, reintegrating ex-combatants across the country, including those not
10/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

in the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, providing land and
effectively implementing the illicit crop substitution programme are crucial in order
to discourage the activities of FARC-EP dissident groups, which are threatening the
reintegration process.
Fourthly, India supports the Secretary-General’s five proposed priorities for
2021, focusing on the United Nations mission’s verification of the sections of the
peace agreement that concern reintegration and security guarantees.
Fifthly, we have taken note of Colombia’s request to expand the mandate of
the United Nations Verification Mission to include the monitoring of sentences to be
handed down by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We look forward to working with
other Council members during the mandate renewal of the Mission.
India has special relations with Colombia. In 2019, India and Colombia
celebrated 60 years since the establishment of diplomatic relations. Over the years,
the relationship has strengthened and diversified in various areas of mutual interest
encompassing the political, cultural and commercial fields. That is evidenced
by growing trade and investments from India and the increasing presence of
Indian companies in Colombia. In 2018, the Indian Space Research Organization
successfully launched the FACSAT-1 satellite, the first-ever Colombian Air Force
nanosatellite. India offers more than 100 training slots to Colombian officials under
the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation programme annually. Also, every
year, thousands of Colombians visit India for tourism, nature therapy and to learn
yoga. As Colombia marches ahead as one of the major economies in Latin America,
India, as a long-standing partner, remains willing to support Colombia in its journey
towards peace, progress and prosperity.

21-0100811/30

S/2021/77

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to start by warmly welcoming Minister Blum de Barberi to the Security
Council this afternoon and by thanking the Special Representative for his very
comprehensive brief and, more importantly, for all the ongoing commendable work
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
In November, we marked the fourth anniversary of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The journey to peace
has not been easy or without sacrifice, and we know that much remains to be done.
But I want to say that the dividends of that work are being felt by more and more
Colombians every single day, and we salute all who work for that.
Let me reiterate Ireland’s well-known support for the peace process in Colombia.
We welcome the continued commitment of the parties to the full implementation of
the peace agreement. As in all our countries, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
brought enormous challenges. But, notwithstanding those challenges, we recognize
that significant progress continues to be made in implementing the agreement. The
purchase of land for housing and productive projects for former combatants and the
ongoing progress on truth, justice and victim reparation are just two examples of the
determination that we see.
We also share the serious concern expressed by the Special Representative
about the ongoing violence. The protection and security of former combatants and
those living in conflict-affected communities, as well as social leaders and human
rights defenders, are essential. We believe that the perpetrators of such violence must
be brought to justice. Sustainable peace cannot be delivered if peacebuilders live in
fear, suffer harm or, worse, lose their lives.
We are deeply concerned about reports of the continued forced recruitment
of children, as well as threats against youth leaders by illegal armed groups and
by terrorist organizations. The activities of those illegal groups pose an ongoing
challenge to building peace. We encourage the rapid adoption and implementation of
a comprehensive public policy to dismantle criminal organizations and their support
networks. Effective strategies for continued reintegration, land redistribution
and providing alternative means of economic activity, including effective crop
substitution, are all vital to stabilizing areas that are still experiencing violence.
We also support all the Secretary-General’s recommendations in his latest
report (S/2020/1301), including those aimed at improving security and consolidating
the progress towards peace. We hope and trust that they will bear fruit.
I want to highlight two areas of particular interest today, based on Ireland’s
own experience of conflict and peacebuilding on our island.
The first issue is transitional justice. An innovative approach to transitional
justice is at the very heart of the Colombian peace prcocess. Truth, justice and
reconciliation efforts have been the bedrock of the transformation that has been
achieved to date. Ireland welcomes the progress achieved by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace and the Truth Commission and for the families of forcibly disappeared
persons. We welcome the request by the President of Colombia for an expansion
of the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission. The verification of
compliance with sentences issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace would help to
further build the trust in the process of all parties at a critical juncture.
12/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

The second issue that I wanted to raise is that of women and peace and
security. The Colombian peace agreement quite simply serves as an exemplary
model for gender-inclusive and gender-responsive peacebuilding. Ireland applauds
the progress reported by the National Reintegration Council’s Technical Working
Group on Gender and the Government’s High-level Forum on Gender. This work
is embedding women’s full participation in the political process. We want to see
this continue because we are ambitious for Colombian women. We also want to see
full implementation of all the provisions, including on ethnicity and gender. That
remains an important priority. We urge the allocation of sufficient resources —
technical and financial — to allow completion of this vital work. We are particularly
concerned about the gendered nature of violence perpetrated against women and
girls, including social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. The
incidence of such violence, alarmingly, has increased in recent months. Both in our
national capacity and through our broader work here on the Security Council on
women and peace and security, Ireland will continue to work with all in Colombia to
empower and protect women and girls.
In conclusion, the peace process in Colombia rightly stands out as an example,
globally, of successful peacebuilding. It serves as an example for others affected by
conflict. We in Ireland know that peace can be fragile and that building peace takes
time, courage, forbearance and — always — just a little faith. I assure Minister
Blum de Barberi that she can count on Ireland as a faithful friend on this journey.
As a member of the Council, we will work with her and with our European Union
partners, including the European Union Special Envoy for the Peace Process in
Colombia, Irishman Eamon Gilmore.
As we start a new and, hopefully, brighter year, we encourage all to redouble
their efforts to ensure the full, comprehensive and inclusive implementation of the
final peace agreement.

21-0100813/30

S/2021/77

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
We warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, to this meeting.
For Mexico, today’s meeting is of the utmost importance, as it addresses the
situation in a country very close to us, with which we are united by countless ties
of friendship, history and cooperation. We have stood by the people of Colombia
throughout the arduous process towards peace, always favouring dialogue between
the parties.
Today, four years after the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia–Ejército del
Pueblo, we congratulate our Colombian brothers and sisters for the steps they have
taken towards building sustainable peace.
We recognize the progress made in reducing violence, promoting greater
political participation and fostering the transitional justice system, which is essential
to achieve the goals of justice and accountability.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1301) and are very
grateful for the presentation made by the Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, whose work we acknowledge, as well as that of the entire Mission
team. The five priorities outlined in the report seem to us relevant and timely, and
we urge all parties to move decisively towards their fulfilment.
We welcome the request made by President Iván Duque to expand the Mission’s
mandate and incorporate verification tasks into the sanctions issued by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. United Nations support should continue to strengthen the peace
process, understood as a process focused on victims and national reconciliation. We
recognize the effort and commitment of President Duque to continue the work of the
Mission, and we take note that the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC) also agrees that the mandate should be expanded.
I also note Colombia’s exemplary commitment to multilateralism, as evidenced
by its asking the Council for support to strengthen the peace and reconciliation
process. We invite the members of the Council to heed Colombia’s request and,
once we have received the Secretary-General’s recommendations, to establish that
new component in line with what was agreed in resolution 2545 (2020) and the
peace agreement.
It is very clear to us that the Special Jurisdiction for Peace will have to issue
its first judgments in the coming months, which we eagerly await.
The Secretary-General’s report recognizes the progress made in Colombia
with regard to peacebuilding, the expansion of spaces to promote inclusive political
participation, as well as the process of social reintegration of ex-combatants through
successful productive projects. In that context, we also highlight the importance of
providing mental health services to overcome the serious psychosocial effects of
the conf lict.
14/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

We also commend the progress in public policy with regard to housing, and
the legislative initiatives resulting from dialogue held in a spirit of cooperation
between the parties.
In the area of rural reform, we recognize the implementation of development
programmes with a territorial focus, and we trust that the road maps for the
stabilization of the remaining regions will be finalized.
As an agent of change in reconciliation initiatives and through the active
participation of young people in the implementation of the peace agreement,
Colombian civil society has undoubtedly been instrumental.
Nevertheless, we regret the levels of violence that still persist in several areas
of the country. We condemn, of course, the acts of aggression against ex-combatants,
human rights defenders, indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities and members
of the LGBTI community.
We strongly condemn the murders of social leaders. We also condemn the
recruitment of indigenous children by dissident groups of the former FARC. In order
to consolidate the progress made, calls for greater protection and security must be
heeded in order to provide development opportunities for communities.
With regard to gender, the final agreement clearly establishes an inclusive
process. However, progress has been limited. We believe that more technical and
financial resources will be needed to accelerate the implementation of the gender
provisions on issues such as reintegration and security guarantees. We call for attention
to be paid to the victims and for the necessary preventive policies to be implemented.
It is clear that the presence of illegal armed groups and organized crime is
another crucial element underlying the violence. We recognize the progress made in
disarmament campaigns, which have confiscated a considerable number of weapons.
But no national action on that issue will be sufficient if it is not complemented at
the international level by the fight against the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons. The Council should take note of that.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s observation that the final agreement
offers a series of instruments to provide opportunities for development, security
and peace to the communities that were most affected by the conflict and are now
suffering the effects of the pandemic. In that regard, we believe that the steps
identified in the five priorities of the report will undoubtedly contribute to the
strengthening of peace in Colombia.
Mexico will continue to support the work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia through the Mexican observers and will undoubtedly continue
to support the peace efforts of the Government of Colombia.

21-0100815/30

S/2021/77

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Massieu for the report (S/2020/1301) and for the concrete recommendations, which
we support. The Security Council has been a leading guardian of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. As a
new member, we look forward to contributing to the Council’s work to safeguard the
integrity and ensure the implementation of the accord. We come to this role with the
background of our long-standing contribution to the United Nations mission, and as
a guarantor country to the peace agreement, together with Cuba.
Norway has long accompanied Colombia in its efforts to achieve peace and
we greatly appreciate the trust that the parties have shown us. We join the SecretaryGeneral in recognizing the significant results of the peace agreement during its first
four years. From our perspective, the key achievements include the transformation
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARCEP) from a guerrilla group into a political actor; progress in reintegration, including
through the establishment of productive projects for ex-combatants; progress made
in rural development in conflict areas; and the substantial work of the transitional
justice institutions in fulfilling their commitments towards the victims.
It is a remarkable achievement that the vast majority of former FARC-EP
combatants remain in the reintegration process. That speaks both to the commitment of
those former combatants, but also to the Government’s commitment to reintegration.
Moving forward, we encourage the authorities, in cooperation with the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), to take further steps in order to
ensure access to land for housing and productive projects; to combat stigmatization
and build trust between former combatants, State institutions and communities; to
increase the institutional attention to the new reintegration areas; and to make sure
that women ex-combatants have equal access to reintegration projects.
We remember that, during the peace negotiations, a turning point was reached
when the victims on both sides of the conflict were placed at the centre of the
discussions. Now, in 2021, the victims must again be placed at the centre. The Truth
Commission will issue its final report, and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace will
deliver its first judgments. We urge both parties and other actors to cooperate fully
with these institutions and to enable them to carry out their work independently and
without political interference. The principles of justice, truth, reparation and nonrepetition must remain above ideologies and political polarization.
In support of that endeavour, the Security Council should swiftly consider the
request for an expansion of the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to verify compliance with the judgments to be issued by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace.
At the same time, we express our deep concern about the security situation
of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders. Norway firmly
believes that an inclusive political process, with respect for human rights — including
women’s rights — and with the rule of law at its core, is a prerequisite for achieving
lasting, sustainable peace.
We remain particularly worried about the growing level of violence, threats,
stigmatization, and discrimination against women, indigenous and Afro-Colombian
leaders, environmental and LGBTI activists and human rights defenders.
16/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

For the Council, which oversees the implementation of the peace agreement,
it should be intolerable that more than 250 ex-combatants — signatories to the
agreement — have been killed since its signing. Since the beginning of this year,
four ex-combatants have already been killed. We recognize the efforts made by the
Government to improve security, but these numbers demonstrate that more needs to
be done.
We therefore echo the Secretary-General’s call on the authorities to
immediately redouble their efforts, including by bolstering protection and filling
the vacancies in the National Protection Unit; enabling the National Commission
on Security Guarantees to finalize and implement a public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups; enhancing the capacity of the Special Investigation Unit of
the Office of the Attorney-General’s office; and accelerating the implementation
of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human
Rights Defenders.
Indeed, guaranteeing women full, equal and meaningful participation in
all phases of implementation is fundamental for ensuring sustainable peace. We
commend the efforts of the Government to trace gender-specific indicators, and we
encourage the enhanced implementation of gender-related provisions.
Advancing the implementation of the peace agreement requires sustained
and constructive dialogue between the parties. Norway encourages the Government
and the FARC to make better use of the mechanisms for dialogue provided for
in the agreement, including the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement and the National
Reintegration Council.
In that spirit, while we recognize the challenges related to the identification
and handing over of conflict-related assets, we strongly encourage both parties to
jointly ensure that those assets can be recovered for the benefit of the victims.
We commend the Government, the FARC and the Colombian people for the
significant progress achieved. Nevertheless, important work remains. The accord
calls for nothing less than comprehensive and structural changes to address the
root causes of the conflict, including through the implementation of the provisions
of the ethnic chapter, as well as rural reform, political participation and illegalcrop substitution. We urge both parties to honour to their commitments, increase
efforts and work together to preserve progress towards sustainable peace for the
Colombian people.
Let me end with an assurance that Norway will stand by its consistent and
long-term commitment to peace in Colombia.

21-0100817/30

S/2021/77

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for presenting the report on the situation in the country. We
are also glad to welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, to this meeting.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/1301) adequately reflects the
developments in Colombia. It raises great concern, as we clearly see gaps in the
Government’s implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
This historic document, supported by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, is, in itself, a road map for settlement, which means that it must be strictly
upheld. However, the five recommendations that are presented in the report address
almost every aspect of the peace process. It means that progress on all tracks
is insufficient.
That conclusion is confirmed by the public discontent in Colombia that swept
through the streets in recent months. Thousands of people from the indigenous
population and participants of the peace process went on march, seeking governmental
protection because it is the Government that bears the main responsibility for the
security of the population.
According to the data provided by reputable non-governmental organization
Indepaz, a systemic intimidation and extermination campaign was launched against
the participants of the peace process. The position of civic activists and public
leaders is no less gruesome. As a result, part of the population has to take up arms
again. It is no coincidence that the report becomes more alarming when it touches
upon those returning to the ranks of illegal armed formations.
Other priority tracks, such as comprehensive land reform, electoral changes,
political and social reintegration of peace process participants, and drugs also
require urgent progress. Statistical data indicates that in 2020 drug production
volume remains unchanged, implying that in fact there has been zero progress. State
agencies that are responsible for the peace process, including the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, still lack financing.
Assessments indicating low efficiency of the Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement
raise particular concern. It is not seldom that the Government ignores Commission
meetings, whereas that body is crucial, as it provides a platform for direct dialogue
between the Colombian sides. Security Council members know from the cases of
Syria, Ukraine and Venezuela that direct dialogue between sides is an indispensable
part of any lasting settlement.
The final peace agreement is losing momentum. Against this backdrop, we
are concerned at attempts to interpret and substitute provisions of the document with
the “peace with legality” programme. Programme implementation at the local level
sometimes looks like an attempt to revise the final agreement.
All of the foregoing takes Colombia further from its strategic goal of lasting
national reconciliation. We expect that Bogotá will take the criticism contained in
the Secretary-General’s report in a constructive manner and forcefully start to fulfil
peacebuilding tasks.
18/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

I would now like to make a couple more points on the report. First, we
would very much like to see in future reports a dynamic headcount of illegal
armed formations such as dissidents from the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and members of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. Those figures could
be indicative of the level of public trust in the Government’s efforts.
Secondly, we are surprised that the report contains separate statistics on
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex representatives. This group is not
considered vulnerable, so the inclusion of this kind of specifics in the report provides
no added value. What the report really lacks is information on the social safety net
and the security of families with children where the breadwinner has fallen victim
to conflict or attack. In post-conflict situations, single-parent families constitute a
vulnerable group.
Thirdly, we believe the report gives insufficient information on the resolution
of disputes between the Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. Lasting
peace in Colombia is impossible without the participation of all key stakeholders.
Russia is ready to offer its support for the Colombian peace process in order to
ensure that peace is sustainable and irreversible.
In conclusion, let me touch upon an important regional issue, or, rather, a
problem of global proportions. A short time ago Russia was intending to provide
humanitarian financial assistance to the countries affected by tropical storms Eta
and Iota. The money was intended to be spent on water filters to curb the spread
of disease. However, the United States-based Citibank, which acted as mediator in
the transaction, refused to transfer funds to the Central American Parliament. After
two weeks of inquiries into the source of the funds, which was the Russian Foreign
Ministry, Citibank returned the money. To date, we have received no explanation
either from the bank or from the United States Department of State as to the reasons
for the return of those funds. This refusal of our contribution inflicted harm on
ordinary people who were merely waiting for urgent humanitarian aid.
That is one of many examples of destructive impact of illegal restrictive
measures on humanitarian cooperation. I am pointing this out for our colleagues
who justify their malevolent policies with the claim that their targeted sanctions
have no impact on humanitarian issues. Pandemics and natural disasters put matters
in perspective and prove that restrictive measures have become a major challenge to
the sustainable recovery of States. This issue deserves the closest attention of, and a
response by, the international community.

21-0100819/30

S/2021/77

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
I also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his comprehensive briefing and acknowledge the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Five years into the final peace agreement between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), the Colombian peace process continues to serve as a global
exemplar. The A3+1 commends the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP
for their renewed commitments to ensuring that the ultimate goal of lasting peace,
stability and prosperity is achieved throughout the country.
We note the advances in the peace process as underscored in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1301), along with the challenges, which
have been further aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is critical that
the final agreement be implemented comprehensively. We urge all stakeholders to
capitalize on the positive momentum and fulfil their obligations vis-à-vis the final
agreement. We also offer the following observations.
First, we remain extremely concerned about the dire security conditions
confronting former combatants, women social leaders, human rights defenders and
indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders. In this respect, we strongly condemn the
senseless killings of 25 former combatants who were assassinated while awaiting a
response to their protection requests by the National Protection Unit.
In addition, the A3+1 shares the Secretary-General’s views that the greatest
threat to the implementation of the final agreement remains the constant violence
against those who laid down their arms in good faith and remain committed to peace,
against the communities that have endured violence for decades and against the
social leaders and human rights defenders who work on their behalf. As we have
mentioned previously, the root causes of conflict need to be frontally tackled and the
perpetrators of violence held accountable.
The A3+1 is encouraged by the meetings between President Iván Duque
Márquez and former FARC-EP members, as well as those with indigenous leaders
following the “Pilgrimage for life and peace” and minga marches last October.
We welcome the Government’s reassurances that enhance security guarantees and
strengthen the reintegration process, and we look forward to the implementation
of effective security measures. The A3+1 also reiterates its call for the regular
convening of meetings of the National Commission on Security Guarantees in order
to complete work on the public policy to dismantle criminal organizations and their
support networks and to advance in the formulation of the Strategic Plan for Security
and Protection.
Furthermore, we applaud the activation of the gender working group of the
Comprehensive Security System for the Exercise of Politics, which will prioritize
protection measures for women politicians. We also urge the authorities to improve the
implementation of the action plan of the Comprehensive Programme of Guarantees
for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders.
20/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

While we acknowledge the parties’ efforts aimed at ensuring the success of the
final peace agreement, we repeat the importance of ensuring that the peace process
is fully inclusive. In particular, it should include the meaningful participation of
indigenous and Afro-Colombians as well as their protection.
Secondly, on the socioeconomic front, the A3+1 commends the Government’s
efforts aimed at making land and resources available to former combatants for
productive activities. These laudable efforts are fundamental to facilitating the full
reintegration of the former combatants into Colombian society and to discouraging
their return to the illicit economy.
In addition, the A3+1 encourages the Government to advance in resolving
the protracted challenges facing the 9,500 former combatants residing outside the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration, especially those associated
with comprehensive rural reforms. To that end, we appreciate the call by the Inspector
General’s Office for scaling up the institutional response in new reintegration areas
in its second report on the implementation of the peace agreement.
Thirdly, the A3+1 applauds the progress made within the Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, especially the headway
made on the seven macro-cases within the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We
underscore that durable peace cannot be attained without proper reconciliation,
and we are therefore pleased that some former FARC members are accepting
responsibility for their crimes. We also look forward to the mid-year issuance of the
Special Jurisdiction’s first sentences.
We are cognizant of the symbiotic relationship between the illicit trade in
drugs, particularly of narcotics, and armed conflict, including terrorism. We urge
the Government to prioritize the development of rural infrastructure as well as the
implementation of the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops. The successful resettlement of former combatants can be sustained
only if they are kept away from the illegal narcotics business.
We will continue to support all efforts aimed at consolidating the peace
process, including through the incorporation of groups that are not parties to the
final agreement. We are therefore hopeful that this year the Government and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional will fully capitalize on this opportunity to engage
in transformative peacebuilding and constructive dialogue in order to achieve a
stable and lasting peace in Colombia. In this context, we commend the guarantor
countries — Norway and Cuba — for their mediating efforts.
Finally, the A3+1 reaffirms its support for the peace process in the country
and remains in solidarity with the Government and the people of Colombia in their
pursuit of lasting peace. We also commend the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia and the country team for their tireless efforts in assisting the process,
particularly in working towards the full implementation of the final peace agreement.

21-0100821/30

S/2021/77

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I offer many thanks to the Special Representative for his briefing and for his
summary of the key priorities for 2021. The United Kingdom very much supports
those recommendations. As has been noted, we are approaching a milestone: the
fifth anniversary this year of the peace agreement. I think that Colombia has a huge
amount to be proud of and to celebrate in terms of what has been achieved up to now.
However, we cannot lose sight of the significant challenges to peace that remain.
Indeed, during our visit in 2019, the Security Council saw both the achievements
and the challenges.
I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi to the Council
today and thank her and President Duque Márquez for the letter the Council received
requesting that the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
be expanded to include verifying compliance with the sentences issued by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. We welcome this request, and I know that Council members
will give it due attention. I will say more about that during our consultations.
The Special Jurisdiction’s first sentences later this year will mark an important
milestone in Colombia’s reconciliation process and in securing justice for victims.
As we have noted before, it is extremely pleasing that the three components of the
transitional justice system have continued to make progress despite the challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We encourage all parties to fulfil their
responsibility to the victims of the conflict by acknowledging their role and ensuring
as full a picture of the truth as possible, so as to pave the way for reconciliation and
sustainable peace.
In contrast, reconciliation will be much harder for those communities that
continue to be affected by insecurity and whose social leaders, human rights
defenders and former combatants continue to face serious threats and deadly
violence from armed groups every day. As both the “Pilgrimage for life and peace”
and minga marches show, there is rising frustration across Colombia at the risk that
this instability is posing to peace and security. The United Kingdom welcomes the
Colombian Government’s willingness to engage with those airing these frustrations
and hopes the commitments made will be implemented as soon as possible.
Sufficient resources must be urgently allocated to guarantee that social leaders
and former combatants receive the necessary protection when they request it, and to
ensure that women, indigenous and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
representatives community members in particular are not overlooked. A backlog of
over 1,000 protection requests is a source of concern.
In addition, those who endanger Colombia’s peace, both by arranging and
carrying out those attacks, must be brought to justice as swiftly as possible to deter
others. The Special Investigations Unit in the Office of the Attorney General is
to be commended for its work and for the convictions it has secured so far, but
greater cooperation from security forces and improved judicial capacity in the
rural areas where this violence is concentrated will be essential for the success of
many investigations.
As we have highlighted before, Colombia needs a realistic long-term plan to
dismantle these armed groups and criminal organizations and to bring State services,
security and justice to all citizens; otherwise, a lasting peace will remain out of
reach in the areas where this violence is concentrated. It is extremely encouraging
22/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

that the National Commission on Security Guarantees continues to meet, but it is
now time for serious action.
We were encouraged by the positive developments outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/1301) on reintegration, and in particular the Government’s
commitment to accelerating the purchase of land for former combatants from the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo. Despite security
challenges and the obstacles posed by COVID-19, the United Kingdom hopes these
measures will continue to be prioritized as these thousands of Colombians seek to
build a life away from conflict.
All parties to the final peace agreement have shown what can be achieved
through constructive dialogue and cooperation. As COVID-19 continues to leave
its mark around the world, a lasting and comprehensive peace will be vital not
just for the safety and security of Colombians but for Colombia’s own aim to build
back better from this devastating pandemic. Colombia has been an example on the
Council’s agenda, and I wish to remind the Foreign Minister that she can continue to
count on the support of the United Kingdom.

21-0100823/30

S/2021/77

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing and for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. It is always an honour to have Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi with us;
we thank her for joining today’s meeting.
The Verification Mission has played a vital role in supporting Colombia’s
peace and reconciliation efforts, and it should be proud of its contributions. In
this context, the United States also wishes to acknowledge the Government of
Colombia’s commitment to the implementation of the final peace agreement,
particularly in the face of the daunting public-health challenges posed by coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and as Colombia continues to generously host the 1.7 million
Venezuelans who have been forced to flee disastrous and repressive conditions in
their own country.
As all the members of the Security Council know well, the pandemic in
Colombia continues to worsen an already complex humanitarian situation and to
strain available health-care and social services, particularly in conflict-afflicted
communities and for members of vulnerable populations. The United States has
provided more than $23.5 million in assistance for Colombia’s response to COVID-19,
and we will continue to stand with the country in its fight against the pandemic.
As many of my colleagues have mentioned, more than four years have passed
since the signing of the peace agreement. As the Security Council has adopted five
Security Council mandates in connection with the work of the Verification Mission,
now seems to be an excellent time to reflect on what Colombia has achieved since
November 2016 and to focus on urgent and ongoing challenges.
What can often be often lost, I think, in the specifics of our discussions on
this topic is the magnitude of the peace agreement, and the profound impact it has
already had on Colombian society. In comparison to previous decades, we must say
that Colombia has witnessed a significant nationwide decrease in violence, including
in rates of homicides, kidnappings and other conflict-related indicators. Against the
backdrop of a conflict that raged for more than 50 years, and that was unsparing in
its violence, that is no small accomplishment.
Yet, as the Secretary-General’s reports have also confirmed, during the
same period since the signing of the accord, hundreds of human rights defenders,
social leaders and former combatants have been killed, with 21 killings of former
combatants in just the most recent reporting period, as we have just heard.
Members of Colombia’s indigenous, Afro-Colombian, LGBTI and other vulnerable
populations that have been among those most affected by the ongoing violence, as
have Colombians who are working to address land and environmental issues.
As the most recent report (S/2020/1301) indicates, those attacks have been
concentrated in the rural areas where there is very limited State presence and there
are illegal armed actors and illicit economies. While there are no simple answers to
address those complex underlying issues, that violence has a direct and damaging
effect on the reintegration process and the implementation of the peace agreement,
and we join our other Council members and colleagues in saying it must end.
The United States applauds President Duque’s November 2020 meeting with
former combatants, during which he reinforced his commitment to the reintegration
process and to strengthening security measures for former combatants. It was a
24/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

very important and vital step forward in addressing issues facing the reintegration
process and security guarantees for former combatants.
The United States urges the Colombian Government to continue to strengthen
its presence in those rural areas and to hold those responsible for violence
accountable. Accountability in all forms is essential to implementing the peace
accord. In particular, transitional justice is at the heart of the peace process and will
be central to its success in the coming years, particularly with the first sentences of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace expected later this year.
Colombia’s transitional justice system is trying something truly innovative:
to guarantee the rights of victims and support efforts to provide reparations, while
providing some space for Colombian society as a whole to come to terms with the
painful legacy of this conflict. The United States urges all parties to fully participate
in truth and reconciliation efforts and to help ensure accountability so that Colombia
can heal. We certainly welcome President Duque’s recent letter to the Council in
connection with a potential role for the Verification Mission, and we look forward to
the Council’s consideration of that request and the supporting details.
In conclusion, let me say, implementing the peace accord was never going to
be easy, or take place overnight. In the face of enormous obstacles, Colombia has
continued to move forward with that essential task. The United States will continue
its partnership with Colombia in the service of a peaceful and prosperous future.

21-0100825/30

S/2021/77

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Phuong Tra Nguyen
I would like to warmly welcome Her Excellency Claudia Blum de Barberi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to this meeting. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his informative briefing.
It is encouraging to witness the positive and remarkable developments in
Colombia since the conclusion of the final peace agreement in 2016. Violent incidents
have decreased significantly while the reintegration process has expanded at all
levels. The Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) and other relevant
parties have had more opportunities to participate in the political life of the country.
The Government has made great efforts to promote socioeconomic developments,
including a comprehensive rural reform.
We, however, remain concerned that the terms of the agreement have not
been fully implemented, and as a result, among others, the reintegration process
is still facing multiple challenges. In that regard, we would like to stress the
following points:
First, we call on all relevant parties to engage in constructive dialogue to
address various challenges and differences in the peace process, especially through
the mechanisms established by the agreement.
The year 2021 plays a very important role for Colombia, especially in terms of
preparations for the 2022 elections. Every effort should be made to create the most
favourable conditions for the organization of and participation in the elections. The
United Nations and the international community should support Colombia’s efforts
towards that end.
Secondly, with regard to security, according to the Government of Colombia,
illegal organized armed groups are the greatest perpetrators, with nearly 77 per
cent of the attacks against former combatants and social leaders. They have also
targeted their influence in conflict-affected areas where most of the crimes are
against civilians. In that connection, we urge the National Commission on Security
Guarantees to adopt the necessary policies to dismantle those organizations and to
strengthen the investigation and the application of justice. We call upon the relevant
parties to make full use of the security guarantees mechanisms provided for under
the final peace agreement to protect civilians, especially women and children, in
conflict-affected areas.
Thirdly, reintegration is a long-term process, requiring patience, political will
and practical steps. We take note of the efforts undertaken by the Government of
Colombia and the progress achieved so far in the socioeconomic and political fields.
That process should continue to be implemented in a comprehensive manner to be
politically and socioeconomically sustainable.
Therefore, we emphasize the need for further measures to promote economic
and inclusive development, social cohesion, rural development, housing and
education access, job creation and so forth. The development plans of the country
need to take into account the particular needs of its communities.
We expect to see a greater role played by the Government, FARC, the National
Reintegration Council, together with the United Nations, regional and international
organizations, in developing a joint strategy for strengthened socioeconomic
26/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

development, which lays out concrete measures to assist former combatants in
attaining sustainable livelihoods.
Last but not least, we would like to commend and reiterate our support for the
unceasing work of the United Nations Verification Mission and the United Nations
country team in contributing to the process of peace, security, unity and development
in Colombia.

21-0100827/30

S/2021/77

Annex XIV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Colombia, Claudia Blum de Barberi
[Original: Spanish]
I thank the presidency for convening this meeting and the members of the
Security Council for their constant support to Colombia.
I welcome the new members of the Council, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico
and Norway, and wish them success in carrying out their duties.
The Government of Colombia is grateful for the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/1301) and thanks his representative, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for the
work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which he leads.
The Secretary-General recognizes the significant decrease in violence in my
country in the past four years. That is a trend that Colombia has been building on
since 2002. His report also underscores the results of social investments to benefit
communities affected by decades of violence. And it describes the progress achieved
in the reintegration of former combatants and other aspects of the implementation
of the 2016 agreement. Those achievements demonstrate President Iván Duque’s
unwavering commitment to peace in Colombia, the strengthening of the rule of law
and the development of territories that have endured poverty and vulnerability.
The report documents progress made on the priorities identified by the
Secretary-General for 2020 and identifies additional challenges for 2021.
I would like to address several of those issues.
First, our greatest challenge continues to be the security of communities,
social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants.
The international community understands that the agreement was signed
between two parties in 2016, in the midst of other sources of existing violence.
Illegal armed groups that remain in several areas of the territory, and others that
have emerged, all fuelled by drug trafficking and other illegal economies, are a
threat to Colombians’ security.
The findings of the Office of the Attorney-General show that those organized
armed groups, especially the dissidents and splinter groups, are the main perpetrators
of attacks on former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). They appear to be responsible for about
77 per cent of the cases.
In 2020, the national Government consistently implemented measures
to strengthen the protection of former members of the FARC-EP. A total of 272
individual and collective security schemes have been implemented.
The Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney-General is also
making progress in cases of attacks against former combatants. Of the 291 cases
under its jurisdiction, 34 have resulted in convictions, 21 are in the trial stage, 40 are
under investigation and arrest warrants have been issued in 48 cases. That represents
progress in more than 50 per cent of the cases.
For their part, the security forces have stepped up efforts to fight criminal
structures in the territories.
The State has made progress in the public policy guidelines for the dismantling
of criminal organizations. However, we have not waited for the public policy to be
28/30

21-01008

S/2021/77

adopted in order to implement the necessary measures to guarantee the security of
Colombians. The initiatives developed under Decrees No. 601 and No. 965 of 2020
to confront illegal organizations have already yielded positive results. An example
of that are the operations against the Clan del Golfo, one of the illegal groups that
profits the most from illicit drug trafficking; 412 members of that group have already
been arrested.
In 2020, the number of people in the reintegration process who were killed
was 12 per cent lower than in 2019. Colombia will continue to work decisively to
prevent and combat those crimes and threats against vulnerable communities.
The socioeconomic efforts of programmes, such as the development
programmes with a territorial focus, have made it possible to strengthen the rule of
law and transform the territories most affected by violence and poverty.
The integrated presence of the State in those areas is another priority
identified by the Secretary-General. The progress achieved in the stabilization of
the 170 municipalities that have benefited from the development programmes with a
territorial focus is evidence of the momentum, commitment and effectiveness of the
Government in the implementation of the 2016 agreement. Those areas represent one
third of the national territory and are home to nearly 7 million Colombians.
In the past two years, there have been many changes in rural areas. The
provision of electricity has been extended throughout the country; 8,348 housing
solutions have been provided; 6,140 housing subsidies, with an investment of $52
million, have been granted in municipalities where development programmes with a
territorial focus are being implemented.
We also know that transformations towards a more equitable, peaceful, just
and inclusive society require long-term effort. For that reason, the Government has
developed a judicious planning initiative, with 15-year regional implementation road
maps that are irreversible and guarantee the continuity of the actions undertaken.
In addition, 13 sectoral plans have been adopted in different areas of government to
address the needs of the country’s rural areas.
The sustainability of the reintegration process is another priority of President
Iván Duque. Despite the challenges of the pandemic, the Government continues to
fulfil its commitments even beyond what was agreed. The National Development
Plan 2018-2022 includes measures to make reintegration sustainable for additional
time beyond that of the agreement, as long as former combatants remain in the legal
system.
The detailed registry of persons in reintegration enables the establishment of a
sustainable strategy, with a holistic approach towards its economic, housing, family,
education, health, and psychosocial and community well-being components.
Although the agreement did not provide for access to or ownership of land
specifically for former combatants, the Government has identified that need. For
2021, we have committed $4.2 million towards land acquisition.
Through inter-institutional agreements, we also strengthen the sustainability
of productive projects. The national Government, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, the International Organization for Migration, the
Multi-donor Trust Fund and other cooperating partners, has developed a strategic
alliance to strengthen reintegration through collective productive projects.
The national Government has supported the dialogue bodies provided for in
the agreement and its regulatory development. Among them, the Commission for the
21-0100829/30

S/2021/77

Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement,
which was extended for an additional period of time beyond that initially agreed.
Those spaces exist to resolve disagreements with regard to the implementation
of the agreement. It must be understood that they are not alternative venues for
dialogue between the Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común opposition party on issues that do not correspond to the implementation of
the agreement. Congress and the democratic forums are the appropriate forums for
debates unrelated to the implementation of the agreement.
I would also like to stress the role of women and the focus on gender. The
Council has witnessed Colombia’s commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda. We continue to work to meet the 51 gender indicators included
in the framework plan for the implementation of the final agreement, and that is
monitored by the Special Forum on Gender and the High-Level Forum on Gender of
the Government. Victims are at the centre of all our efforts. I am pleased to report the
recent 10-year extension of the Victims and Land Restitution Act. President Duque’s
Government has delivered more than 220,000 individual compensations to victims
for a total of $498 million, in addition to collective reparations.
The transitional justice system was established to guarantee the rights
of victims to truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition. The Government has
continued to support all its mechanisms, ensuring adequate funding.
In 2020, $148.4 million were allocated to the system and distributed as follows:
$82.7 million for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace; $39.8 million for the Special
Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing; and $25.9 million for the Truth
Commission. Between 2019 and 2020 there was a 28 per cent increase in funding
of the system, despite the impact of the pandemic and budget reductions to other
State institutions.
I would like to report that President Iván Duque recently sent a letter to the
Secretary-General and the Security Council, asking them to consider adding to the
mandate of the Verification Mission. The purpose of this request is to ensure the
reparative element of truth and justice, which must be undertaken by those who have
committed crimes and been punished. The Colombian people must be able to trust
the justice system to advance reparations for victims and national coexistence.
As mentioned in the report, last November President Iván Duque received
representatives of the Pilgrimage for life and peace. The President ratified the
Government’s commitment to the reintegration of ex-combatants. He emphasized
the importance of continuing to work for respect for life, justice and the generation
of trust, and he praised the role of the public forces that confront criminal groups and
protect former combatants and all citizens.
The effective implementation of an ambitious agreement requires political
will and strategic planning based on the principle of national ownership. Although
we still have a long way to go, the peace with legality policy is helping us to advance
towards a more just and peaceful society. The support of the international community
is essential in this process.

30/30

21-01008
