26

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

3. Calls for the scrupulous respect for and faithful implementation of the Agreements by ali parties concerned
who should fully abide by their letter and spirit;
4. Notes the continuing process of withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and expresses its expectation that the withdrawal will be completed in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Agreements;
5. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the Afghanistan problem;
6. Reaffirrns the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever;
7. Calls upan ali parties concerned to work for the urgent achievement of a comprehensive política! solution
and the creation of the necessary conditions of peace and
normalcy that would enable the Afghan refugees to return
voluntarily to their homeland in safety and honour;
8. Ernphasizes the need for an intra-Afghan dialogue
for the establishment of a broad-based government to ensure the broadest support and immediate participation of
ali segments of the Afghan people;
9. Requests the Secretary-General and his Representative to encourage and facilitate the early realization of a
comprehensive political settlement in Afghanistan in accordance with the provisions ofthe Agreements and ofthe
present resolution;
1O. Renews its appeal to ali States and national and international organizations to continue to extend
humanitar\an relief assistance with a view to alleviating
the hardsh1p ofthe Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
11. Welcornes the appointment of a special coordinator for channelling economic and humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan;
12. Calls upan ali States to provide adequate financia!
and material resources to the Co-ordinator for
Humanitarian and Economic Assistance Programmes
Relating to Afghanistan for the purposes of achieving the
speedy repatriation and rehabilitation of the Afghan refugees, as well as for the economic and social reconstruction
of the country;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and ~he Security. Council informed of progress
towards the 1mplementat10n of the present resolution and
t? submit to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth sess1on a report on the situation in Afghanistan, on progress
achieved in the implementation ofthe Agreements and the
política! settlement relating to Afghanistan;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security".
45th plenary meeting
3 November 1988
43/21.

The upnsmg (intifadah) of the Palestinian
people

The General Assembly,
Aw~re of the uprising (int((adah) of the Palestinian people smce 9 December 1987 against Israeli occupation,

which has received significant attention and sympathy
from world public opinion,
Deeply concerned at the alarming situation in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, as well as in the other occupied Arab territories, as a
result of the continued occupation by Israel, the occupying Power, and of its persistent policies and practices
against the Palestinian people,
Reaffirming that the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 47 is applicable to ali the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
Recalling its relevant resolutions as well as Security
Council resolutions 605 (1987) of 22 December 1987,
607 (1988) of 5 January 1988 and 608 (1988) of 14January 1988,
Recognizing the need for increased support and aid for,
and solidarity with, the Palestinian people under Israelí
occupation,
Conscious of the urgent need to resolve the underlying
problem through a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement, including a solution to the Palestinian problem in ali
its aspects,
l. Condernns Israel's persistent policies and practices
violating the human rights ofthe Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and,
in particular, such acts as the opening of fire by the Israeli
army and settlers that result in the killing and wounding
of defenceless Palestinian civilians, the beating and breaking of bones, the deportation of Palestinian civilians, the
imposition of restrictive economic measures, the demolition of houses, collective punishment and detentions, as
well as denial of access to the media;
2. Strongly deplores the continuing disregard by Israel,
the occupying Power, of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council;
3. Reaffirrns that the occupation by Israel ofthe Palestinian territories since 1967, including Jerusalem, in no
way changes the legal status of those territories;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, abide
immediately and scrupulously by the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, and desist forthwith from its
policies and practices that are in violation of the provisions of the Convention;
5. Calls upan ali the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention to take appropriate measures to ensure respect by Israel, the occupying Power, for the Convention
in ali circumstances, in conformity with their obligation
under article 1 thereof;
6. Invites Member States, the organizations of the
United Nations system, governmental, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, and the mass communications media to continue and enhance their support
for the Palestinian people;
7. Urges the Security Council to consider the current
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, taking
mto account the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-Genera];48
8. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the present situation in the occupied Palestinian territories by ali
47

United Nat1on,. Trcaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
O}licial R<'cords of thr Sccurity Council. Forty-third Year,
S11pplcment fár January Fchruary and ,\,farch 1988. document S/19443.
4

'

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

means available to him and to submit periodic reports
thereon, the first such report no later than 17 November
1988.
45th plenary meeting
3 November 1988
43/22.

Right of peoples to peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its Declaration on the Right of Peoples to
Peace, approved on 12 November 1984, 4 9
Referring to its resolutions 40/11 of 11 November 1985
and 41/10 of 24 October 1986,
HavinR in mind the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights 5<f which emphasizes that recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of ali
members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing the strong resolve of peoples to strengthen
international peace and security and promote economic
and social development,
Noting with satisfaction the positive events and trends in
the field of disarmament, the resolution of crisis situations
and the strengthening ofinternational peace and security,
Reaffirming that the implementation of the right of peoples to peace constitutes a fundamental concern of each
State,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the Declaration on the Right of
Peoples to Peace, s1
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Reaffirms the lasting importance and validity of the
Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace;
3. Considers that the etforts of non-governmental organizations and world public opinion play an important role
in the implementation of the Declaration;
4. Invites all States and international organizations to
continue their etforts towards the implementation of the
Declaration at the national and international levels;
5. Calls upon ali States and relevant organizations of
the United Nations system, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to inform the Secretary-General about the
measures taken to implement the Declaration;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session on the basis of replies received;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session an item entitled "Implementation of the
Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace".
46th plenary meeting
11 November 1988
43/23.

Zone of peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, in
which it solemnly declared the Atlantic Ocean, in the re49 Resolution 39/J 1, annex.
50 Resolution 217 A (III).
51 A/43/602.

27

gion situated between Africa and South America, the
"Zone of peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic",
Affirming that the questions of peace and security and
those of development are interrelated and inseparable, and
considering that co-operation among all States, in particular those ofthe region, for peace and development is essential to promote the objectives of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Recalling also its resolution 42/16 of 10 November
1987, in which it urged States of the region to continue
their actions aiming at fulfilling the goals of the declaration, specially through the adoption and implementation
of specific programmes for this purpose,
Noting with appreciation the etforts of States of the zone
towards fulfilling the goals of the declaration,
1. Takes note of the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with resolution 42/16; 52
2. Welcomes the holding of the first meeting of States
of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic at Rio de Janeiro, from 25 to 29 July 1988, and takes
note of the Final Document of the meeting; 53
3. Commends initiatives by States of the zone to promote peace and regional co-operation in the South Atlantic;
4. Calls upon all States to co-operate in the promotion
of the objectives of peace and co-operation established in
the declaration of the zone of peace and co-operation of
the South Atlantic and to refrain from any action inconsistent with those objectives, particularly actions which
aggravate or may create situations oftension and potential
conflict in the region;
5. Requests the relevant organizations, organs and
bodies of the United Nations system to render all necessary assistance that States of the zone may seek in their
joint etforts to implement the declaration of the zone of
peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the implementation ofresolution 41/11 under review and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth
session, taking into account, ínter afia, the views expressed
by Member States;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the ítem entitled "Zone of peace and
co-operation of the South Atlantic".
47th plenary meeting
14 November 1988
43/24.

The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 530 ( 1983) of
19 May 1983 and 562 ( 1985) of 1O May 1985 and its resolutions 38/10 of 11 November 1983, 39/4 of 26 October
1984, 41/37 of 18 November 1986 and 42/1 of7 October
1987, as well as the initiative of the Secretaries-General of
the United Nations and of the Organization of American
States of 18 November 1986,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuancc of General Assembly resolution
42/ I, 54
5 2 A/43/576 and

Add.1

' 1 A/43/512.
'

4

A/42/127-S/ 1H6H6. 1-'or thc printed text, see Oflicia/ Record, o( 1hc
