S/PRST/2001/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 June 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4341st meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 June 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council calls for an immediate suspension of hostilities in
Burundi.
“The Security Council calls on the armed groups to enter into
negotiations.
“The Security Council reiterates its profound concern at the continuation
of the conflict in Burundi and its toll on the civilian population. In that
context, the Security Council stresses once again its support for the Arusha
process and the efforts of the Facilitator, Nelson Mandela.
“The Security Council strongly emphasizes to the parties to the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement of August 2000 (Arusha Agreement) the
need to implement, all the immediately applicable provisions of the
Agreement, including the provisions for the establishment of new institutions.
“The Security Council calls upon the parties to the Arusha Agreement to
continue searching, together with all parties concerned, for solutions to
outstanding issues in the Agreement.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern at continuing human
rights abuses and violations of humanitarian law, and stresses the need for all
parties to ensure respect for human rights and humanitarian law. In particular,
it urges the belligerents to commit themselves immediately to the protection of
civilians, in particular their life, physical integrity and the means necessary for
their survival. It also reiterate its call for safe and unhindered access for the
delivery of humanitarian aid to all people in need.
“The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General through his
Representatives to continue to engage the armed groups and contribute to
coordinated efforts to bring about a political settlement of the conflict.
“The Security Council reiterates its call to the donor community to
increase its humanitarian and development assistance to the people of Burundi,
in keeping with their pledges given at the Paris Donor Conference on 11-12
December 2000.
01-43328 (E) 290601

*0143328*

S/PRST/2001/17

“The Security Council remains actively seized of the situation in Burundi
and, in this context, will continue to receive regular reporting from the
Secretariat on developments in and around the country. The Security Council
stands ready to consider, in the light of progress in the above areas, further
contributions to the peace process, and the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement.”

2
