Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

of decision- and policy-making in a consultative capacity,
the Inter-Agency Consultative Board shall be consulted
on all significant aspects of the United Nations Development Programme and in particular it shall :
(a) Advi.se the management on the programmes an_d
projects submitted by Governments, through_ the Resident Representative, prior to their submiss10n to the
Governing Council for approval, taking into account
the programmes of technical assistance being carried
out under the regular programmes of the organizations
represented on the Consultative Board, with a view to
ensuring more effective co-ordination ; the views of
the Consultative Board, when it so' requests, shall be
conveyed by the Administrator to the Governing Council, together with any comments he may wish t_o. make,
when recommending for approval general poltc1es for
the Programme as a whole or for programmes and
projects requested by Governments;
( b) Be consulted in the selection of agencies for the
execution of specific projects, as appropriate;
( c) Be consulted on the appointment of the Resident
Representatives and review annual reports submitted
by them;
the Inter-Agency Consultative Board shall meet as often
and for such periods as may be necessary for the performance of the foregoing functions ;
7. Decides that, as a transitional measure, the present
Managing Director of the Special Fund shall become
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme and the present Executive Chairman of
the Technical Assistance Board shall become the CoAdministrator of the Programme, each to .serve until
31 December 1966 or, pending a further review of
arrangements at the management level, until such later
date as may be determined by the Secretary-General
after consultation with the Governing Council ;
8. Decides that the present resolution shall come
into effect on 1 January 1966 and that such action as
may be required in terms of this resolution shall be
taken prior to that date.
1383rd plenary meeting,
22 November 1965.
ANNEX
1. Nineteen seats on the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme shall be filled by developing
countries and seventeen seats by economically more developed
countries, subject to the following conditions:
( a) The nineteen seats allocated to developing countries of
Africa, Asia and Latin America and to Yugoslavia shall be
filled in the following manner: seven seats for African countries, six seats for Asian countries and six seats for Latin
American countries, it being understood that agreement has
been reached among the de ,eloping countries to accommodate
Yugoslavia;
(b) Of the seventeen seats allocated to the economically
more developed countries, fourteen shall be filled by Western
European and other countries and three by Eastern European
countries;

(c) Elections to these thirty-six seats shall be for a term
of three years provided, however, that of the members elected
at the first election the terms of twelve members shall expire
at the end of the year and the terms of twelve other members
at the end of two years.
2. The thirty-seventh seat shall rotate among the groups
of countries mentioned in paragraph I above in accordance
with the following nine-year cycle :

21

First and second years: \Vestern European and other
countries;
Thi·rd, fourth and fifth years : Eastern European countries ;
Sixth year : African countries ;
Seventh year: Asian countries;
Eighth year: Latin American countries;
Ninth year: \IVestern European and other countries.
3. Retiring members shall be, eligible for 1"e-election.

2042 (XX). Establishment of a United Nations
capital development fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1521 (XV) of 15 December
1960 by which it decided in principle that a United
Nations capital development fund should be established,
Recalling further its resolutions 1706 (XVI) of
19 December 1961, 1826 (XVII) of 18 December 1962
and 1936 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, on the basis
of which preparatory steps have been undertaken with
a view to starting the operations of the fund,
Bearing in mind the provisions of section III of its
resolution 1219 (XII) of 14 December 1957 and part C
of its resolution 1240 (XIII) of 14 October 1958, as
well as the provisions contained in the sixth preambular
paragraph of its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November
1965,
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in annex A.IV.7 (United Nations Capital Development
Fund) and annex A.IV.8 (Gradual transformation of
the United Nations Special Fund) of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,3 as well as the provisions contained in paragraphs 7 and 8 of General Assembly resolution
2029 (XX),
Being convinced that the United Nations assistance
programmes are designed to support and supplement
the national efforts made by developing countries to
solve the most important problems of their economic
development. above all those relating to industrial
development.
Taking note of the study prepared by the SecretaryGeneral on the practical steps to transform the Special
Fund into a capital development fund in such a way
as to include both pre-investment and investment
activities, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on a
United Nations Capital Development Fund on its fourth
session,'1
1. Reaffirms the need for extending United Nations
economic assistance to the field of investment activities
in the developing countries;
2. Urges the economically advanced countries to undertake measures designed to ensure the beginning of
the operations of a United Nations capital development
fund at an early date;
3. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider, at its
second meeting in 1966. the ways and means for an
effective implementation of the recommendation con3 See Proceedings of the Umted Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 47.
4 Official Records of the Economic and Social COU11cil, Thirtyseventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 101 document E/3947.
5 Official Records of the General Assemoly, Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, document A/5748.

22

General Assembly-Twentieth Seseion

tained in annex A.IV.8 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, bearing
in mind the provisions of section III of ·General Assembly resolution 1219 (XII) and part C of Assembly
resolution 1240 (XIII);
4. Invites the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the Member States regarding the additional resources which should be obtained through
voluntary contributions with a view to initiating activities of investment proper ;
5. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee
on a United Nations Capital Development Fund so as
to enable it to carry out the tasks envisaged in General
Assembly resolutions 1826 (XVII) and 1936 (XVIII),
taking into account the results of the work of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as the results of the SecretaryGeneral's consultations with the Member States;
6. Further instructs the Committee to make new
efforts with a view to reaching a large measure of
agreement on the draft legislation (statute) of the
United Nations capital development fund, bearing also
in mind the alternative proposals for starting operations
through a gradual transformation of the United Nations
Development Programme ;
7. Requests the Committee to submit its report to
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session, for transmission, together with the Council's comments, to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session for necessary action.
1391st plenary meeting,
8 December 1965.

2043 (XX). World campaign for universal literacy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1677 (XVI) of 18 December 1961 and 1937 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 on
the question of the eradication of illiteracy,
Taking note of:
(a) The resolutions adopted in 1964 by the regional
economic commissions, Economic and Social Council
resolution 1032 (XXXVII) of 14 August 1964 and
resolution 1.271 adopted on 19 November 1964 by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirteenth
session,
( b) The report submitted by the Secretary-General
to the General Assembly at its nineteenth session8 and
the note by the Secretary-General on the world campaign for universal literacy submitted to the Assembly
at its twentieth session, 7 as well as the particularly
encouraging report submitted by the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the action taken by that organization,8
Having received with appreciation the noble and
generous message on this question addressed to the
General Assembly by His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah of Iran,9
6 Jbid.,

agenda item 47, document A/5830.

7 A/6048.
8 A/C.2/L.807.

For summary, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Twentieth Sl!Ssion, Second Committee, 980th
meeting, paras. 2-8.
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Sesion, Annexes, agenda item 47, document A/6024.

Taking note of:
(a) Recommendation No. 58 to the Ministries of
Education concerning literacy and adult education, 10
approved by the International Conference on Public
Education at its twenty-eighth session, held at Geneva
in July 1%5,
( b) The conclusions and recommendations approved
by the World Congress of Ministers of Education on
the Eradication of Illiteracy, 11 convened by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and held at Teheran from 8 to 19 September 1965,
and in particular the resolutions on the mobilization
of human and material resources,
1. Declares that illiteracy is a world problem which
concerns all mankind ;
2. Affirms that literacy is an essential factor in economic, social and cultural development;
3. Considers that the time has come for all Member
States to make vigorous and systematic efforts, as soon
as possible, to eradicate illiteracy throughout the world ;
4. Invites countries where illiteracy is a major problem to give due priority to literacy in their development
policy and programmes and, in accordance with this
priority, to mobilize the material, financial and human
resources available. whether governmental or nongovernmental :
5. Invites the countries which have achieved the best
results in the campaign against illiteracy in their territory to take adequate account, in their programmes of
bilateral co-operation, of the priority that the countries
receiving these programmes have decided to give to
literacy in their development plans;
6. Invites those States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies which
employ illiterate foreign workers to organize or develop
literacy courses for them with a view to promoting the
vocational training and social advancement of those
workers residing in their territory;
7. Invites Governments to consider the possibility
of increasing, at both the national and the international
level, the resources allocated to literacy programmes by
having recourse to various sources ;
8. Welcomes the literacy programme of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and invites the other competent specialized agencies,
including the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, as well as the Special Fund, the Technical Assistance Board, and governmental and nongovernmental international and regional organizations,
to combine their efforts with those of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in putting into effect literacy programmes closely
integrated with development programmes;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the regional economic commissions to study, within the
framework of the United Nations Development Decade,
the most appropriate measures for promoting the effective integration of literacy in development ;
10 A/6048, annex I. For the printed text, see United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy,
Teheran, 8 to 19 September 1965, Literacy and Adult Education
(Paris, 1965).
11 A/6048, annex II. For the printed text, see United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of llliteracy,
Teheran, 8 to 19 September 1965, Final Report (UNESCO/
ED/217).
