S/PV.7572

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7572nd meeting

Tuesday, 8 December 2015, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2015/914)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-40818 (E)
*1540818*

S/PV.7572

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2015/914)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and Mr. Jackson K.
Tuwei, Special Envoy of the African Union for Lord’s
Resistance Army Issues.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Tuwei,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Nairobi.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/914, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: I have the honour to present the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/914) on the situation
in Central Africa and the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The report before the Council outlines the main threats
to peace and security in Central Africa, and provides an
update on the activities undertaken by UNOCA in the
past six months, in consultation with Member States,
United Nations entities and subregional organizations.
The recent spate of violence that erupted in
September in the Central African Republic has
generated additional refugee populations within the
region and gross human rights violations against local
populations, particularly in Bangui. The intercommunal
violence has also further weakened the national
reconciliation process and increased the proliferation

2/6

08/12/2015

of small arms and gang-related criminality. In that
context, Pope Francis’ visit to the Central African
Republic on 29 and 30 November, which I witnessed,
was timely. His message of peace and his prayers in
Catholic churches and Muslim mosques were embraced
by the population and welcomed as symbols of hope.
Now more than ever, it is critical to accelerate the pace
of implementing the recommendations of the Bangui
Forum for National Reconciliation — over which
I presided — in particular with respect to security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
It is also critical for the presidential and legislative
elections to take place peacefully to conclude the
transition. In that regard, on 25 November President Ali
Bongo Ondimba of Gabon, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), convened an Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, which I attended. The Assembly endorsed
the revised electoral calendar and took note of the
remaining gap in the electoral budget. The Gabonese
Republic and the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
announced new pledges, which fill the financial gap.
Together with earlier contributions made by Cameroon
and the Republic of the Congo, ECCAS is the secondlargest contributor to the country’s electoral budget
after the European Union.
Boko Haram remains a critical threat to stability,
peace and security in the region. The terrorist group
has stepped up its attacks against civilian and military
targets in the Lake Chad Basin area, notably in
Cameroon and Chad, leading to a further deterioration
in the security, economic, humanitarian and human
rights situations. The proximity of other regional
conflicts near the Lake Chad Basin region, combined
with the risks of radicalization and the chronic poverty
of already marginalized populations, remains a serious
concern. The influx of refugees into the Lake Chad
Basin region has overstretched Government capacities
and further limited service delivery in the affected
areas. The refugee situation comes in addition to a
significant number of internally displaced persons and
returnees who require immediate assistance.
Boko Haram has been weakened as a result of
the intensified military campaign led by countries
of the Lake Chad Basin, and has started resorting to
attacks against soft targets. The ongoing efforts to
operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force

15-40818

08/12/2015

Central African region

underscore the commitment of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Benin to coordinating action to
fight Boko Haram. It is our sincere hope that a joint
summit of Central and West African Heads of State
and Government, to explore concrete ways to address
the root causes of terrorism and radicalization, will
take place without further delay. At the request of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative for West
Africa and I will continue to engage in consultations
with the States concerned and regional bodies in that
regard.
In addition, the Secretary-General has called
for all counter terrorism operations to fully comply
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee laws. He has also welcomed the adoption, on
26 November, by the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa of
an integrated regional strategy on counter-terrorism and
the non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa, and its plan of action.
The support of international partners remains
crucial in the fight against terrorism, radicalization
and armed violence, as such assistance contributes
substantially to reducing the burden on the States
affected. While there is a need to continue to support
the Multinational Joint Task Force, early recovery and
development activities should also be supported as part
of a holistic approach to countering radicalization in
the region.
While killings and attacks perpetrated by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) have diminished, the
LRA continues to pose a threat to regional security,
particularly to populations in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The security and humanitarian crisis triggered by the
LRA’s activities, including looting and abductions,
should not be underestimated. The LRA has adapted to
our strong collective response by keeping a low profile,
buying time and taking advantage of coordination gaps.
The armed groups hope that fatigue and competing
priorities will weaken our resolve to finish the job. We
must not fall into that trap.
UNOCA has continued its active engagement on
the LRA issue, including on the implementation of
the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the LRA. Last September, in close
cooperation with the African Union, UNOCA convened,
in Entebbe, Uganda, the bi-annual coordination meeting

S/PV.7572

of LRA focal points. Last month, the African Union
Special Envoy for LRA Issues, Mr. Jackson Tuwei, and
I undertook a visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to meet with the authorities and other relevant
stakeholders to encourage continued commitment
to counter-LRA efforts and enhanced coordination,
including across borders. We were encouraged by the
renewed engagement of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in supporting and cooperating with the AU
Regional Task Force in combating the LRA. I welcome
Special Envoy Tuwei’s briefing to the Council today.
During the past months, the number of cases
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, especially along the
Bakassi Peninsula, has increased. In addition to the
usual robbery activities, pirates have been committing
acts of rape — a new and disturbing phenomenon.
Unfortunately, not much progress has been made
towards the implementation of the decisions of the
2013 summit at Yaoundé of the ECCAS/Economic
Community of West African States, which includes the
full operationalization of the Interregional Coordination
Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea, as
well as its two subregional arms for West Africa and
Central Africa. I encourage the African Union to hold
as soon as possible the Extraordinary Summit of Heads
of State and Government on Maritime Security and
Development for Africa, originally scheduled to be
held in November in Lomé.
Curbing cross-border criminal activities, including
the illicit trade in wildlife and natural resources used
to support the activities of armed groups such as the
LRA, remains a major challenge. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption of General Assembly resolution
69/314, of 30 July 2015, on tackling illicit trafficking in
wildlife, and look forward to its full implementation.
UNOCA also stands ready to support Central Africa
in the development of a subregional strategy to address
the growing phenomenon of poaching.
There are mounting political tensions in the region
as several countries in Central Africa enter an electoral
cycle that will run up to 2018. In part, such tensions
originate from disputes over national Constitutions
and a lack of political consensus. I will continue to
use my good offices to engage with stakeholders in
the subregion to encourage the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including through inclusive political dialogue.

15-408183/6

S/PV.7572

Central African region

In September in Bangui, at a seminar organized
by UNOCA, journalists endorsed a code of conduct
for media and journalists during the electoral period
in Central Africa. I welcome that commitment,
which defines the role of the media in the conduct
and promotion of peaceful electoral processes in the
subregion.
We look forward to the continued engagement of
the Security Council in promoting peace and security
in Central Africa. UNOCA will continue to work
closely with Member States of the subregion towards
that important endeavour.
The President: I thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tuwei.
Mr. Tuwei: I wish to thank the President of the
Security Council for granting me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and the progress being made
to counter the threat under the African Union-led
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the LRA. I also wish to thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
Special Representative of the Secretary General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa for enabling me to give this briefing via video
teleconference.
The LRA remains a threat to vulnerable civilians
in the remote parts of the south-eastern Central African
Republic, the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. The latest
information revealed by seven personal body guards
of Joseph Kony, who reported to the AU Regional
Task Force (RTF) in mid-June 2015, indicates that
the strength of the LRA is estimated at 230, made
up of about 120 armed fighters — 33 of them newly
recruited — and 110 dependants. The main group,
under the command of Joseph Kony, continues to
operate from safe havens in the extreme north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic, outside the reach
of the AU RTF. A second LRA group is in the Garamba
National Park, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the primary task of poaching elephants for ivory
to be delivered to Kony. Meanwhile, a third group is
operating in the Central African Republic and serving
as a conduit for receiving ivory from the second group
and delivering it to Kony.
Currently, the LRA is operating in survival mode,
trafficking and trading in gold looted from mines in

4/6

08/12/2015

the Central African Republic and ivory poached from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so as to sustain
itself and its leadership. The LRA uses money obtained
from the sale of those items to buy food, arms and
ammunition, drugs and other essential items. LRA
fighters are continuing to ambush traders and travellers
in order to loot food and other essential commodities. It
has also continued abductions, mainly in the Haut and
Bas-Uélé districts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular to carry looted items but also to
serve as sex slaves and fighters.
In the Central African Republic, the number of
LRA-related incidents has been relatively low in 2015,
due to sustained military pressure by the Regional
Task Force, a military component of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the LRA and joint protection
measures by local communities with international
non-governmental organizations. That reduction is also
partly the result of the opportunistic relationship the
group has established with ex-Séléka leaders and local
communities in order to peacefully obtain food and
safe passage from the north-eastern Central African
Republic to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
vice versa.
Despite the number of LRA-induced internally
displaced persons (IDPs) dropping significantly from
about 369,000 in mid-2013 to 131,000 in mid-2014,
abductions have remained high in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the number of IDPs and
refugees in that country is again increasing, reaching
about 200,000 by June 2015, according to an AprilJune 2015 report of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Therefore,
the lives of thousands of civilians in the border areas
continue to be at risk due to fear of possible attacks
from the LRA. That calls for urgent efforts to address
the emerging challenge of civilian displacements.
In an effort to eliminate the LRA, the AU RTF,
supported by United States special forces in the Central
African Republic and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, continue to conduct operations targeting the top
leadership of the group. The operations also focus on
the protection of civilians and facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to populations in need in the
affected areas. Those efforts have continued to weaken
the LRA and to degrade its fighting capacity.
On the political and diplomatic front, from 12 to
15 September, I led an AU delegation to Khartoum

15-40818

08/12/2015

Central African region

and engaged with the Sudanese authorities on the LRA
problem. The mission was undertaken pursuant to the
Government of the Sudan’s invitation on 14 May 2014
to the AU Commission and the Peace and Security
Council to verify allegations made in the report of
the Secretary-General that month about the presence
of the LRA in Kafia Kingi (S/2014/319). The trip was
also a follow-up to my discussions with the Sudanese
Government delegation at the margins of the second
meeting of the heads of intelligence and security
services of East Africa, held in Kampala in mid-July.
While in Khartoum, my delegation also interacted
with the United States chargé affairs, the European
Union Ambassador and the Deputy Force Commander
of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. Our engagements have enhanced cooperation
between the Government of the Sudan and the AU
Commission in confronting the LRA problem, as
evidenced by the green light given by the Sudanese
authorities for joint fact-finding on the LRA in Kafia
Kingi. I commend the Government of the Sudan for that
spirit of cooperation against the LRA and assure the
Council that the Commission will take all the necessary
steps to ensure that the joint mission is undertaken.
Secondly, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abdoulaye Bathily and I have continued to
work in close partnership in order to sustain the recent
momentum against the LRA. From 17 to 20 November,
we undertook a joint mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo where, in Kinshasa, we exchanged views
with the Secretary-General of the country’s Ministry
for Foreign Affairs and with the Minister of Defence,
as well as with the Deputy Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and MONUSCO’s
Acting Force Commander.
On 19 November, we met in Dungu, in the northeast of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the
Commander of the MONUSCO Moroccan battalion,
the commander of the Congolese troops in Bas-Uélé,
the Assistant Commander of the United States special
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
representatives of the RTF headquarters from Yambio
and local authorities in Bas-Uélé. The meetings were
an opportunity to obtain a first-hand assessment of the
tempo of the ongoing operations as well as the attendant
operational and humanitarian challenges on the ground.

S/PV.7572

We were pleased to note that the forces were actively
engaged in operations against the LRA.
Despite its weakened state, the LRA continues to
pose a significant threat to the population in the affected
parts of the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan — all the more
so because of the volatility of the situation in eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan and because
of other emerging security threats on the continent
that continue to provide opportunities for the LRA
to survive. Those threats tend to divert our national,
regional and international efforts away from the LRA
threat. The reported emergence of a new rebellion
in South Sudan’s Western Equatoria state is already
interrupting the delivery of logistics and supplies to
the RTF by road from Uganda to the Central African
Republic via South Sudan. It also poses a direct threat
to the personnel of the RTF headquarters in Yambio. As
long as Joseph Kony is in charge of the LRA, the group
will continue to exploit such situations to try to survive
and rejuvenate itself in alliance with other violent
extremist groups or mutate into a regional nuisance,
worsening the security and humanitarian conditions.
Our efforts are also being impeded by the
inadequacy of troops required for the RTF to track the
LRA in a vast territory. The RTF is currently operating
at only 50 per cent of its authorized force strength of
5,000 troops. Moreover, some of the contingents are
lacking the required logistics to combat the LRA.
The existence of armed militia groups such as the
ex-Séléka, janjaweed and other poaching groups also
constitutes a challenge to counter-LRA operations, as
those groups are collaborating with the LRA against
the RTF. All those challenges are being compounded
by the unpredictability of funds for supporting the fight
against the LRA.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation for the cooperation between the African
Union and its partners, namely, the United Nations,
the European Union and the United States, and call
for closer operational coordination as well as mutual
support among all the forces engaged in countering
the LRA. I appeal to the African Union’s partners to
enhance their logistical and financial support to the
RTF and to devote more efforts to curtailing the LRA’s
logistic supply chain in order to hasten the end of this
terrorist group.

15-408185/6

S/PV.7572

Central African region

Finally, I request the Security Council to closely
monitor the unfolding situation in the Western
Equatoria state of South Sudan in relation to the LRA
threat, as well as to remain seized of the matter until the
LRA is eliminated.

6/6

08/12/2015

The President: I thank Mr. Tuwei for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on these
important topics.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-40818
