ministerial level and the sigrnng of the agreements for a
comprehensive political settlernent hased on the framework
document of 28 August 1990, and welcoming the preparations
being made by the Cn-Chairrnen of the Conference in that
regard,
Convinced that such a comprehensive political settlement
can offer at last a peaceful, just and d1Jrable solution tu the
Cambodia conflict,

Taking note of the rcqucst hy His Royal Highnes Prince
Norodom Sihanouk for United Nations pe~onnel to be sent to
Cambodia at the earliest possihk moment. 1 ''
Underlining the necessity of a United Nations presence in
Cambodia irnmediate!y after the signing of the agreements for
a cornprehensive political settlemcnt of the Cambodia conflict,
pending the in1plementation of the arrangements set out in
those agreements,
Having considered, to this end, the report of the SecretaryC'.JCneral of 30 Septembcr 1991 172 proposing the establishment
of a United Nation:; Advancc Mi;;sion m Cambodia,
1. Approves the report of tbe Sccretary-General of 30
September 1991;172

2. Decides to establish, under its authority, a Unikd
Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia immediately after the
signing of the agreements for a ,;omprehensive political
settlement of the Cambodia conflict and in accordance with the
report of the Secretary-Gcneral. with members of the Mission
to be sent to Cambodia immcdiatcly alter the signing;

3. CalL<1 upon the S~preme National Council ofCambodia, and the Cambodian parties for their part, to coopcrate fülly
with the Mission and with the preparations for the implementation of the arrangements sel out in ,'1c agreements for a
cornprehensive political settlement;
Welcomes the proposa! of the co-chairrnen of the Paris
Conference on Cambodia 10 reconvene the Conference at an
early date at the ministerial level to sign the agreements for a
cornprehensive political seulement of the Cambodia conflict;
4.

adopted by th~ Coriference on 23 October 1991 which had been
circulated in t.he anne"X to a letter dated 30 October 1991 from
the representatives -if France and Indonesia io the United
Nations, 114 or: hehalf of the Co-Chairmen of the Conference.
ln a Jetter date,j 29 October 1')91 175 addressed to the
President of the Se..:unty Council for the attention of the
memben- of the CouociJ. the Secretary-General referred to
resolution 117 (1991) of16 October 1991, bywhich the Council
had decided to estahlish a United Nations Advance Mission in

C:ambodia immediately after the signing of the agreements for
a comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia contlict,
and stated that these agreements had been signed in Paris on
23 October 1991. Having complcted the nccessary consultations,
the Secrctary-(1cneral proposed that the rnilitary elements of
the Mission he composed of contingents from the following
Member States, all of whom had expressed their readiness in
principle to make the necessary personnel available: Algeria,
Argentina, Austra!ia, Belgium, Canada, China, France, Germany. Ghana, India, Ind0nesia, lreland, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Senegal, Tunisia, the Union of
Soviet Sociahst Rcpuhlics. the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem freland, the United States of America and
Uruguay. He added that he was awaiting a reply frorn one
othcr Member State which had been infonnally approached,
and be would revert to the Securîty ('.,ouncil when be had an
indication of whethcr it also was ready in principle to contributc military personnel to the Mission.
In a letter dated 31 October 1991, 176 the President of the
Security Council infonncd the Secretary-General as follows:

"I have the honour to inform you that your Jetter
dated 29 Octoœr 1991 175 concerning the composition of
lhe rnilitary elernents of the United Nations Advance
Mission in Cambodia bas been bruught to the attention of
the Council members. They agree with the propœal
contained in ymJT letter."
At its 3015th meeting, on 31 O"-tober 1991, the Council
d1scussed the item emitled:

"'The situation in '.::'.amlxxiia:

Requests the Secrctary-General to report to the
Security Council by 15 November 1991 on the implementation

"Letter dated 30 October 1991 from the representatives of
France and of InJonesia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-Geueral (S/23177); 27

of the present resolution and to 1<cep the Council fully
informed of further development~.

"Note by the Secretary-C'..eneral (S/23179)". 27

5.

AdopleJ wumimausly al rite 3014th
1,1œling.

Decisions

In a note dated 30 October 1991.,1-r:i the Secretary-General,
in accordance with the requcst addressed to him in paragraph
12 of the Final Act of the Paris Conference on Cambodia, drew
the attention of the Security Council tn the instruments

Resolution 718 (1991)

or 31 October 1991
The Security Cou11âl.
Recalling 1ts resoJutions 668 (1990) of 20 September 1990
and 717 (199!) üf 16 Oc:ober 1991,

Decisions

Welcoming the meeting in Paris, from 21 to 23 October
1991, of the Paris Conference on Cambodia at the ministerial
level, at which the agreements for a comprehensive political
seulement of the Cambodia conflict 174 were signcd,

In a Ietter dated 8 Novembe.r 1991 177 addrt~,;scd 10 ~he
President of the Security Councii for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretarv-Ge.m,r:.ù. foi1her 1<: l!i~ •
ktter of 29 October 1991 175 relating t~~ the c,omposüion of ih,·
militarycomponent of1he llnited Nations Adv;mcé: Mission Îll
Carnbodia, proposed lhar Brigadier-Get1eral Michel l.J.•nJ01.,
(Franct~) be aprointed 3s Senior Military Liaison Offüer (ift'.1,
Mission.

Htsving considered the agreements for a comprehensive
political seulement of the Cambodia conflict, signed in Paris on
23 October 1991,
Noting that those agreements provide, inter alia, for the
designation of a special representative of the Secretary-General
and the establishment of a United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia,

In another letter d:1ted 8 November 1991' 7t alkirc~st•d te
the President of the Security Council for the attrnt1-:m of Lht·
members of the Council, the Secretary-fieneral proposed that
subject to lhe approval of the Council at the appropn:ilc t.irni:
Major-General John M. Sanderson (Australia) he arr" ,mted J:,
Commander of the military component of the United Natioœ:
Transitional Authority in Camhodia after it had hecn ,:staJ:,lished by the Council. He further proposed that BngadierGeneral Michel Loridon ( han cc) se ive as Deputy Commander.
He stated that in the meantime, it was his intention to associatc
C':reneral Sanderson closely in a senior advismy c::ipa<'.iry in tht
preparatory process rclating to the military mam.!J1c of 1 h,
Authority,

Noting alîo that it is the intention of the Secretary-General
to send a sUJvey mission to Cambodia as soon as possîble to
prepare a plan for implementing the mandate envisaged in the
agreements, for submission to the Security Council,
Underlining the necessity for the full cooperation of the
Supreme National Council of Cambodia, and ail Cambodians
for their part, in the ïrnplementation of the agreements.
1. Expresses its full support for the agreements for 3
comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict,
signed in Paris on 23 Octohcr }Q9l; 174

ln a letter dated 1 J November 1991, 179 the Pœs.ident (,: 1 ix
Security Council informed the Secretary-(1entra! r1~ t, ►l!c,w,;:
"I have the honour to inform you th:il, y,1ur luter
dated 8 November 1991 177 conceming the appoïntmeni <il
the Senior Military Liaison Officer of the United Nations
A.dvance Mission in Cambodia has bcen brought to :h.::
attention of the Council memben.. The~ agrce with lhf,
propl'Sal containe,d in your letter.''

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to designate a special
representative for Camhodia to act on hi'i behalf;
3. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-GeneraJ to
send a sutvey mission to Cambodia as soon as possible to
prepare a plan for implementing the mandate envisaged in the
agreements;

in another letter dated 11 November 1991,111() the President
of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General as
follows:

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council at the earliest possible date a report containing bis implementation plan, including in particular a detailed
estimate of the cost of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, on the understanding that this report would be
the basis on which the Council would authorize the establishment of the Authority, the budget of which is to be
subsequently considered and approved in accordance with the
provisions of Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations;

"I have the honour to infonn you that your lettcr
dated 8 November 1991 178 conceming the appointmcnt of
the Commander and the Deputy Commander of tht
military compcment of the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia has been brought to the attentio:.1
of the Council members. They wclcomt th: pruposal
contained in your lctter."

5. Calfs upon ail Cambodian parties to comply fully with
the cease-fire that entered into force at the time of the signature of the agreements;

In a letter dated 12 November 1991 181 addressed to th~
President of the Sccurity Council for the attention of th!'
members of the C',ouncil, the Secretary-General referred to hi~
letter of 29 October 1991 to the President of the Security
C'ouncil 17s and the President's reply of 31 Octoœr 1991 17"
conceming the composition of the military elements of the
United Nations Advance Mission in Cambo<lia. Following
further consultations, the Secretary-General proprned that
Austria be added to the Member States contributing milit1ry
personnel to the Mission.

6. Calfs upon the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, and ail Cambodians for their part, to cooperate fully with
the United Nations in the implementation of the agreements
for a comprehensive politicaJ seulement of the Cambodia
conflict.
Adopled unonimously al the JOJ 5th
mttling.

41
