220

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

development for review on a cross-organizational basis at
its first regular session of 1985,
Aware that greater co-ordination and knowledge of
activities in this area within the specialized agencies and
the regional commissions and by Member States and nongovernmental organizations would facilitate an exchange
of experience and concepts and be beneficial to all,
Reaffirming that within the United Nations system the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Department of International Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat remains the focal point for coordination, consultation, promotion and advice on questions concerning women,
Deeply concerned that international efforts on behalf of
women should keep pace with the increasing efforts
towards establishing effective national machineries and
mobilizing resources to ensure the integration of women
into all stages of planning, monitoring and development
activities,
Noting that the progress report of the Secretary-General 155 requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
37/57 was submitted to the Commission on the Status of
Women at its thirtieth session,
l. Urges the specialized agencies, regional commissions and other organs, bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system which have not yet done so to
develop and implement comprehensive policies regarding
the concerns of women, both as agents and as beneficiaries, in technical co-operation and development activities and to establish effective review measures to ensure
that women are an integral part of these policies and
activities;
2. Requests the specialized age11cies, regional commissions and other organs, bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system to ensure continued co-operation
and co-ordination with the Commission on the Status of
Women beyond the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women, in order fully to achieve the goals of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Endorses the request of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 1984/12 that the SecretaryGeneral should report to the Commission on the Status of
Women at each session on all significant developments
pertaining to the advancement of women within the
United Nations system that have occurred since the preceding session;
4. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women 'to
give greater attention at its future sessions to the reports of
the Secretary-General pertaining to the integration of
women in development, by continuing to include in its
qcnda a specific item for that purpose, and to submit its
co,asnents on his reports to the Economic and Social
~ I and, as appropriate, through the Council to the
Glilltal Assembly;
S. Reaffirms its resolution 36/127 of 14 December
1981, which provides for the consideration of issues
relating to the integration of women in development in all
the relevant organs of the General Assembly.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
155 E/CN.6/1984/4.
IS65ee also sect. X.B.I, decision 391459.
157 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

39/129. Preparations for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace 156
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it endorsed, inter alia, the action proposals

contained in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year, 153
Recalling also its resolution 3490 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which it expressed its conviction that a comprehensive and thorough review and appraisal of progress
made in meeting the goals of the World Plan of Action was
of crucial importance for the success of the Plan and recognized that the results of the implementation of the Plan
would contribute to the consideration of the review and
appraisal of the International Development Stratep for
the Second United Nations Development Decade' 7 and
would consequently promote the role of women in the
development process,
Recalling further that the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade 154 stressed that the important set of measures to
improve the status of women contained in the World Plan
of Action adopted at Mexico City in 1975, and the important agreed measures relating to the International Development Strategy in the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 158
should be implemented,
Recalling its resolution 35/ l 36 of 11 December I 980, in
which it decided to convene in 1985, at the conclusion of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, a World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, with
the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education",
Recalling also its resolution 37/60 of 3 December 1982,
in which it welcomed the decision of the Economic and
Social Council that the Commission on the Status of
Women should act as the preparatory body for the
Conference,
Recalling further its resolution 38/108 of 16 December
1983,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for the
World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace on its second session, 159
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
decision 1984/125 of 24 May 1984,
Bearing in mind the request of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 1983/28 of 26 May 1983 that the
Secretary-General should invite interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Council to submit information to the preparatory body for the
Conference, including their views on the progress made
and the obstacles still to be overcome towards the attainment of the goals of the Decade, as well as their views on
priorities and strategies looking to the year 2000,
l58 Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality. Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I,

sect. A.
159 A/CON F.116/Pl •1 I 9 and Corr. I.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

221

promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind,
including distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of3 December
1982 and 38/109 of 16 December 1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention, 160

Having considered the reports of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its
second and third sessions, 161
Noting that the Committee, in its rules of procedure, 162
decided that it would have summary records and would
include Arabic among its official languages and that the
Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1984/8 of
22 May 1984, recommended that the General Assembly
should take the necessary steps to ensure the provision and
distribution in all official languages of such records,
Recognizing the importance of the summary records of
bodies established to monitor the implementation of international human rights instruments,
Noting that the Committee decided to consider the
achievements and obstacles experienced by States parties
in the implementation of the Convention as a contribution
to the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held at Nairobi
from 15 to 26 July 1985, and that the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 1984/8, requested the SecretaryGeneral to assist the Committee therein,
l. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Invites States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the
Convention;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women on its second and third sessions and commends
the Committee for its work;
5. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
6. Requests States parties to make all possible efforts to
submit their initial implementation reports in accordance
with article 18 of the Convention, bearing in mind the
Committee's general guidelines regarding the form and
contents of such reports;
7. Requests the Committee, in organizing its work, to
ensure that the reports of States parties are adequately
reviewed within the quadrennial cycle envisaged in the
Convention;
8. Takes note of the discussion in the Committee concerning the inclusion in the agenda of a future session of an
item on the discussion of article 21 of the Convention,
specifically the provision that the Committee may make
suggestions and general recommendations based on the
examination of reports; 163
9. Authorizes the provision and distribution in all official languages of the United Nations of summary records of
the meetings of the Committee and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take appropriate measures to that end;
10. Invites the Committee to consider, in the light of
this authorization of the provision and distribution of
summary records of its meetings on a regular basis, the
format and content of its future reports, bearing in mind

160 A/39/486.
161 01/icial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple-

162 /bid., Thirty-eighth Session. Supplement No. 45 (N38/45), annex III.
163 /bid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/39/45), vol. II,

Stressing the importance of the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Commission
on the Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for
the Conference, as well as the need for ensuring the high
quality of the documents to be submitted to the
Conference,
1. Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of
Kenya for its offer to act as host to the World Conference
to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985;
2. Urges all Member States to make all efforts to
ensure the success of the Conference;
3. Takes note of the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for the
Conference on its second session and endorses the recommendations contained therein, as approved by the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 1984;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the preparatory body for the Conference at its third session all the
recommendations contained in the reports of each of the
regional preparatory meetings;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
preparatory body for the Conference at its third session a
report containing information from interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, in accordance with Council
resolution 1983/28;
6. Requests that the preparatory body for the Conference ensure the high quality of the documents to be submitted to the Conference, which should be distributed at
least six weeks before the opening of the Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled .. United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
JO 1st plenary meeting

14 December 1984

39/130. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to

ment No. 45 (A/39/45), vols. I and II.

para. 360.
