S/2022/698

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 September 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 15 September 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 42 of resolution 2607 (2021), the Security Council requested me
to provide, following the completion of a technical assessment of the weapons and
ammunition management capability of Somalia, recommendations to improve that
capability further. The Security Council further requested th at I articulate options for
clear, well-identified and realistic benchmarks that could serve to guide the Council
in its review of the arms embargo measures in the light of progress achieved to date
in the weapons and ammunition management capability of So malia and its
compliance with resolution 2607 (2021), and particularly the Council’s consideration
of possible modification, suspension or lifting of those measures.
Pursuant to the Council’s request, an assessment team conducted a mission to
Somalia (Mogadishu and Baidoa, South-West State) from 16 to 24 July 2022. The
team also held consultations in Nairobi on 25 July 2022. Led by the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the team also co mprised technical experts from
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) and the United
Nations Mine Action Service. Upon invitation from the Federal Government of
Somalia, the Panel of Experts on Somalia also joined for part of the as sessment.
In Mogadishu, the team held consultations with representatives of the Federal
Government of Somalia: the National Security Adviser to the President of the Federal
Republic of Somalia and his staff, including the National Focal Point for Weapons
and Ammunition Management; and representatives of the Ministries of Defence,
Internal Security and Justice and Judiciary Affairs, as well as the Somali National
Army and Somali Police Force, National Intelligence and Security Agency, Office of
the Mayor of Mogadishu and the national component of the Joint Verification Team.
The team met with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and representatives of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and UN-Women, as well as the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS), the European Union Naval Force Somalia (Operation Atalanta)
and the European Union Training Mission in Somalia. The team also held
consultations with the HALO Trust and the Mines Advisory Group. In Baidoa, the
team met with the Head of UNSOM in Baidoa, and the ATMIS Commander of Sector
3. The team also met with the South-West State Ministers of Internal Security and
Justice, as well as representatives of the Regional Security Office (including the
Weapons and Ammunition Management Focal Point), the Somali National Army and
Somali Police Force. I was saddened to learn of the tragic deaths of the South -West
State Minister of Justice, Sheikh Hassan Ibrahim, and several other people, as a result

22-13548 (E)

210922

*2213548*

S/2022/698

of a deadly attack by Al-Shabaab shortly after this meeting. The incident underscored
the continued threat the group poses to peace and stability in Somalia.
The Federal Government of Somalia enabled a visit by the assessment team to
the Somali Police Force headquarters, a Somali Police Force storage site and a Somali
Police Force explosive ordnance disposal explosive storage, as well as the Halane
Central Armoury, and a new ammunition storage facility currently under construction
in Jazeera, in Mogadishu. In Baidoa, the team visited Somali National Army and
Somali Police Force armouries.
In Nairobi, the team held consultations with the Panel of Experts on Somalia,
the Regional Centre on Small Arms, the Bonn International Centre for Conflict
Studies, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
organization Conflict Armament Research.
The team conducted in-person and virtual consultations with Member State
delegations, including Security Council members, based in New York, Mogadishu
and Djibouti.
The Offices of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict were also consulted.
A debrief was provided, both to the Federal Government of Somalia and to
Council members, on the assessment team’s findings.
Somalia is currently undergoing a critical evolution as it implements the
Somalia Transition Plan and gradually assumes greater responsibility for its national
security. Through its resolution 2628 (2022), the Council requested benchmarks on
the implementation of the security transition, including benchmarks for the
effectiveness of ATMIS, the Somalia Transition Plan and the national security
architecture. 1 Through resolution 2632 (2022), the Council also requested
recommendations for benchmarks to track the timely execution and achievement of
the UNSOM mandate. 2
This is my third assessment on weapons and ammunition management and the
arms embargo in relation to Somalia (for the two previous assessments, see
S/2014/243 and S/2019/616).

Arms embargo and context
A general and complete arms embargo was established in relation to Somalia,
by resolution 733 (1992) of the Security Council. A targeted arms embargo, applicable
to individuals on the sanctions list of the relevant committee together with other
targeted measures (travel ban and assets freeze), was introduced in resolution 1844
(2008). The territorial arms embargo was partially lifted by resolution 2093 (2013)
for a limited period 3 in order to support the development of the security forces of the
Federal Government of Somalia and to provide security for the Somali peop le. Since
then, the embargo has been further eased and streamlined by the Council, for example,
with the addition of new exemptions, including for Somali security sector institutions
__________________

To be submitted by the United Nations, jointly with the African Union, the Federal Government
of Somalia, the European Union and other donors, pursuant to paragraph 50 of resolution 2628
(2022).
2
Pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2632 (2022).
3
The partial lifting of the arms embargo was subsequently renewed, for several months or up to a
year, by Security Council resolutions 2142 (2014), 2182 (2014), 2244 (2015), 2317 (2016), 2385
(2017), 2444 (2018) and 2498 (2019).
1

2/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

other than those of the Federal Government of Somalia; 4 the lifting of the notification
requirement for the provision of technical advice, financial and other assistance, and
training related to military activities, intended solely for the development of the
Somali National Security Forces; 5 and the renewal of the partial lifting of the arms
embargo without an expiry date, which, previously, had been renewed on a yearly
basis. 6 Restrictions on the import of components for improvised explosive devices
were introduced in resolution 2498 (2019). 7
Currently, the partially lifted arms embargo incorporates five exemptions and a
biannual reporting requirement from the Federal Government of Somalia, as most
recently reflected in resolution 2607 (2021). The exemptions are: those subject to the
approval of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia; 8 those requiring the absence of a negative decision by the
Committee and a post-delivery notification; 9 those requiring an advance notification
and a post-delivery notification to the Committee, 10 or only an advance notification; 11
and, standing exemptions (or exceptions) for which no prior decision by or
notification to the Committee is required. 12 The reporting requirement covers, inter
alia, information on the structure, composition, strength and disposition of the
security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia, and the status of regional and
militia forces; reports by the Joint Verification Team; 13 and post-distribution
notifications. 14 Since the beginning of 2019, when my previous assessment on the
__________________

Security Council resolution 2111 (2013).
Security Council resolution 2551 (2020).
6
Security Council resolution 2551 (2020).
7
The sanctions regime also includes a ban on the export and import of charcoal from Somalia, as
first established in Security Council resolution 2036 (2012).
8
Items contained in annex A to Security Council resolution 2607 (2021), intended solely for the
development of the Somali National Security Forces and for the Somali securi ty sector
institutions other than those of the Federal Government of Somalia.
9
Items contained in annex B to Security Council resolution 2607 (2021), or the delivery of
technical advice, financial and other assistance, and training related to military activities,
intended solely for the development of the Somali security sector institutions other than those of
the Federal Government of Somalia.
10
Items contained in annex B to Security Council resol ution 2607 (2021), intended solely for the
development of the Somali National Security Forces.
11
Non-lethal military equipment intended solely for humanitarian or protective use.
12
Exceptions are provided for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM, now ATMIS), AMISOM strategic partners, operating
solely under the latest African Union strategic concept of operation and in cooperation and
coordination with AMISOM, and the European Union Training Mission in Somalia. Exceptions
are also provided with a view to suppressing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia, with such measures to be taken upon the request of the Federal Government of
Somalia and for which the Federal Government has notified the Secretary -General. Lastly,
exceptions are provided for supplies of protective clothing temporarily exported to Somalia by
United Nations personnel, representatives of media and hum anitarian and development workers
and associated personnel and for entry into Somali ports for temporary visits of vessels carrying
weapons and military equipment for defensive purposes provided that such items remain at all
times aboard such vessels. Türkiye, noting its significant contributions to the Somali security
sector, reiterated to the assessment team its desire for an exception to the arms embargo, similar
to that enjoyed by other international partners.
13
Following the recommendation made in the 2014 assessment, the Federal Government of
Somalia established a joint verification team in 2015. Its membership continues to include the
Federal Government and experts from the organization Conflict Armament Research, tasked with
conducting routine inspections of the stockpiles, inventory records and supply chain of weapons
of government security forces for the purpose of mitigating the diversion of arms and
ammunition to entities outside the security services of the Federal Government.
14
Incorporating information regarding the destination unit in the Somali National Security Forces
or the place of storage of military equipment upon distribution of imported arms and
ammunition.
4
5

22-13548

3/18

S/2022/698

partially lifted arms embargo was conducted, the Committee has cleared eight
exemption requests and received 100 exemption notifications from the Federal
Government of Somalia, other States and regional organizations. 15 The Committee
received 23 post-delivery notifications during the same period. 16 Aimed at providing
additional guidance to the Federal Government of Somalia, and to supplying States
or international, regional and subregional organizations, concerning the procedural
requirements for submission of exemption requests and notifications, the Committee
issued an updated implementation assistance notice in May 2022. 17
For better implementation of the partially lifted arms embargo, an authorization,
renewed annually, 18 for Member States to interdict arms, as well as charcoal and
specific components for improvised explosive devices, being transported in v iolation
of the sanctions regime, in Somali territorial waters and on the high seas off the coast
of Somalia, was first introduced in resolution 2182 (2014).
In its engagements with the assessment team, the Federal Government of
Somalia expressed the view that the partially lifted arms embargo hindered the fight
against Al-Shabaab by restricting the access to weapons by the Government, since
potential suppliers did not wish to be involved in the onero us approval or notification
process. Dissatisfaction was also voiced at the fact that the Government continued to
lack visibility and oversight of equipment delivered to the Somali security sector
institutions other than those of the Government, despite th e request contained in
resolution 2607 (2021) for States, or international, regional and subregional
organizations to inform the Federal Government of such deliveries. There is,
moreover, no requirement for the Committee, after it receives exemption requests or
notifications for these deliveries, to transmit the information to the Government.
The Federal Government of Somalia reiterated its previously held position on
the complete lifting of the arms embargo. Notwithstanding its position, and cognizant
of the gradual approach adopted by the Security Council in easing the arms embargo
in previous years, the Federal Government expressed support for the benchmarking
exercise. In a position paper on the arms embargo subsequently shared with the
assessment team, the Government called for specific items, currently subject to an
approval process, to be made subject to notification only. This position paper
concludes that the Somali National Armed Forces conducting offensive operations in
the areas of operations outlined in the Somalia Transition Plan should be exempt from
the partially lifted arms embargo.

__________________

In 2019, three exemption requests, including two requiring the absence of a negative decision,
and 26 notifications; in 2020, one exemption request and 26 notifications; in 2021, two
exemption requests and 20 exemption notifications. See the annual reports of the Committee,
S/2019/978, S/2020/1215 and S/2021/1051. As at 1 September 2022, two exemption requests and
28 notifications (of which one related to the import of components for improvised explosive
devices). Double notifications, if submitted both by the Federal Government of Somalia and by
the supplying State for the same items, have been counted as one notification.
16
In 2019, four post-delivery notifications; in 2020, seven post-delivery notifications; in 2021,
eight post-delivery notifications. See the annual reports of the Committee, S/2019/978,
S/2020/1215 and S/2021/1051. As at 1 September 2022, four post-delivery notifications.
17
Available at: https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/sites/www.un.org.securitycouncil/files/
2022_ian2_clean_6june2022.pdf.
18
Security Council resolutions 2244 (2015), 2317 (2016), 2385 (2017), 2444 (2018), 2498 (2019),
2551 (2020) and 2607 (2021).
15

4/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

Assessment of weapons and ammunition management capability,
including recommendations for improvement, and options for
relevant benchmarks
The present section provides an assessment of the weapons and ammunition
management capability of Somalia, including recommendations for improvement,
organized by stages of the weapons and ammunition life cycle, and, as appropriate,
highlighting the country’s support needs. As requested, I also present options for the
Security Council’s consideration in the development of relevant benchmarks.
National framework
Assessment
Since my assessment in 2019, the Federal Government of Somalia has further
strengthened its national framework governing weapons and ammunition
management. With the presidential decree of 18 September 2018 continuing to serve
as the primary national policy, in 2020 the Government developed a national weapons
and ammunition management strategy, with support from international partners. 19 The
strategy provides a key policy road map for weapons and ammunition management
in Somalia for the 2021–2025 period. It outlines commitments and goals for managing
each stage of the weapons and ammunition life cycle, as well as the roles and
responsibilities for different actors, both at the Federal Government and federal
member state level. Notably, it also addresses important cross-cutting issues,
including gender. 20 The assessment team understands the strategy to be a living
document, to be updated by the Federal Government of Somalia as needed. In
resolution 2607 (2021), the Security Council welcomed the adoption of the strategy.
Eleven standard operating procedures are also in place to facilitate the
implementation of the strategy, 21 albeit standard operating procedures need to be
adapted or tailored for the federal member state level. A standard operating procedure
for weapons and ammunition management in the Somali National Army, introduced
since the previous assessment, notably provides guidance on delivery of weapons to
subordinate units – a gap that was highlighted in the previous assessment. 22
There have been no other notable developments in further strengthening the
legal and regulatory framework, 23 potentially due to the electoral process and the
__________________

The consultative, strategic meeting to develop the Strategy was organized by the Federal
Government of Somalia’s Office of National Security in April 2020, in cooperation with UNIDIR
and the organization Conflict Armament Research. The Strategy constituted a milestone in a
process that started in 2014 until 2017, whereby with support from UNIDIR, UNSOM and the
Mine Action Service, the Federal Government of Somalia conducted an iterative inter-ministerial
consultative process on weapons and ammunition management to continuously evaluate progress
and address gaps in the national weapons and ammunition management frameworks, procedures
and practices. See UNIDIR, Towards a National Framework for Arms and Ammunition
Management in the Federal Republic of Somalia: A Narrative Report 2014–2017, 2017,
https://unidir.org/sites/default/files/publication/pdfs/narrative-report-2014-2017-en-695.pdf.
20
The Strategy also cited, inter alia, the National Gender Policy (2016) and the Somali Women’s
Charter (2019) as among the national frameworks which it is guided by and aims to complement.
21
The standard operating procedures concern: general armoury procedures; armoury procedures for
weapons; armoury procedures for ammunition and explosives; accounting of weapons,
ammunition and explosives; marking of weapons; destruction of weapons and ammunition;
transport of weapons and/or ammunition; reception and documentation procedures at Halane
Central Armoury; management of captured weapons; Somali National Army weapons and
ammunition management; and the harmonized AMISOM/Fed eral Government of Somalia
standard operating procedure on the management of recovered small arms and light weapons .
22
See also marking and record-keeping section below.
23
Such as through the review or development of relevant legislation or regulations , acts or decrees.
19

22-13548

5/18

S/2022/698

coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, among other factors. For example, the
two draft acts referred to in the previous assessment, to regulate civilian ownership
of small arms, and weapons of private security companies, have yet to be adopted. 24
Recommendations
Demonstrating continuous political will, commitment and ownership, the
national weapons and ammunition management strategy was developed through a
consultative process, including large-scale federal member state level weapons and
ammunition management stakeholder engagement for the first time. The document
itself also addresses the needs and plans for federal member state -level weapons and
ammunition management. Further such consideration of planning and implementation
needs at the federal member state level should continue. Implementation will be key
to the success of the strategy. In this regard, the finalization of a results -based action
plan with clear baselines and targets for implementation of the strategy, as mentioned
in the document, 25 should be prioritized. Such a plan, complemented by a training
framework (see below section on professionalization, training and capacity
development), could also help focus the international support called for by the
strategy. 26 I urge international partners to provide this support through close
coordination and discussion with the Federal Government of Somalia, including on
Somalia’s priority needs.
The Federal Government of Somalia has expressed its full commitment to
review and adopt legislation, where gaps exist, in its pursuit of the rule of law and
building strong and credible institutions. Building on the presidential decree of 18
September 2018 on the Control of Arms and Ammunition of the National Army,
additional legislation is required to cover remaining gaps in the context of weapons
and ammunition management. For example, legislation, acts or decrees pertaining to
international transfers, including elaboration of the procurement process requirements
and import controls, such as a control list, merit particular attention. Where such
legislation may involve weapons and ammunition aspects, for example in the context
of vital security agencies, the Office of National Security and other weapons and
ammunition management stakeholders should have visibility on the process to ensure
that weapons and ammunition management components, are considered and
adequately integrated. This will require international assistance and support,
including the provision of technical and legal expertise.
I also encourage the Federal Government of Somalia to become a State pa rty to
relevant international and regional arms control instruments, 27 and to harmonize its
domestic legislation with the provisions of those instruments.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.

__________________

Pending review by appropriate government authorities.
Section 4 focuses on the implementation process, including setting out roles and responsibilities
for different stakeholders.
26
Section 3.5 of the Strategy focuses on international assistance.
27
Such as the Arms Trade Treaty; the Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking
in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime; and the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the
Horn of Africa.
24
25

6/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

Benchmark 1: the legal and regulatory framework governing conventional
weapons, including small arms and light weapons, and ammunition,
components, and related material, is appropriately strengthened 28
Indicators
– Legislation, regulations or administrative procedures are in place, and
implemented or operationalized, to cover the weapons and ammunition life
cycle including transfers, marking, record-keeping, stockpiling, tracing, end-use
and final disposal.
– The legal and regulatory framework should include elaboration of the
procurement process requirements, such as indication of relevant officials
authorized to sign end-use/end-user documentation.
– Development of a national transfer control system for imports, which includes
adoption of a control list that clearly categorizes and defines items subject to
national transfer controls.
Benchmark 2: the National Weapons and Ammunition Management Strategy
continues to be implemented and updated
Indicator
– Finalization and operationalization of the results-based action plan with
baselines and targets, for implementation of the National Weapons and
Ammunition Management Strategy. 29 This would include baselines and targets
at both the Federal Government and federal member state level.
Coordination
Assessment
The Office of National Security, under the leadership of the National Security
Adviser to the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, continues to provide
overall political coordination and policy direction for weapons and ammunition
management, in addition to being the focal point office for all matters related to the
partially lifted arms embargo. Within the Office, an officially designated national
weapons and ammunition management focal point is responsible for relevant
coordination and planning throughout the relevant ministries and the Security Sector
Forces, as well as coordinating with international partners. The Office’s staff also
includes a sanctions and legal advisor. For deliveries of weapons and military
equipment subject to approval by or notification to the Committee, the Office
coordinates with the Ministry of Defence, which takes the lead in procurement
planning, and subsequently submits the relevant documentation to the Commit tee.
The previous assessment indicated that the Office of National Security had set
out a road map to establish a formal national coordination mechanism on small arms
and light weapons, the National Commission on Small Arms and Light Weapons, also
referred to in Security Council resolution 2607 (2021). The Office of National
Security has reiterated its commitment to establishing the Commission to its security
partners, as part of the efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia to implement
the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and
Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa. The establishment
of the Commission is also in line with the commitments of Member States under the
__________________

In line with section 1.2. National frameworks of the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management Strategy.
29
As outlined in the Strategy itself, under section 4. Implementation process.
28

22-13548

7/18

S/2022/698

Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Since 2019, the Federal Government of Somalia has continued to provide and
convene platforms for weapons and ammunition consultations and coordination,
though less frequently in the past two years. 30 From 19 to 20 March 2022, the Office
of National Security, with support from international partners, 31 organized a Weapons
and Ammunition Management Coordination Conference that commendably included
a range of stakeholders, including from federal member states. The conference
identified 15 priorities (2022–2023) and a breakdown of weapons and ammunition
management needs both at the Federal Government of Somalia, Benadir Regional
Administration (covering Mogadishu), and the federal member state level. 32 The
Office of National Security plans to hold a follow -up meeting in September of this
year.
Regional security offices, established in 2017, each include a weapons and
ammunition management focal point funded through donor support. Through the
regional security offices, the Federal Government has engaged and coordinated with
the federal member states to roll out certain weapon and ammunition management
measures at the federal member state level. This is another important step forward,
considering that strengthening and expanding the weapons and ammunition
management system beyond Mogadishu remains a priority. The roll-out has so far
included measures such as the survey of storage capacities and needs, the
refurbishment and construction of a limited number of storage sites, marking and
registration of weapons, and monitoring and verification.
Recommendations
The Office of National Security plays an essential role in coordinating weapons
and ammunition management strategy and processes. Establishment of a formal
national coordination mechanism under the umbrella of this Office, with adequate
resourcing, would help solidify a process whereby all relevant government entities
work together with international partners to conceive, implement, monitor and
evaluate safe, efficient and effective management of weapons and ammunition. It
would also help in addressing capacity and coordination challenges that were

__________________

Political developments, including the electoral process and elections, security developments, and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have all had an impact in this regard.
31
Organized in cooperation with the HALO Trust.
32
The 15 priorities identified were related to: (1) establishing a regular platform for inter -agency
coordination; (2) updating the national weapons and ammunition management baseline
assessment; (3) reviewing, updating and operationalizing existing weapons and ammunition
management standard operating procedures; (4) conducting a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration assessment; (5) establishing a sub-working group on weapons
and ammunition management coordination; (6) accelerating and expanding the ongoing efforts to
mark and register the national stockpile, and furthering the marking and registration efforts at the
federal member state level, and Benadir Regional Administration; (7) conducting a full audit of
existing storage capacity in order to clearly define the remaining needs; (8) establishing a
centralized reporting mechanism for captured weapons and associated material; (9) mitigating
the risk posed by weapons and ammunition that are no longer serviceable; (10) establishing clear,
measurable, and achievable benchmarks for the lifting of the partial arms embargo;
(11) developing a legal framework to prevent illicit arms fl ows; (12) establishing central
armouries across Somalia; (13) developing a national counter-improvised explosive device
strategy to counter and degrade Al-Shabaab’s threat; (14) developing national legislation on
explosive materials and precursor chemicals; and (15) establishing analysis units to carry out
policy and operational analysis.
30

8/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

highlighted to the assessment team during its visit, as well as potential risks 33 to
continued and sustained weapons and ammunition management progress. Its design
and establishment are the decision of the Federal Government, as is the definition of
its mandate, scope of items covered, 34 decision-making processes and resourcing.
The coordination conference held in March 2022 offered an important platform
for discussion between Federal Government and federal member state stakeholders,
as well as international partners. A follow-up meeting is already planned. Such events
could be convened regularly and systematically, to discuss ongoing progress,
challenges and needs in relation to the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management Strategy and its implementation action plan. The increased coordination
between the Federal Government and federal member states I highlighted above was
critically facilitated by the weapons and ammunition management focal poi nts
situated within regional security offices. I urge the international community to
continue to support these key positions.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.
Benchmark 3: a national weapons and ammunition management coordination
mechanism and its primary components are clearly defined and functioning 35
Indicators
– The adequate resourcing and capacitating of the national weapons and
ammunition management lead authority and the national weapons and
ammunition management focal point to coordinate weapons and ammunition
management.
– The frequency and regularity of weapons and ammunition management
coordination and consultative meetings held, including the type and level of
Federal Government and federal member state level participation, as well as the
type and level of international stakeholders’ participation.
– The adequate resourcing and capacitating of entities having a coordination role
at the federal member state level, particularly regional security offices and the
weapons and ammunition management focal points within them.
Marking and record-keeping
Assessment
Since 2014, the Halane Central Armoury in Mogadishu has been the main
reception point for imported weapons and the main processing point for marking,
recording, initial storage and distribution of imported weapons. Weapons marking and
record-keeping have shown consistent improvements over the years, with newly
imported weapons being systematically marked. The Ministry of Internal Security has
also deployed a mobile marking capability within Mogadishu and to the sector level.
__________________

Risks identified by the assessment team include: (i) limited information -sharing between Federal
Government and federal member state stakeholders, and international pa rtners and assistance
providers (a challenge already noted in the last assessment); (ii) the duplication of efforts and
support provided by, and received from, international stakeholders not aligned with national
policies, strategic and specific objectives and targets; and (iii) the absence of a mechanism to
monitor and evaluate progress of the implementation of the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management Strategy.
34
Categories of conventional weapons, including small arms and light weapons, ammunition ,
improvised explosive device components, anti-personnel landmines, etc.
35
In line with Section 2.1 Policy and Coordination of the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management.
33

22-13548

9/18

S/2022/698

International support continues to be required for mobile marking. The assessment
team reviewed records at the Halane Central Armoury to confirm that newly imported
marked weapons were logged and individual weapons were issued to and recorded in
the files of security force personnel.
In addition, the Federal Government of Somalia is in the early stages of
implementing a remote verification tool, which also assists in record -keeping,
through the “digitalization” of marked weapons through a mobile phone data
collection software application. Since November 2020, 6,615 Somali police force
weapons have been registered in Mogadishu and in two federal member state
locations. The Federal Government of Somalia, with international donor support,
plans to implement digitalization of the weapons record-keeping system throughout
the Somali National Armed Forces to improve verification processes and
accountability. The Office of National Security also intends to develop a national
database for weapons and ammunition management in line with the National Weapons
and Ammunition Management Strategy. The assessment team was presented portions
of the prototype weapons and ammunition database during the visit.
The Office of National Security further confirmed to the assessment team that
the second phase of the biometric registration, linking individual weapons through
their serial numbers to an individual soldier’s file, had been completed. The
Government plans to link the weapons and ammunition database, when established,
to the biometric registration.
Through stakeholder interviews the assessment team understood that the
marking and registration of captured weapons is rare (see also section on processing
and tracing of recovered weapons below). In its report to the Security Council in
August 2022, the Government noted that 21 captured weapons were marked and
registered on the remote software application during the reporting period.
Ammunition accounting and life cycle management is in a nascent stage. The
only existing accounting process observed by the assessment team was logging the
receipt of ammunition at the central armoury and initial distribution to sector
locations.
Recommendations
The progress in weapons marking and record-keeping is a welcome step and
should be continued. In this regard, I urge international partners to continue to provide
support as needed, including as required to support remote verification initiatives.
The national database on weapons and ammunition management should be rolled out
as a matter of priority, to serve as a centralized accounting platform.
For ammunition life cycle management to be effective, details on operational
expenditure rates, loss or theft, ammunition age, misfire data, and disposal
information is required. 36 This data is not currently being recorded. The establishment
of an ammunition accounting system would be important to increase the ability of
national authorities to assess the quality and quantity of its stockpile, distinguish
between surplus stocks and ammunition necessary for operational purpo ses, and
identify loss or theft from the ammunition stockpile.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.

__________________
36

10/18

See the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines 03.10 on inventory management.
22-13548

S/2022/698

Benchmark 4: weapons and ammunition accounting and management systems
are functioning and effective 37
Indicators
– Newly imported, existing and captured weapons are marked according to
national standards.
– Weapons are recorded in a central database and digitalization of Somali National
Armed Forces weapons supports verification procedures.
– Ammunition accounting and life cycle management procedures are in place in
line with international guidelines.
Stockpile management
Assessment
Stakeholder interviews confirmed the construction or rehabilitation of weapon
armouries throughout Somalia, primarily funded by donor infrastructure projects. At
least 242 armouries of various sizes were constructed over the past decade. However,
the extent to which armouries are used to secure, store and manage weapons is
uncertain. Relevant stakeholders and government officials confirmed that many of the
armouries were not being used for their intended purpose. The asses sment team
inspected five armouries during the assessment period. All were sufficient from a
physical security perspective; four of the five were used for weapons management
but three of the five were also used to store ammunition, including high explosive
ammunition.
The infrastructure requirements, as well as the safety, security, and management
procedures for weapons are much different than those for ammunition. A key
challenge continues to be the Halane Central Armoury. No weapons were stored at
the site during the assessment visit. The assessment team was informed that the
weapons were in use. However, contrary to the intended purpose of a weapons
armoury, a large amount of high explosive ammunition has been stored at the location
since 2018. This continues to present a significant risk to the airport and the
population surrounding the site. In August 2021, United Nations entities agreed to
fund the construction of an ammunition storage area at Jazeera, outside populated
areas in an effort to reduce the risk to United Nations entities, the civilian population,
and infrastructure within the international airport. In January 2022, Somali authorities
authorized the project and agreed to transfer ammunition to the new site once
construction is completed.
Recommendations
Confusion remains about the physical security and stockpile management of
weapons versus ammunition. A core physical security principle for depots is that
“weapons should be stored separately from ammunition.” 38 An audit by Somali
authorities should be undertaken to establish the locations and current use of weapon
armouries throughout Somalia.
The assessment team also observed boxes of ammunition that had rotted at
Halane Central Armoury owing to inadequate storage conditions through exposure to
flooding and excessive heat, constituting an important safety concern, which should
__________________

In line with section 2.3 Marking and Recordkeeping of the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management Strategy.
38
International guidelines are contained within the Modular Small-Arms-Control Implementation
Compendium.
37

22-13548

11/18

S/2022/698

be addressed in an urgent manner. Improvements in life cycle management will
improve performance and reliability of ammunition during operations.
When the Jazeera project is complete, it will be the only known ammunition
depot in Somalia. The safe and secure management of ammunition is only possible
when adequate storage systems, including infrastructure is in place. At a minimum,
in addition to the Federal Government of Somalia central ammunition storage area
being constructed, each federal member state should have an ammunition storage area
suitable for receipt, storage, and distribution of ammunition to security forces.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.
Benchmark 5: physical security and stockpile management of weapons and
ammunition is available, functioning and effective 39
Indicators
– An audit of existing weapons armouries is undertaken to support a needs
assessment.
– A needs assessment of weapons armouries, ammunition storage areas and
associated weapons and ammunition training requirements is available to
support authorities with planning and resourcing.
– Sufficient armouries for weapons are available to support security forces and
managed according to relevant international guidelines. 40
– Sufficient ammunition storage areas are available to support security forces and
the ammunition storage areas are managed according to relevant international
guidelines. 41
Monitoring and verification
Assessment
The Panel of Experts on Somalia is the monitoring mechanism established by
the Security Council on compliance with the sanctions regime, including the partially
lifted arms embargo. The Panel’s investigations into violations of the arms embargo
rely on the cooperation of Member States, particularly Somalia and neighbouring
countries. Recent years have seen improved cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the Panel.
The Joint Verification Team, established in 2015 and comprising representatives
of the Federal Government and experts from the organization Conflict Armament
Research, conducts routine inspections of the Security Sector Forces’ stockpiles,
inventory records and supply chain of weapons for the purpose of mitigating the
diversion of arms and ammunition. To date, the Team has documented 7,819 weapons,
either directly by a member of the Team or by a trained member of the Security Sector
Forces (currently the Somali Police Force) using a remote software application. 42 It
has further verified 43 2,635 weapons, from 86 locations in the Banaadir region,
Kismayo, South-West State and Galmadug. This represents approximately 12 per cent
__________________

In line with Section 2.4 Stockpile management of the National Weapons and Ammunition
Management Strategy.
40
International guidelines are contained within the Modular Small-Arms-Control Implementation
Compendium.
41
International guidelines are contained within the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines.
42
Ammunition is not currently being documented by the Joint Verification Team.
43
Meaning that a weapon has been documented and matched, based on serial numbers, with a
weapon contained in a post-delivery notification submitted to the Committee.
39

12/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

of the weapons notified as delivered since the partial lifting of the arms embargo in
2013. While in-person inspections have not occurred since October 2019, with the
introduction of the remote software application in November 2020 there has been a
substantial increase –1,800 per cent – in the average number of weapons verified per
month. 44
Recommendations
The work of the Panel of Experts and the Joint Verification Team, will facilitate
the identification of potential diversion pathways and strengthen the Fed eral
Government’s ability to crack down on illicit transfers. As such, improved
cooperation and dialogue between the Federal Government and the Panel is a
welcome step, and I commend the work of the Joint Verification Team. Expansion of
the Joint Verification Team’s coverage would provide a more comprehensive
overview of weapons and ammunition distribution in Somalia. In this regard, remote
verification appears to offer valuable cost and time -efficiency gains.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.
Benchmark 6: the Joint Verification Team is well coordinated, resourced,
functioning and operational
Indicators
– Increased proportion of weapons and ammunition, imported under the partially
lifted arms embargo for the Security Sector Forces, that have been documented
by the Joint Verification Team either directly or through remote means.
– Increased proportion of weapons and ammunition notified as delivered to the
Committee, cross-referenced by the Joint Verification Team and included in the
biannual regular reporting of the Federal Government of Somalia to the
Committee.
– The further broadening and deepening of joint verification coverage, including
in federal member states.
Processing and tracing of recovered, including captured, weapons, ammunition,
and components
Assessment
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2607 (2021), the Federal Government
of Somalia, federal member states and AMISOM (now ATMIS) are required to
document and register military equipment captured as part of offensive operations or
in the course of carrying out their mandates, including recording the type and serial
number of the weapon and/or ammunition, as well as photographing all items and
relevant markings. The resolution also mandates the Panel of Experts on Somalia to
inspect these weapons prior to their redistribution or destruction. The Federal
Government of Somalia has made important efforts to develop a specific framework
for the management of such recovered material, in a recognizably challenging,
dynamic, and operational environment. For example, in 2020 the Federal Government
revised and adopted its standard operating procedure on the management of recovered
weapons, 45 starting its implementation and continuing the training of relevant
Security Sector Forces and agencies. In 2021, the Federal Government of Somalia
__________________
44
45

22-13548

The figure of 1,800 per cent is valid as at August 2021.
The updated standard operating procedure covers the storage, registration, tracing and reporting
of these weapons.
13/18

S/2022/698

and AMISOM agreed on a harmonized standard operating procedure on the
management of recovered small arms and light weapons. Given the transition from
AMISOM to ATMIS, this document is being further updated by the Government in
coordination with ATMIS. It is yet to be activated. 46
From 2019 to date, ATMIS handed over captured weapons to the Government
in two ceremonies, in February 2020 47 and in April 2022. 48
Recommendations
The assessment team found a continued lack of awareness at the sector level of
the harmonized procedure, the effective implementation of which re mains a priority.
This should go hand in hand with the establishment of focal points at sector level and
could now also be accompanied by the deployment of the remote software
application, coupled with mobile marking kits, providing an important, cost -effective
measure to address and overcome some of the challenges faced in this area. In this
regard, further international support, and assistance in the form of capacity -building,
is needed.
While Security Council resolution 2607 (2021) refers to all weapons,
ammunition and related material that are “captured” as part of offensive operations
or in the course of the Federal Government of Somalia, the federal member states and
AMISOM (now ATMIS) carrying out their mandates, the Federal Government, the
Panel of Experts, and the Joint Verification Team operating under the Office of
National Security, have applied a broader interpretation of this requirement to include
the management of various categories of “recovered” weapons, such as battlefield
“captured” weapons, but also, for example, “seized” (on land, by or in Somali
territorial waters) or “found” items (in caches). A recognition of this approach and
integration thereof by the Council in the next resolution, using the above specific
terminologies, would be useful and send an important signal to relevant actors of the
Council’s determination to address and close off external and internal sources of illicit
supplies through which Al-Shabaab and other unauthorized actors acquire such items
in the first place.
The sharing of information on recovered weapons with the Panel of Experts by
the different Somali, regional and international actors involved in the implementation
of the partially lifted arms embargo, in order to allow the tracing of these weapons,
and to help determine whether a violation of the arms embargo has taken place, will
assist the Council in establishing any additional future measures to curb the illicit
flow of arms into Somalia, as well as help identify the additional support needs of the
country in this area.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.

__________________

In a press release issued in August 2022, the Committee urge the Federal Government of Somalia
to outline the specific resources that were needed to activate the standard operating procedure
and encouraged Member States, regional organizations and other relevant institutions to support
the provision of those resources to the Federal Government of Somalia with a view to activating
the above-mentioned standard operating procedure. The press release is available at:
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/751/press -releases.
47
See “AMISOM hands over captured weapons to government of Somalia”, 28 February 2020,
https://amisom-au.org/2020/02/amisom-hands-over-captured-weapons-to-government-ofsomalia/.
48
See ATMIS hands over captured weapons to Somalia authorities, April 30, 2022, https://atmisau.org/atmis-hands-over-captured-weapons-to-somalia-authorities/.
46

14/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

Benchmark 7: a coordinated and context-specific system is in place ensuring
traceability of recovered weapons 49
Indicators
– The formal designation of at least one National Focal Point or focal point entity
(such as a designated and established analytical cell) on all matters relating to
the tracking or tracing of weapons, ammunition, and components recovered
from the illicit sphere, in line with relevant international instruments and
standards.
– The activation of the harmonized Federal Government of Somalia and ATMIS
standard operating procedure for the management of recovered weapons,
ammunition, and components, including through the designation and
establishment of relevant focal points.
– The proportion of recovered weapons that can and have been traced by a
competent national authority, or by a mandated and authorized entity (such as
the Panel of Experts on Somalia) in cooperation and coordination with the
competent national authority, through existing national, regional, or
international mechanisms.
I have identified seven benchmarks above that are based on various stages of
the weapons and ammunition management life cycle. All of these could be considered
under the broad category of progress on weapons and ammunition management
capacity, including preventing illicit arms trafficking. The above stages of wea pons
and ammunition management are inextricably linked to, and may encompass, the
below elements on further professionalization, training and capacity development of
the Somali security forces but are presented separately for the purposes of this
benchmarking exercise.
Further professionalization, training and capacity development of Somali
security forces
Assessment
Since the previous assessment in 2019, the Somali security forces have
increased their ability to manage their weapons and ammunition, with additional
personnel trained in marking and registration, in particular. The Federal Government
of Somalia has indicated plans for further training and capacity -development,
including through additional training on marking, registration and documenta tion,
and establishment of an analytic cell for captured weapons and improvised explosive
device components. It has also indicated that it provides Somali National Armed
Forces and the Somali Police Force with predeployment training in international
humanitarian and human rights law, 50 including through “policies on human rights,
code of conduct, gender and discipline” pertaining to the Somali Police Force and
State Police. 51 I note that the United Nations continues to provide support and training
in this regard, in strict compliance with the human rights and due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces.

__________________

In line with, inter alia, section 2.5 Processing and tracing recovered weapons and ammunition in
the National Weapons and Ammunition Management Strategy.
50
Federal Government of Somalia position paper on the arms embargo, provided to the assessment
team on 26 July 2022.
51
Federal Government of Somalia Implementation Report on the Somalia Transition Plan and
Force Generation, provided to the Security Council on 9 July 2022.
49

22-13548

15/18

S/2022/698

Recommendations
Further professionalization, training and capacity-building of its security forces
would strengthen the ability of Somali security forces to combat Al -Shabaab and
assume full responsibility for the security of the country by the end of the Somalia
Transition Plan. In this regard, I urge international partners to continue to provide
their support, including within the framework of the Security Pact. 52 With a view to
facilitating sustainable and long-term capabilities, emphasis should be placed on
training-of-trainer programmes. Adherence to international humanitarian and human
rights law, and prosecution of those within the security forces who violate them, are
critical to establishing a credible, professional and representative Somali security
forces, as called for by the Security Council. 53 In this regard I note that the “Medium
Term End-2024 End State” of the Somalia Transition Plan includes the provision of
services by the Somali Security Forces to the Somali people in compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law. 54
I welcome the engagement to date by Federal Government of Somalia with my
Special Representatives on Children and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. 55 Further progress in finalizing a new national action plan for the
implementation of the Somali Women’s Charter and of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security would be an important step in ensuring the full and
meaningful inclusion of Somali women, including in the security sector, in line with
relevant Security Council resolutions such as 2106 (2013) and 2242 (2015). I
encourage continued engagement with UN-Women in this regard.
In view of the above, options for potential benchmarks and associated indicators
could be as follows.
Benchmark 8: a consolidated and costed training plan, incorporating training
of trainers programmes, to enable implementation of the National Weapons
and Ammunition Management Strategy, is adopted. 56 This should include a
framework for training to implement the gender section of the Strategy (such
as identification of quotas for female trainees)
Indicator
– In accordance with the plan, delivery of regular weapons and ammunition
management training to security forces, including at federal member state l evel.

__________________

Adopted by the Federal Government of Somalia and 42 international partners on 11 May 2017,
the Security Pact highlighted “an agreed vision of Somali -led security institutions and forces that
are affordable, acceptable, accountable”, and able to provide security and protection to the
Somali people “in accordance with international humanitarian and human rights standards”.
International partners agreed to provide “increased, more effective and unified support, including
better coordinated mentoring, training and equipping, of police and military forces”.
https://unsom.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/london-somalia-conference-2017-securitypact.pdf.pdf.
53
Security Council resolution 2607 (2021), paras. 14 and 15.
54
Somalia Transition Plan.
55
For further information, see also the latest reports on Children and Armed Conflict in Somalia
(S/2022/397) and Conflict-related Sexual Violence (S/2022/272).
56
The training plan should incorporate the existing standard operating procedures and be in line
with international standards, such as the Modular Small-Arms-Control Implementation
Compendium and International Ammunition Technical Guidelines.
52

16/18

22-13548

S/2022/698

Benchmark 9: relevant actors continue to engage with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
including with a view to adopting action plans to combat sexual violence
in conflict57
Indicators
– Establishment and operationalization of a national sexual offenders register,
against which potential Somali National Army and Somali Police Force recruits
are screened.
– Establishment and operationalization of mechanisms within the Somali National
Army and Somali Police Force to hold perpetrators of sexual violence
accountable, as demonstrated by the number of fully processed cases.
Benchmark 10: relevant actors continue to engage with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
including with a view to implementing the road map on children and armed
conflict (2019)
Indicators
– Establishment and operationalization of clear age-assessment and screening
procedures for the Somali National Army and Somali Police Force.
– Continued application of the standard operating procedures for the reception
and handover of children separated from armed groups to child protection
actors, endorsed by the Government in 2014, and to allow child protection a ctors
access to children at every stage of the release and reintegration process.
– Establishment and operationalization of mechanisms within the Somali National
Army and Somali Police Force to hold perpetrators of grave violations against
children accountable, as demonstrated by the number of fully processed cases.
The above benchmarks may be considered under the broad category of progress
on security sector reform.

Observations
I thank the Federal Government of Somalia, and through the Federal
Government, the state representatives in Baidoa, for their strong cooperation and
active participation in this assessment, including the full access granted to the
assessment team. I welcome the invitation by the Federal Government to the Panel of
Experts to join the assessment team for meetings and for field visits in Mogadishu,
signifying the continuous increase in cooperation between the Government and the
Panel. I wish to express my gratitude to the United Nations family in Somalia, ATMIS,
the Member States and regional and international organizations for their support of
and engagement with the assessment team.
Somalia is on a positive trajectory in its management of weapons and
ammunition. Important steps have been taken at various stages in the weapons and
ammunition management life cycle, with notable progress, for example, in marking
and registration. The national framework has also been strengthened by the
introduction of the National Weapons and Ammunition Management Strategy.
Challenges remain, in particular in the roll-out of weapons and ammunition
management at the federal member state level, which will require continued necessary
__________________
57

22-13548

In line with Security Council resolutions 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013) and 2467 (2019).
17/18

S/2022/698

engagements and cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal
member states. The present letter articulates options for benchmarks that could assist
the Security Council in its review of the partially lifted arms embargo in the coming
years. The benchmarks, once established by the Council, should be regularly assessed
against progress achieved in their implementation. It is important that the
international community support the Federal Government and the federal member
states, as appropriate, in achieving such progress, including through the provision of
resources and capacity-building support in a coordinated and coherent manner. In this
regard, predictable funding is important in aiding long -term planning.
For the immediate term, in the light of the findings of the assessment team, the
Security Council and its 751 Committee on Somalia could take further stock of the
partially lifted arms embargo, including with a view to updating and clarifying the
exemptions and exceptions. A review of the two annexes setting out the exemptions,
together with a review of the exemption provision relating to the delivery of
non-lethal military equipment, 58 may provide opportunities for further adjustments to
the embargo. Visibility of the Federal Government on deliveries made to the Somali
security sector institutions other than those of the Government, could be further
improved.
Closer and regular engagement between the Federal Government and the
Committee, possibly as part of a regular discussion following the submission of each
biannual report by the Federal Government, can promote a greater understanding of
the concerns and needs of the Federal Government and the views of the Committee.
Periodic engagement between countries in the region and the Committee, in order to
raise awareness of the trends and patterns in cross-border arms trafficking, may assist
in identifying additional solutions in addressing the illicit trafficking of arms to
Somalia.
Given the continued stigma felt by the Federal Government in connection with
the existing arms embargo, I encourage the Security Council and its Committee to
strengthen their public messaging, to make clear that the measure aims to support
Somalia in developing its weapons and ammunition management capabilities and in
developing its security forces, in order to provide security to the Somali people. I
encourage the Federal Government, together with the federal member states, to
continue their efforts in consolidating the gains which have been made, and to further
strengthen their capacities where needed to meet th e obligations under the partially
lifted arms embargo.

__________________
58

18/18

Security Council resolution 2607 (2021), para. 27.
22-13548
