S/PV.7995

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7995

th meeting
Friday, 30 June 2017, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-19240 (E)
*1719240*

S/PV.7995

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Colombia (S/2017/539)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/539, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault: I am pleased to supplement the
Secretary-General’s report to the Council dated 23 June
(S/2017/539) and to inform the Council that three days
ago, on 27 June, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) met its
obligations under the 29 May road map agreement by
handing over to the United Nations Mission in Colombia
the remaining 40 per cent of the individual weapons
registered by the Mission in March.
A number of weapons will remain at the disposal
of FARC-EP to provide security for the camps and the
United Nations weapons-laydown team sites therein
until 1 August, on which date the containers will be
removed from the camps, and the current zones where
the FARC-EP are assembled will be turned into training
and reintegration areas secured by the Colombian police
and armed forces.
2/8

30/06/2017

At the “farewell to arms, farewell to war” ceremony
held on 27 June in a FARC-EP camp in a region that
has been at the epicentre of the war, President Santos
and the head of the FARC-EP secretariat, Timoleón
Jiménez, sent strong and moving messages to a
Colombian society often doubtful of the promises of the
peace process. Mr. Jiménez announced that, with the
laying down of its weapons, the FARC-EP was formally
marking the end of the 53-year armed insurgency and
the beginning of an unarmed, peaceful and democratic
movement. I can only quote President Santos Calderón
when he said that reaching and living that day had
made his presidency of Colombia worthwhile. He
acknowledged the historic significance of the FARCEP’s fulfilment of its commitment to laying down
its weapons and affirmed his own commitment to
implementing the Final Peace Agreement, as he said,
to the last comma. At the ceremony, religious leaders,
including the President of the Bishops’ Conference of
Colombia, acted as witnesses of honour for the final
stage of the laying down of weapons.
The conviction expressed by both leaders — that
half a century of war is now over — has been borne out
by the Mission’s review of the ceasefire that has been
in place since the end of August 2016. Indeed, while
in the past nine months there have been a number of
failures to observe the rules of the ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities, none have showed a pattern
of deliberate violation or any involvement of highlevel decision-makers on either side. We therefore
believe that as the FARC-EP lays down its weapons,
the ceasefire has been consolidated. It will nevertheless
be important to ensure that the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism continues to operate for
some time after 1 August, when the current zones and
points are due to disappear. It has been an effective
tool for maintaining and strengthening confidence
between the parties to the conflict, and its presence
at the local level will help to ensure that any incidents
that may occur in the next few weeks and months can
still be dealt with cooperatively. Incidentally, eight
months after the Mechanism began operating, we think
that the merits of its tripartite approach — whereby
the two parties participate directly in verifying each
other’s compliance, with United Nations support and
coordination — have been well established. While the
Mechanism’s success owes much to the confidence
fostered between the warring parties at the negotiating
table, the Council might wish to consider whether it
could usefully be applied to other peace processes.
17-19240

30/06/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

With the storing of individual weapons in United
Nations containers, the Mission and the FARC-EP, with
the support of the armed forces and the police, can now
devote their full attention to disposing of hundreds
of arms caches, collecting the weapons in them and
destroying explosives and unstable armaments. So far,
81 arms caches have been visited and a large amount
of explosives destroyed. Plans are ongoing with the
FARC and the Government to extract another 380 in
the coming weeks, with more to follow. Disposing of
arms caches is undoubtedly a difficult process, but
we are encouraged by the willingness of the FARCEP and the armed forces to move forward, and we are
confident that at least a very high percentage of the
caches, if not all, can be dealt with by 1 September,
when the Mission’s verification of the caches ends and
responsibility switches to the Government.
The past few days have brought good, encouraging
news to Colombia and the world, and it is perfectly all
right to celebrate these advances, even if there is clearly
no reason to pause and no room for complacency.
While the completion of the laying down of individual
weapons has created new opportunities, it has also
emphasized the urgency of moving forward quickly
with the implementation of the peace agenda.
The first and most urgent challenge is undoubtedly
the reintegration of the 10,000 FARC-EP combatants
and militias, among whom there is a deep sense of
uncertainty about their physical security in the wake
of disarmament and about their socioeconomic future.
As the reports of the Secretary-General have stressed,
reintegration is a particularly daunting endeavour
against a backdrop of entrenched illegal economies, the
spread of armed groups — including organized crime
and FARC dissidents — into areas formerly controlled
by the FARC-EP, and a pattern of violence against
social leaders. One of the merits of the 29 May road
map is that it clearly lays out a number of priorities
relating to the legal, physical and socioecomic security
of FARC-EP members. No effort should be spared in
promptly implementing that agenda.
Beyond the reintegration of combatants, the peace
process must also respond to the needs and expectations
of the more vulnerable sectors of Colombian society. We
fully agree with the three priority areas identified by
the Government — deploying security forces to protect
communities and establish the rule of law in the areas
most affected by the war; mobilizing national and local
institutions to bring goods and services to rural areas

S/PV.7995

long outside their reach; and implementing the new
peace jurisdiction as quickly as possible so as to deliver
on the promise of justice for the victims of the conflict.
We welcome the fact that, together with reintegration,
these were precisely the priorities that the Government
indicated to the Peacebuilding Fund, and we urge the
international community to support these goals.
We are honoured by the Government of Colombia
and the FARC-EP’s request that we establish a second
verification mission, focused on reintegration and
wider security guarantees, to begin operating as soon
as possible. As I have indicated, that is where some
of the most immediate and pressing challenges to the
consolidation of peace lie. We believe that the terms of
reference indicated in President Santos’s letter to the
Secretary-General and the Security Council (S/2016/53,
annex) represent a good basis for a credible and
effective verification mandate. Like the first mission,
the second will be as much about fostering cooperation
and building confidence as about verification as such.
In that regard, we believe that the trust that has been
established between the Mission, the two parties, the
State institutions and civil society can help to ensure
the success of the second mandate.
The Security Council’s decision in January 2016 to
back the implementation of the agreement on a ceasefire
and a laying down of arms by establishing the United
Nations Mission in Colombia was widely regarded across
Colombian society as a guarantee that the commitments
made in Havana would be duly implemented at home.
Across political divides, and the current polarized
atmosphere notwithstanding, the Security Council
remains a highly significant factor for confidence in
the midst of the misgivings and uncertainties that are
the inevitable sequels to such a protracted and painful
conflict. As the peace process in Colombia enters a
new phase, beyond the laying down of weapons, the
Council’s commitment to the peace process and the
determination it expressed in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/6, following its visit to Colombia in early
May, to support the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement will remain an invaluable contribution to
the long-term success of this unique endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Arnault for his briefing and for the work he is doing.
I would also like to welcome the presence at today’s
meeting of Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.

17-192403/8

S/PV.7995

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

30/06/2017

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

already under say and will be carried out according to
the timetable.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the final formal meeting of the Council under your
stewardship, Mr. President, I thank you and would like
to heartily congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation,
on the excellent work you have done this month. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/539), and his Special Representative, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his detailed briefing.

The Colombian Government has demonstrated its
commitment to the implementation of the Agreement,
using the fast-track procedure to adopt important laws
in order to accelerate the process, as well as adopting
numerous decrees related, inter alia, to the economic
and social development of areas affected by the conflict,
the socioeconomic reintegration of FARC-EP members
and the reintegration of children.

This Wednesday, Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, visited the
United Nations Mission in Colombia and the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. The visit took
place at a historic moment for Colombia, which only
the day before had announced the final laying down
of arms of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). On that
occasion, Minister Nin Novoa brought a message from
the Government of Uruguay conveying its full support
and readiness to collaborate with the Colombia peace
process, as well as its commitment to the new mandate
requested by the Government of Colombia and the
FARC-EP, which the Council will consider shortly.

The United Nations Mission in Colombia, for its
part, has carried out many tasks of a different nature,
while playing a fundamental role in the success of the
various implementation stages of the Agreement that,
until now, had been easily circumvented. That confirms
that the Security Council acted wisely in establishing
the current Mission in Colombia. In this new phase, we
believe that it must continue to act in the same manner.

We stress that the progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement
demonstrates once again the firm commitment of the
parties to the peace process. We have on many occasions
stated, and once again reiterate, that the people of
Colombia have shown the world through actions that
giving peace a chance is worth it. Their leaders have
staked their entire civic and political capital in opting
for peace. True courage means fighting for peace, not
making war.
The FARC-EP has made its final contribution by
laying down its arms by the end of May, pursuant to the
road map. For a combatant, laying down arms has great
significance, because he ceases to be what he once was
for a long period and exposes himself, as Mr. Arnault
rightly pointed out, to a period of uncertainty in which
he is no longer who he was and is not yet who he will be.
Consequently, a great deal of courage is required, and
we salute them. The laying down of arms made possible
the heartfelt ceremony that Mr. Arnault referenced,
which signalled the closure of a key stage of the Havana
accords and opened a new chapter towards the future.
As Jean also mentioned, it still remains for explosives
to be removed from arms caches. However, that task is
4/8

Given the remaining difficulties in the
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and
understandable concerns, we consider that the
request made by the President of the Republic of
Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, on behalf
of the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP,
that a second political mission of the United Nations
be established before 10 July — with a focus on the
political and socioeconomic reintegration of the
FARC-EP and on the implementation of personal and
collective security measures for its members, as well as
for integral security and protection programmes for the
communities and organizations in the territories.
We also consider the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to be timely and are encouraged by
the information that the current Mission in Colombia
would be able to initiate some tasks of the second
mandate, on a provisional basis, in response to the
request of the parties.
That is why we fully support the request of the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP to establish
a second political mission of the United Nations in
Colombia, with a mandate that is consistent with the
request, and fully endorse the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2017/539). Let me also thank Special Representative
Arnault and his team for his important briefing and,
17-19240

30/06/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

more important, for the work that they carry out on a
daily basis.
I want to take this opportunity to say a few words
about the courage of both sides. Peace is never easy.
It requires a great deal of courage and endurance. In
Colombia we have seen both. We congratulate the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) for reaching another historic milestone in
the peace process, with the successful laying down
of individual arms by the FARC-EP on 27 June. As
the Security Council saw first hand during its visit
to Colombia, the process was not without challenges.
We therefore commend the firm commitment of both
sides and their efforts to overcome challenges in the
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement that
resulted in this historic achievement. I concur with
Ambassador Rosselli in his description of the exemplary
achievements reached thus far.
The United Nations Mission in Colombia has played
an important role in support of the peace process. We
believe that a second political mission will support the
parties in building trust and overcoming challenges for
the next stage. For that reason, we strongly support a
second United Nations mission in Colombia. A second
mission must be tailored to the next stage of the peace
process. We would like to underscore the need for a
second mission to have sufficient presence locally and
regionally to be able to effectively and meaningfully
verify the implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Final Agreement. That includes the reintegration
of elements of the FARC-EP as well as personal and
collective security guarantees, as requested by the
parties. I must say that we are concerned about the
killings of human rights defenders, FARC-EP members
and their families, as well as violence against social
leaders — as reported by the Secretary-General.
It is also important that the second mission should
cooperate, support and coordinate with the United
Nations country team with regard to overlapping
mandates. That should maximize synergies and avoid
duplication so that the United Nations can really deliver
as one and adopt a coherent approach to facilitating the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Peace can be made only by those who are part of
the conflict; however, once they set out along the path
of peace they should not walk it alone. All parts of
the State need to facilitate the implementation of the

S/PV.7995

Agreement, including moving forward on the amnesty
provisions. The goodwill and generosity of spirit of
partners is essential. A committed and sustained effort
is needed in support of the implementation of the wider
Peace Agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends. In that regard, we were impressed by the
presentation of the annual report of the United Nations
Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Colombia,
which brings together the Colombian Government, the
United Nations and the international community. We
are very proud to have contributed to that Fund.
I thank the Special Representative for his update
on the situation of children, and in particular on the
implementation of the agreement signed on 15 May
2016 on the separation and reintegration of children
associated with the FARC-EP. The focus must now be
on reintegration and rehabilitation of children separated
from the ranks of the FARC-EP. In that regard, we
would like highlight the Colombia conclusions of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which I had the pleasure and honour
to chair, and the recommendations they contain.
We would also like to thank the Special
Representative for the work that the Mission has
undertaken regarding the inclusion and participation
of women, as well as in developing prevention and
protection mechanisms for possible situations of
gender-based violence. I also credit the Government for
the way it is carrying out that agenda.
The Peace Agreement marked a new beginning for
Colombia. With each milestone along the way, peace is
further consolidated. Yet, as the Secretary-General told
us in January, peace is not inevitable. It still requires a
lot of hard work. In our national capacities, as Member
States and friends of the Colombian people, but also as
a united Security Council, we must continue to stand
with the parties as they continue to work for lasting
peace in Colombia.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing and commend him
on his great contribution and that of the Mission to
the peace process in Colombia. We warmly recall our
visit to Colombia and appreciate his help in facilitating
that historic trip. My delegation would like to share the
following observations.

17-192405/8

S/PV.7995

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

30/06/2017

First, Kazakhstan welcomes the many positive
developments that have occurred in fulfilling the Peace
Agreement. We are pleased to know that another major
milestone has been achieved in the peace process when,
on 27 June, 100 per cent of the individual weapons
possessed by members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) were surrendered, received and stored
by the Mission. We strongly commend the people of
Colombia for their courage and resolve to achieve peace
and stability in their own country. Their commitment to
the peace process is exemplary.

implement the Peace Agreement. We join previous
speakers in fully endorsing the Secretary-General’s
recommendations towards the establishment of a
second United Nations mission in Colombia.

Secondly, we acknowledge the very timely mission
of the Security Council to Colombia in May, which
gave us the unique opportunity to witness at firsthand the accomplishments made thus far, as well as the
challenges encountered in successfully implementing
the Peace Agreement. We were able to demonstrate the
unified solidarity of the international community with
the Government and the people of Colombia in their
efforts to restore peace, stability and security. Our
presence was therefore a positive affirmation and sign
of support for the determination of the Government
and the FARC-EP to the peace process that benefits
all Colombians.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Thirdly, despite the progress achieved, we are
concerned about the ongoing attacks on community
leaders, human rights defenders and FARC-EP
members and their families. The activities of non-State
armed groups, including the National Liberation Army,
is sufficient cause for alarm. The Government should
take every step possible to prevent such attacks in order
to avoid undermining public confidence. It is absolutely
essential to ensure security in all areas vacated by
the FARC-EP so as to prevent armed groups from
filling the vacuum. The long-term reintegration of the
members of the FARC-EP and the development of areas
affected by the conflict must become high priorities for
the Government.
We strongly support the Government of Colombia
in its resolve to tackle all of those issues on the ground.
However, we understand that it cannot undertake
that enormous task alone, and we therefore call
upon the international community to mobilize the
adequate resources.
Fourthly, in the meantime, it is important not to
lose the positive momentum achieved. We therefore
encourage the parties to redouble their efforts to
6/8

Finally, once again, we commend the continuing
efforts of the Colombian Government towards the
consolidation and implementation of the peace accord
and encourage it and the international community to
continue to work hard in order to overcome challenges
and facilitate and expedite the establishment of lasting
peace in Colombia.

Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing
and for his good work as Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia. We would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Ambassador Ms. Mejía Vélez, to the
Security Council.
On 27 June, the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) reached another
historic milestone in their peace process. The members
of the FARC-EP completed the process of surrendering
their individual weapons, thereby demonstrating that
the peace process in Colombia is irreversible. In that
regard, Bolivia welcomes the road map approved on
29 May and commends both parties on their attitude
to the process — calculating each step, establishing
committees, analysing each stage, meeting to address
challenges and reaching consensus on the way forward.
The process met with success because, in spite
of their differences, the Government and the FARCEP are engaged in ongoing talks to achieve their
shared goal of peace. It is vital that they maintain and
strengthen their attitude towards dialogue and common
understanding as they enter the most difficult stage of
the process. The road map stipulates that the members
of the FARC-EP must surrender all of their weapons by
20 June. That step has been achieved. For its part, the
Government promised to guarantee the physical, legal
and socioeconomic safety of the former members of the
FARC-EP, as stipulated in the Peace Agreement. We
trust that that commitment will be gradually honoured.
17-19240

30/06/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

This phase poses a genuine challenge. The murders
of community leaders, human rights defenders and
relatives of people with links to the guerrillas or
dissidents; people who spread a message of hate
instead of reconciliation and the illegal economy, inter
alia, are all challenges that illustrate the complexity
of the reintegration phase. Peace should be the
cord that binds Colombians, and the support of the
international community will play a fundamental role
in that endeavour.
Bolivia believes that the parties to the conflict made
the right decision when they requested that the Security
Council establish a mission to verify the reintegration
of ex-combatants. Once again, the Government and the
FARC-EP have put their trust in the Security Council
and the United Nations. We believe that the members
of the Council will continue to provide firm and
unanimous support to the peace process in Colombia.
I would also like to highlight the remarks made by the
Post-Conflict Minister of Colombia, Mr. Rafael Pardo,
who, during his recent visit to New York, mentioned
plans to deliver on one of the main objectives of the
Peace Agreement, which is to raise the standard of
living in rural areas and to bridge the existing gap
between rural and urban areas.
We believe that measures to formalize land
ownership in rural areas and improve social security for
farmers and other residents of rural areas are important
in the medium term. We hope that the international
community and financial institutions can provide the
necessary cooperation.
Finally, as expressed by my country’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs in a letter dated 28 June, we reaffirm
the resolute support of the Bolivian Government for
peacebuilding efforts in Colombia as part of fostering
a culture of peace and dialogue to ensure the peaceful
coexistence of its people. In that regard, in addition to
the leadership and the political capital demonstrated
by the Government and the leaders of the FARC-EP,
we must underscore the third angle of this virtuous
triangle, which is the support provided to the victims
throughout the peace process. Leadership, boldness
and the spirit of reconciliation make this process an
example for the world to follow.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.

S/PV.7995

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As
Mr. Arnault stated — and I would like to reiterate — the
visit to our country by the members of the Security
Council was of the utmost importance. For the very
first time, we witnessed both supporters and detractors
of the peace process engaging in dialogue, gleaning
additional information and trying to deepen their
understanding about the common goal that unites us.
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for being part
of the Council’s mission to Colombia last week. I think
that the visit was very valuable. I also thank Mr. Arnault
and his entire team for their remarks and for facilitating
the surrender, on 27 June, of all individual weapons held
by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to the United Nations,
an organization that we acknowledge and respect for
its impartiality and its role as the guarantor of global
peace and security.
More than nine months have elapsed since the start
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia and, through
the reports of the Secretary-General, members of the
Council have witnessed the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, the registration of weapons, the surrender
of all individual weapons, the 9,604 members of the
FARC-EP, including militiamen and guerillas, who
are in the process of being reintegrated, a series of
legislative and institutional reforms required for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the start
of plans for the reintegration process, which the PostConflict Minister so eloquently explained last week.
For all those reasons, I dare say that, despite
the remaining tasks, both the FARC-EP and the
Colombian Government have in fact fully upheld their
commitments. These are not minor tasks. In the coming
months, by the time we finish the first Mission’s
mandate in September, we must work to complete the
phase of locating, extracting and destroying unstable
armaments in the caches, as the Special Representative
mentioned during his briefing.
This peace process is largely the result of the
leadership of President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón
and of Colombia’s commitment to moving forward
with strength and determination on the path towards
lasting peace.
I am honoured to be here before Council members
representing a country that has bid farewell to arms as
part of a monumental effort in which Colombians have

17-192407/8

S/PV.7995

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

30/06/2017

insisted, over and over again throughout the years, with
successes but also many failures, until we reached this
moment that opens the door to a future that is possible
for all of us.

a success story, can continue and be strengthened. With
the Council’s support, I am sure that this will be so.

Similarly, and based on what we have learned
together, Colombia and the United Nations — through
the one-of-a-kind tripartite mechanism format, which
Mr. Jean Arnault mentioned — have learned lessons
that can certainly serve Council members on other
matters, bearing in mind the unique aspects of each
case, and even, in a not-too-distant future, can serve
to reciprocate the unwavering support given to us by
the international community, the United Nations and
the Security Council throughout this process. At the
end of the day, the Peace Agreement seeks to build a
more inclusive Colombia in which there is room for
everybody, so we can all contribute to the building
of our nation, whose success lies primarily with
all Colombians.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council during the
Bolivian presidency, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of my delegation to all the members of
the Council, especially my colleagues, the permanent
representatives, the deputy permanent representatives,
the diplomatic experts of all the missions and the
secretariat of the Council for all the support it has given
to us, as well as the rest of the Council members, who
have supported us during the various meetings. Indeed,
as the representative of Uruguay said earlier, it has been
a busy month, but we think we achieved our objectives
in terms of reaching consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the support and fraternal solidarity of
Council members, despite our differences.

I know that I do not need to tell you, Mr. President,
or any Council member how precarious building
sustainable peace is once the agreements between
parties to a conflict have been signed. It has always
been said that the first years of reincorporation are the
hardest and are when the political will, the action and
the commitment of the parties and the support of the
international community are put to the test. That is why
I would like to reiterate once again the gratitude of my
Government and of the citizens of Colombian.
Now that we are preparing to establish a second
political mission whose mandate responds to the
contents of the Peace Agreement itself, we are confident
that the history of Colombia, which until now has been

8/8

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

I am grateful for the positive contributions of
every delegation on the various issues. I thank the
representatives of the Secretariat — the interpreters,
the translators, the Conference Services officers, the
sound engineers and the security personnel — who
safeguarded the Council’s work.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
China the best of luck in the month of July, when it will
assume the presidency of the Council.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

17-19240
