V.

- -

-

lie and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 August 1981;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the assistance granted to the Central
African Republic;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
situation in the Central African Republic under review
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/88.

145

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-

-----------

-

- --

(b) To mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material
assistance to Benin;
(c) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to organize an international
programme of assistance to Benin to mobilize that
assistance;
(d) To report to the Economic and Social Council at
its second regular session of 1981 on the progress
achieved in the mobilization of assistance to Benin and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

Special economic assistance to Benin
35/89.

The General Assembly,
Having considered, under the item entitled "Special
economic and disaster relief assistance", the request of
13 October 1980 of the Government of Benin, 17 '
Recalling the provisions of Security Council resolutions 404 (1977) of 8 February 1977, 405 ( 1977) of
14 April 1977 and 419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, and
in particular paragraph 5 of resolution 419 ( 1977) in which
the Council appealed to all States and all appropriate international organizations, including the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, to assist Benin to repair the
damage caused by the act of aggression,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General of
29 September 1978 on assistance to Benin, 177
Noting that, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 4 I 9
( 1977), the Security Council decided to remain seized of
the question,
Having heard the statement made by the representative of Benin before the Second Committee on
4 November 1980, on the serious economic problems of
that country, 17 "
Taking note of the special situation of Benin, which is
among the least developed countries,
I. Appeals to Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial,
material and technical assistance to Benin so as to help
that country overcome its financial and economic difficulties;
2. Requests the competent organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Benin, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to assist that country;

Requests the Secretary-General:
To take steps to re-evaluate the specific economic problems encountered by Benin and, in consultation with the Government, to establish an international programme of assistance to meet the specific
economic and development needs of the country;
3.

(a)

'" A/35/538-S/14219 ..
177
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-third Year. Supplement for July. August and September 1978, document S/12873.
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-Jifth Session.
Second Committee, 37th meeting, paras. 48-59.

Assistance to Djibouti 17 "

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/124 of 14 December 1979,
in which it called upon the international community to
provide Djibouti with ample and· appropriate assistance
to enable it to cope with its special economic hardship,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/93 of 13 December
1977 and 33/132 of 19 December 1978, in which it, inter
alia, expressed its deep concern at the situation prevailing in Djibouti and strongly appealed to Member
States and to the international institutions concerned to
give effective and sustained assistance to that country
and requested the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective
programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Djibouti,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 12 September 1980, 180 to which was annexed the report of the mission which he sent to Djibouti in response
to General Assembly resolution 34/124,
Noting with concern that the prolonged drought has
caused a heavy loss of livestock, depriving a large number of people of their livelihood, and that the influx of
refugees, together with the drought, has put serious
strains on the fragile economic, social and administrative infrastructure of the country,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to organize an international economic assistance programme for Djibouti;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General; 180
3. Notes with appreciation the assistance already
provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States and
organizations of the United Nations system;
4. Draws the attention of the international community to the critical economic situation confronting
Djibouti, to the assistance immediately needed for the
victims of the drought and to the list of urgent shortterm and long-term projects submitted by the Government of Djibouti for financial assistance as described in
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and international economic and financial institutions to provide Djibouti with ample and
appropriate assistance, bilaterally and multilaterally,
'" See also sect. X. 8.3. decision 35/423.
"" AIJ5/415.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

146

whenever possible in the form of grants, to enable
Djibouti to cope with its special economic hardship;
6. Calls upon the international community to contribute generously to the special account which was
established at United Nations Headquarters by the
Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Djibouti;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Djibouti and to report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
8. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to
report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Djibouti;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Djibouti:
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the
current status of the special economic assistance programme for Djibouti;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Djibouti and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the assistance programme for that
country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/90.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas in
Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda 174

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement made by the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator before the Second
Committee on 3 November 1980,' 81
Noting with satisfaction the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on assistance to the drought-stricken areas
in Djibouti, 182 Somalia, 183 the Sudan 184 and Uganda, 1' ;
to which were annexed the relevant reports of the multiagency mission sent to study the humanitarian needs of
the drought-affected victims in those countries,
Noting with concern the grave effects in Djibouti,
Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda of successive years of
drought and the resulting shortage of food-stuffs, livestock, fodder and water,
1
"
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Secon[Commillee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
1
"
A/35/559.
1
"
A/35/560.
1
"
A/35/561.
"' A/35/562.

Bearing in mind that it is in conformity with the principle of international solidarity enunciated in the Charter
of the United N.1tions to render assistance to Member
States which are the victims of major natural disasters,
A ware of the adverse effects of the drought on the
economic and social development of Djibouti, Somalia,
the Sudan and lJ ganda,
A ware also of the regional nature of the existing
drought situation in the countries of the Horn of Africa,
Recalling the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council concerning assistance in cases of natural disaster, in particular Assembly resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
Recognizing the very high costs involved and the great
problems of distribution to the remote areas of Djibouti,
Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda,
I. Expresses its deep sympathy to the people and
Governments of Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and
Uganda for the loss of human and animal lives caused
by the drought;
2. Endorses the recommendations made by the multiagency mission in the reports annexed to the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General;""
3. Commends the Secretary-General for his speedy
and positive response to the urgent situation of the
drought-stricken countries of Djibouti, Somalia, the
Sudan and Uganda. and for his action in dispatching a
multiagency mission to those countries to ascertain their
immediate needs for assistance to the affected populations;
4. Notes with appreciation the measures already
taken by the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and other agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system, to ensure the speediest and most
effective relief aid for the victims of drought and other
natural disasters in Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and
Uganda;
5. Appeals to Member States and to international
governmental and non-governmental organizations to
make generous contributions towards helping the affected populations in the form of financial, material and
technical assistance, as described in the reports of the
multiagency mission;
6. Recommends that Governments of the droughtstricken countries of the region should consider the
establishment of an intergovernmental body with the responsibility for co-ordinating and supporting the countries' efforts to combat the effects of drought and other
natural disasters and to deal with the problem of
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and other organizations concerned
within the United Nations system, to assign, as early as
possible, the responsibility for assisting those countries
in the region to the appropriate body, within the system,
which will be funded from voluntary contributions, will
be responsible for the co-ordination of the activities of
the United Nations system in support of the recovery
and rehabilitation efforts of the countries concerned and
will also provide direct assistance to the Governments of
those countries in co-ordinating inputs from donor
sources and in strengthening their national and regional
----·

,,,. A/J5/559-Ad'> 562.
