S/PV.8166

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8166th meeting

Wednesday, 24 January 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01983 (E)
*1801983*

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; His Excellency Mr. Festus
Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission; and Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Mogae is joining via video-teleconference
from Juba.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s
30-day report as well as on the situation in South Sudan.
Let me begin by saying that we welcome the signing
of the 21 December Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access between the South Sudanese parties. This
represents a significant achievement on the part of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), with the full support of the region and the
international community.
Nevertheless, the signing of the Agreement, while
a great stride forward, is only a first step. The security
situation in the country remains of concern, and there
continue to be numerous violations of the Agreement,
with clashes between pro-Taban Deng Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) in Opposition and pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition forces in Koch, Unity, and between
the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces
in Mundri and other areas of Western Equatoria, as
well as in different parts of the country. The Security
Council will have the opportunity to hear from the
Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, former President His Excellency Festus
Mogae, on the violations reported by the Ceasefire
2/20

24/01/2018

and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism on 16 January.
These violations by the parties and the continuing
hostile propaganda they have undertaken against one
another are worrisome, as they illustrate a lack of
genuine commitment to honour their words and de facto
undermine regional and international efforts to revitalize
the peace process. At this point, I can only reiterate
the 12 January joint statement of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, and the Secretary-General, who strongly
condemned those violations and underscored their
clear intent to support the imposition of consequences,
consistent with the African Union Peace and Security
Council communiqué of 20 September 2017, should the
parties continue to violate their own agreement.
The South Sudanese parties must realize that
the international community and the region will not
continue to tolerate agreements being signed and
violated in total impunity. I urge the Council to speak
out very clearly against those violations and to take the
decisive actions necessary to impose real consequences
for the violators.
Regarding the security situation in Juba, the attacks
by unknown armed elements on Government security
installations in Gurei sector in the city, and Kapuri,
west of Juba on 4 January, are of concern. On 5 January,
the SPLA Spokesperson attributed those attacks
to forces associated with Lieutenant Colonel Chan
Garang, a commander reportedly close to the former
Chief of General Staff, Paul Malong, who defected
from the SPLA to pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition in
October 2016. The objectives and motivations behind
these attacks are not clear. The United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) continues to closely monitor
the security situation in Juba and the consequences the
tensions between the Government and the former Chief
of General Staff may have in Northern Bahr El Ghazal
and other parts of the country where forces loyal to him
remain deployed.
Meanwhile, on 4 January, there were also shooting
incidents between security forces and criminal
elements in the vicinity of the protection-of-civilians
sites adjacent to the UNMISS headquarters in Juba.
UNMISS immediately reinforced such sites with
additional uniformed personnel to prevent any entry.
The volatility of the security environment in and
around sites remains a source of concern. During
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the reporting period, intercommunal violence also
escalated in the Jonglei, Lakes and Warrap areas,
causing approximately 160 fatalities, including at least
24 women. UNMISS reacted swiftly to those incidents
by mobilizing community leaders and peace actors
to de-escalate intercommunal tensions and promote
dialogue and reconciliation.
Under the Mission’s efforts to extend its presence,
I am encouraged to report that tomorrow Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer
will travel to Yei, in Central Equatoria, to formally
inaugurate a new UNMISS base. The base will allow
the UNMISS force to project its presence, build
confidence and restore stability to an area that has
witnessed massive depopulation to Uganda as a result
of recent conflict. UNMISS has also intensified
actions to establish an increased presence in Akobo,
in northern Jonglei, in order to support humanitarian
efforts and to gain a presence in areas held by the SPLA
in Opposition. At the moment, UNMISS long-duration
patrols allow a semi-permanent presence, which the
Mission plans to build upon in order to build confidence
with the local community.
The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF) continues, with ongoing discussions with the
Permanent Missions to the United Nations of the Federal
Republic of Ethiopia and of Rwanda to expedite the
deployment of the main contingents of their respective
infantry battalions. The number of RPF troops deployed
in South Sudan currently stands at 759.
With respect to human rights, I deeply concerned
about the high level of grave abuses and violations
perpetrated against civilians, mainly women and
children. The gravity of conflict-related sexual violence
is deplorable and constitutes an emergency in its own
right. From January to December 2017, UNMISS
documented 111 incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence, which is a very conservative figure given
that the Mission’s ability to perform its monitoring and
reporting tasks to verify violations suffered by victims
has been restricted by interference by Government
institutions and access restrictions. There were 2,670
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence in 2017,
including conflict-related incidents perpetrated by both
State and non-State actors. For example, on 16 January,
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism report on sexual and gender
based violence in Central Equatoria indicated that there
was clear evidence that sexual violence, mutilation and

S/PV. 8166

sexual assaults by uniformed SPLA soldiers and other
Government security services continued to prevail in
Central Equatoria.
Unfortunately, such human rights violations are
compounded by impunity, as perpetrators are not held
to account. For instance, on 20 December, a South
Sudan National Police Service officer who had been
sentenced to three years imprisonment for raping
a minor was released the same day, allegedly on the
order of the High Court Judge. That contributes to
the perception of impunity across the country. I call
on President Kiir to put to an end to such impunity.
South Sudanese women and girls cannot continue to be
victimized and brutalized and no justice done.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, on which
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller will brief the
Council, I remain concerned about the constraints on
the operating environment for humanitarian operations.
Humanitarian convoys continue to encounter
checkpoints, extortion, harassment and acts of violence.
While much of that can be attributed to criminality, I
call on the Transitional Government of National Unity
to work towards compliance with President Kiir’s
directive of unfettered humanitarian access, and call
on all other parties to allow humanitarians to carry out
their life-saving tasks across the country.
On the national pialogue process, subnational
consultations were held in Western Bahr El Ghazal
and Western Equatoria in December, while they are
ongoing in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Warrap and the
Administrative Area of Pibor. The consultations were
carried out largely in Government-controlled areas,
although efforts to reach opposition constituencies were
made in Raja, Western Bahr El Ghazal. Participants
in the consultations were mostly able to express their
grievances and views, and the open dialogue often
exceeded the expectations of local communities.
Unfortunately, there were instances when security
personnel prevented consultations from being held. For
example, on 2 December, in Torit, Eastern Equatoria,
security officials prevented a pre-dialogue meeting
from taking place, and even threatened to arrest the
Chair of the women’s association who was attempting
to convene the meeting. I must emphasize that it
is imperative that the national dialogue process be
conducted in an inclusive, transparent and credible
manner, as well as be supportive of the efforts to

18-019833/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

revitalize the peace agreement and restore sustainable
peace to South Sudan.
With respect to the IGAD High-Level
Revitalization Forum, the second phase is expected to
resume on 5 February in Addis Ababa, and to focus on
governance, transitional security arrangements and the
permanent ceasefire.
In conclusion, as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General stated
on 12 January, it will be crucial for the South Sudanese
parties to participate in the Forum in good faith and with
a view to making the necessary compromises required
for South Sudan to return to the path to sustainable
peace. That will be the critical moment for the parties
to demonstrate their political will to negotiate a
permanent ceasefire and update the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: At the outset, I should like to thank
you, President Umarov, for your kind invitation to brief
to the Security Council today.
Just before Christmas, six months of hard work
came to fruition with the successful convening of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
High-level Revitalization Forum in Addis Ababa, where
14 South Sudanese parties and other key stakeholders
came together to confront the challenges facing
South Sudan after 18 months of devastating chaos.
The first phase of the Forum dealt with the cessation
of hostilities and, like the Council, I am pleased that
the comprehensive Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access was signed by all parties on 21 December
2017. According to the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangement Monitoring Mechanism, the new
cessation of hostilities agreement has had a generally
positive effect on reducing the overall level of violence
in the country. However, I am disappointed to note
that, within a few weeks of its signing, the Agreement
has now been violated by no fewer than three of the
signatory parties.
Since 24 December 2017, when the Agreement
came into effect, fighting and troop movements have
been reported in Unity, Jonglei, Upper Nile and Central
Equatoria states, causing further displacement and
disturbance of civilians. The Ceasefire and Transitional
4/20

24/01/2018

Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism quickly
published reports on two outbreaks of violence, in Koch
and Mundri, apportioning blame to the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition and Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Government, respectively. The
Chair of the Mechanism has advised me that a number
of other incidents and alleged violations are currently
under investigation, and I hope to receive further
reports very soon. I condemn those acts of violence and
call upon all signatories to the cessation of hostilities
agreement to disseminate the terms of the Agreement
to their subordinate commanders and ensure immediate
and consistent compliance.
Within the past week, I have had cause to
publicly demand full support for the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism. Statements have been made in the media
by the Transitional Government of National Unity that
have the potential to undermine public confidence in
regional and international peacekeeping efforts. The
Mechanism’s teams are direct representatives of IGAD
and the wider international community for the purpose
of verification on ceasefire compliance in South Sudan.
As such, they deserve full respect and total cooperation.
Such denigration of international peacekeeping
missions, including the Regional Protection Force,
is unacceptable. I call upon the Security Council to
reiterate its support for the Mechanism.
As I speak now, the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism
is leading a workshop in Addis Ababa with all its
signatories, which seeks to put in place the practical
mechanisms and cooperation required to deliver
and enforce that cessation of hostilities agreement. I
commend the Mechanism for taking the lead on that, and
all the signatories for their participation. I furthermore
urge the parties to cooperate fully under the terms of
the Agreement so as to ensure unhindered access to the
monitoring and verification teams in the field.
As we begin a new year, it remains my belief that
the IGAD-led revitalization process provides us all with
the most effective platform upon which to confront and
resolve the severe security, governance, economic and
humanitarian crises that continue to overwhelm South
Sudan. I wish to commend the IGAD Special Envoy,
Ambassador Ismail Wais, for his tenacity in leading
that process.
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The High-level Revitalization Forum will convene
again in two week’s time and continue its systematic
review and invigoration of the Peace Agreement. It is
beholden upon us all to keep our faith in that process
and support it with all the resources at our disposal. The
single most important contribution that can be made by
the regional and international community is to speak
with one voice. Only if we stand together, unified in our
approach, will we help the South Sudanese leaders find
and sustain the spirit of compromise and engagement
that will deliver peace and stability.
In four days’ time in Addis Ababa, His Excellency
Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and Chairperson of IGAD, will host another consultative
meeting with the United Nations, the African Union
and the Heads of State and Government of IGAD.
The resolute unity and determination of those three
institutions will be necessary to bring about positive
and sustainable change in South Sudan.
The speed and alacrity with which some parties
and individuals violated the cessation of hostilities
agreement leads me to raise, once again, the key issue
of enforcement. For the revitalization process to be
successful and have the value and meaning that we would
all wish it to have, there must be a clear understanding
among all South Sudanese leaders of the consequences
of non-compliance and of the determination of the world
to ensure that the agreements they sign are complied
with. We cannot stand by as South Sudanese leaders
sign an agreement one day and then authorize, or allow,
its violation with impunity the next. We must address,
with one voice, the issue of non-compliance and make
clear the consequences to be faced by those who
wilfully violate, spoil or derail the Peace Agreement in
South Sudan.
As set forth by articles 14.2 and 14.3 of the current
cessation of hostilities agreement, facilitated by IGAD,
the Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission shall report any serious breaches to the
Transitional Government of National Unity in the
Republic of South Sudan, IGAD, the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council for their action. The actions referred
to may include the measures decided by the twentyeighth Extraordinary Summit of IGAD Heads of State
and Government issued on 7 December 2014, namely,
the enactment of asset freezes, the enactment of regional
travel bans and the denial of the supply of arms and
ammunition and any other material that could be used

S/PV. 8166

in war. It is now time to revisit the range of practical
measures that can be applied in earnest to those who
refuse to take those processes seriously and to make it
clear to all concerned that the world will not tolerate
any further disruption to our efforts to deliver peace.
Over the coming weeks, IGAD will continue along
its path to revitalize the Peace Agreement. Along
with the members of the Council, I wish to take this
opportunity to reaffirm my total commitment to that
process. Together, with one voice, we can challenge
those who peddle violence and self-interest. We urge
the Transitional Government of National Unity and all
parties to continue to engage in that inclusive, political
process. As I said earlier, the IGAD Revitalization
Forum is the best opportunity to restore peace and
rebuild governance in South Sudan, and the process
must not be delayed.
The President: I thank Mr. Mogae for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
Following the briefing provided to the Council on
7 December 2017 by the Emergency Relief Coordinator
(see S/PV.8124), humanitarian partners launched the
2018 Humanitarian Response Plan for South Sudan.
Under the plan, humanitarian partners are seeking
to assist 6 million people with life-saving aid and
protection, which is more than half of the entire
population of the country, even after more than 2 million
South Sudanese already fled the country as refugees.
An additional 1.9 million people are displaced within
the country.
This highly prioritized humanitarian response
plan requires $1.7 billion. Leveraging new funding
in the coming weeks will be critical. Only through
timely, adequate funding will the United Nations
and humanitarian partners be able to procure and
pre-position supplies during the ongoing dry season
to ensure that we can prevent an already critical
humanitarian situation from worsening.
According to the most recent food security analysis,
5.1 million people are currently estimated to be severely
food insecure. That is an increase from the October
to December period, and an increase when compared
to this time last year. Some 1.5 million people are in
emergency-level food insecurity, just one step away

18-019835/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

from famine, and around 20,000 people are already
in famine conditions. The next lean season, which
begins in March, is likely to see food security worsen,
and could see famine conditions spread to several new
locations across the country.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable
to food insecurity and their situation is projected to
deteriorate. An estimated 250,000 children will be
affected by severe acute malnutrition in 2018, requiring
urgent life-saving interventions. The new Executive
Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, underscored
that point during her recent visit to South Sudan. The
alarming levels of food insecurity and malnutrition are
closely linked to people’s inability to plant or harvest
due to the ongoing conflict and constraints upon their
freedom of movement. Cultivation continues to be
severely limited by widespread violence, displacement
and destruction of assets. Last year, the traditionally
surplus food-producing areas of Greater Equatoria
and Western Bahr el Ghazal saw a significant decline,
producing between 30 and 50 per cent less cereal than
in 2016. Ongoing clashes surrounding food production
are of serious concern this year.
I am also deeply disturbed by the continued high
rates of sexual violence. In 2018, humanitarian partners
estimate that 1.8 million women and girls are at risk of
gender-based violence. In response to such staggering
figures, partners are aiming to scale up support services
to reach nearly 400,000 more vulnerable people than
last year.
Since the last briefing to the Council on this topic
(see S/PV.8132), violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses have
continued to be perpetrated by both the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition. Civilians
have continued to be killed and forcibly displaced by
clashes between the parties, including in Yei River state
and Lasu in Central Equatoria and Northern Liech in
Greater Upper Nile. Several thousand people have fled
to Ethiopia and Uganda just this month.
The implementation of the Republican Order
for the Free, Unimpeded and Unhindered Movement
of Humanitarian Assistance Convoys, issued by the
President in November, has been inconsistent, and
the humanitarian access situation across South Sudan
remains highly complex and unpredictable. However,
there have been some positive developments. Last
6/20

24/01/2018

week, the International Organization for Migration
announced that, for the past month, it has been able
to provide consistent primary health care in Greater
Baggari, an area south of Wau that was cut off from
assistance by the SPLA for more than a year. In
Western Equatoria, a humanitarian convoy delivering
assistance to Congolese refugees in Yambio County was
completed safely for the first time this month without
force protection.
Yet, overall, access challenges have continued
to delay and interrupt the humanitarian response.
Last month, in Unity state, truck drivers delivering
humanitarian supplies by road from Juba reported a
total of 66 checkpoints controlled by SPLA and different
non-State actors, with some charging fees. This month,
in the Upper Nile region, the SPLA and the national
security mounted a new roadblock along the AburocKodok road, demanding payment for commercial and
humanitarian vehicles. I would also like to highlight that
in December, humanitarian organizations relocated 65
aid workers due to fighting, bringing the total number
of relocations for 2017 to over 600.
Unfortunately, such access challenges follow a
long-established pattern. In 2017, at least 28 aid workers
were killed in the line of duty, and over 1,100 incidents
were reported, the highest annual count since the start
of the conflict. Those incidents included killings,
kidnappings, attacks against humanitarian assets and
bureaucratic impediments. An example of the latter
is the increased fees for work permits for foreign
nationals — from $100 to as much as $4,000 — imposed
by South Sudan’s Labour Ministry.
The challenging operating environment is
restricting the ongoing dry season prepositioning of
supplies and overall programme delivery. Health,
nutrition, food security and the provision of other
life-saving assistance and support are regularly
interrupted and hundreds of thousands of people are
without access to assistance for extended periods of
time. Obligations under international humanitarian law
remain in effect for as long as the armed conflict lasts.
I join the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in calling upon the parties
to the conflict to adhere to international humanitarian
law and to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, as specified in the 21 December agreement on
the cessation of hostilities.
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Despite the challenges, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners reached more than 5.4 million
people in South Sudan last year. Over 5.1 million
people received food assistance and emergency
livelihoods support. More than 2.5 million people
received emergency health kits, and some 900,000
children and pregnant and breastfeeding women
received emergency nutritional assistance. More than
2.1 million people benefited from water and sanitation
programming; 900,000 people were provided with vital
emergency items, including blankets and mosquito
nets; more than 390,000 children benefited from
educational programming; and over 560,000 people
received services addressing gender-based violence. In
2018, humanitarian partners hope to assist even more
people to avert a further deterioration in humanitarian
conditions. That includes providing protection services
to 4 million people and food security and livelihood
support to 5.5 million.
In conclusion, I call upon the members of the
Security Council to help mobilize timely investment
in the 2018 humanitarian response plan to ensure
that life-saving assistance reaches those most in
need; to use their influence to ensure that the parties
to conflict comply with all their obligations under
international humanitarian law; to ensure that the
parties to the conflict respect and protect civilians,
including humanitarian workers, and civilian objects,
including humanitarian assets, and to make sure that
the parties to the conflict meet their obligations to
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need.
Such obligations were acknowledged and restated in
the President’s decree on access and in the cessation
of hostilities agreement. Humanitarian workers need
to be able to safely deliver aid, when and where it is
most needed. The people of South Sudan deserve
nothing less.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
the briefers for talking about this very important issue
facing us.
The United States has been a supporter of South
Sudan from the beginning. Since independence, we
have invested well over $11 billion in South Sudan and
the Government of President Kiir. What began with

S/PV. 8166

so much promise has slipped into a state of horror that
has haunted all of us for more than four years now.
We have tried to help; we have tried to find a solution.
The Security Council has tried to help as well. Our
support has consisted of much more than mandating
a peacekeeping mission. The Council has lent its
expertise, its guidance and its credibility to the effort
to help South Sudan’s leaders find peace. We have
treated the Kiir Government as a partner in this effort.
We have assumed that the best interests of the people
were its priority.
Thus, in November we welcomed President
Kiir’s Republican Order for the Free, Unimpeded and
Unhindered Movement of Humanitarian Assistance
Convoys, but instead of reaching more struggling South
Sudanese, aid workers continue to be blocked in record
numbers and the parties just will not stop fighting.
The Government continues to insist that aid workers
pay high fees just to provide assistance to the people of
South Sudan. These fees would cost the humanitarian
community $7.6 million — money that should be used
to provide clean water in a country plagued by cholera.
It could provide shelter for some of the 2 million
internally displaced or it could feed some of the six
million people facing life-threatening hunger.
Nonetheless, our support has continued. We were
encouraged by the efforts of South Sudan’s neighbours
to create a forum to negotiate peace, but President
Kiir delayed and attempted to undermine the process.
We welcome the Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access which that forum produced in December, but
hours — hours — after the Agreement went into effect,
it was violated. Instead of reporting the end of fighting
in South Sudan, independent ceasefire monitors are
reporting that Government forces continued their
deployments despite the agreement. Not surprisingly,
more fighting followed. Opposition forces are also
responsible for the fighting. Forces under Riek Machar’s
command spearheaded an attack in which at least 15
civilians were killed, and on 4 January forces loyal to a
former South Sudan Army Chief orchestrated an attack
on a Government checkpoint.
All of this is bad news. It is not just a lack of
forward momentum; things are going backwards in
South Sudan. Just last month, President Kiir promoted
three generals who this Council sanctioned in 2015.
These are men who led the slaughter of innocent South
Sudanese children, women and old men. Hundreds of

18-019837/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

victims reportedly were buried in mass graves and the
Government of South Sudan decided to promote their
killers. Human Rights Watch called this a slap in the
face of justice. It is also a slap in the face of the Security
Council and the nations that have supported the Kiir
Government. It is a slap in the face of basic decency.
Our attempts to ease the suffering of the people of
South Sudan are not working and what is worse, we are
failing — not despite the leadership of South Sudan but
because of it.
The time has come to acknowledge the hard reality
that the leaders of South Sudan are not just failing their
people, they are betraying them. Thus, the Council is at
a crossroads. We are morally obligated, and obligated
under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations,
to address threats to international peace and security
in South Sudan. We cannot stand by idly as innocent
civilians are murdered and raped. We must change
course. It is long past time that the Security Council
establish an arms embargo on South Sudan rather
than continue to hold endless meetings on a crisis that
only becomes worse each month. I urge my fellow
Council members to support an arms embargo. This is
neither punishment nor is it a meaningless gesture. It
is something we can do to actually help the people of
South Sudan to slow the violence, slow the flow of arms
and ammunition, and protect innocent lives.
Every council member can and should act on the
position we all took in our 14 December presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/25) to impose costs and
consequences on those who undermine the peace process
in South Sudan. At the upcoming Intergovernmental
Authority on Development High-level Revitalization
Forum, the parties must find the political will to
compromise on longer-term security and governance
arrangements that meet the needs of South Sudanese
people. If they do not, the Security Council should
work with the region to find a new path to pursue peace.
At the upcoming African Union (AU) Summit,
we urge the African Union to consider seriously the
accountability measures it pledged for those who refuse
to pursue peace. The AU can hold these individuals
responsible for violating the ceasefire and obstructing
the peace process, including through the establishment
of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. And it is past time
for the leaders of Uganda and Kenya to get involved and
put pressure on President Kiir. They are key players in
the success of a true peace process.
8/20

24/01/2018

The Government of South Sudan is increasingly
proving itself to be an unfit partner to the Council and
any country seeking peace and security for the people
of South Sudan. The United States will never give up on
this effort, but if there is to be true peace in South Sudan,
its leaders must step up and make a true commitment to
ending this conflict once and for all. The time is theirs
to determine the future of South Sudan.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Ursula Mueller for their briefings. We are also
pleased to have President Festus Mogae and, as always,
we appreciate his briefing on the recent developments
in South Sudan, particularly those relating to the highlevel revitalization forum.
The security situation in South Sudan still remains
fragile and the dire humanitarian situation continues to
be of serious concern. That is why reaching an agreement
on the cessation of hostilities was accorded the
utmost priority at the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) High-level Revitalization Forum.
In fact, the parties were able to sign on 21 December
2017 the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access. This
is a major achievement that should be welcomed, and
we commend all the relevant stakeholders who worked
tirelessly for it to come to fruition. The agreement is
hoped to bring an end to the senseless violence in the
country so that conducive conditions would be created
for a more substantive political discussion among the
parties to address the complex challenges the country
is facing, as well as to ensure a safe environment for
delivering the acutely needed humanitarian assistance.
However, the reported violation of the cessation
of hostilities agreement — here both sides are
implicated — is dimming the prospect for progress in
ending the conflict. This is very unfortunate and deeply
regrettable. It will undermine the genuine efforts being
exerted to help South Sudanese parties to address the
root causes of the conflict in South Sudan through
an all-inclusive dialogue that would pave the way for
national reconciliation and the building of effective
State institutions through a democratic process.
All the parties must live up to the letter and spirit
of the agreement that they themselves have agreed
to uphold if there is going to be any hope of turning
the tide in South Sudan. As we have been saying all
along, the success of the revitalization process and in
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

addressing the enormous challenges that South Sudan
faces will really depend on the willingness of all the
parties. All violations of the cessation of hostilities
agreement must be investigated, and we appreciate what
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has been able to accomplish so
far in collaboration with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan — reporting and verifying violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement under very
difficult and challenging circumstances.
We would like to stress that all signatories to the
cessation of hostilities agreement are obligated to
ensure unrestricted access to the Mechanism’s ceasefire
monitors so that they can accurately and speedily
report on the situation around the country. We must
also stress that those reported violations should not be
used as an excuse to undermine the second phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum, which is scheduled to
be held during the first week of February. In fact, we
should build on the positive momentum generated so
far. The upcoming IGAD meeting is expected to lay the
groundwork for the resumption of the second phase of
the Forum.
In all of that, the support of the international
community, in particular that of the Security Council,
remains absolutely critical. The Council should
maintain its unity and continue speaking with one
voice, as expressed in its latest presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/25), in urging the parties to participate in
the Forum and live up to the commitments they made.
We are extremely grateful for the support provided
to the revitalization process so far by the African
Union, the United Nations, as well as other regional
and international stakeholders. That support needs to
be further strengthened and continue on a regular basis.
We are pleased to note, as President Mogae
indicated earlier, that the leaders of the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD will meet on 27 January
on the sidelines of the African Union Summit, as part
of maintaining the unity of purpose among the three
organizations in the search of lasting peace, security
and stability in South Sudan. We hope that will provide
impetus for the second phase of the Forum.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his briefing. We also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,

S/PV. 8166

and His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for
their efforts to address the situation in South Sudan.
The Security Council, the African Union and other
relevant actors have decisively shown their support for
the initiative led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). They all agree that this is a
unique opportunity to find a way out of the conflict
and finally bring about lasting peace in South Sudan.
However, it is clear that a process of this nature will
not yield positive results unless the parties take their
commitments seriously and show genuine political will
to implement them.
In that connection, we regret and vigorously
condemn the violations of the Agreement on the
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access, finalized on 21 December 2017
at the conclusion of the first phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum. We call on the parties to avoid
future clashes and comply with the responsibilities
they agreed to, such as ending hostilities, protecting
civilians and ensuring safe and unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance, which are crucial to moving
on to the second phase of the Forum, slated for February.
We welcome the efforts that IGAD has been
undertaking for several months to ensure the success
of the Forum. We highlight the fact that it has been
possible to bring together all stakeholders and to
engage in dialogue with them. We express our support
for the launching of the second phase, as well as our
hope that the negotiations can be carried out in good
faith and with the serious commitment of the parties.
We reiterate that a sustainable solution to the conflict
in South Sudan can be arrived at only through an open
and sincere political process and an inclusive dialogue
that facilitates the fulfilment of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan.
The difficult security-related and economic
circumstances in South Sudan have unleashed a difficult
humanitarian situation. According to reports of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), 7 million South Sudanese need humanitarian
assistance and there is a large number of refugees and
internally displaced persons who are experiencing a
lack basic services, food insecurity and outbreaks of
diseases, such as cholera, in addition to the situation of
vulnerable segments of the population, such as women

18-019839/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and children, who require special attention. We are
concerned about the many challenges for this year and
we call on the international community to cooperate
with OCHA to guarantee humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan.
We also believe it is essential to ensure a good
operating environment for humanitarian workers and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
We call on Government and opposition forces to
provide security to humanitarian workers throughout
the territory and to allow unrestricted access to
humanitarian aid.
With the progress made in the deployment of the
Regional Protective Force (RPF), we hope that a more
robust presence of UNMISS patrols can be extended
and guaranteed in areas with a higher incidence of
clashes, such as in Equatoria, Bahr el-Ghazal and Upper
Nile. We call on the Government to make the requisite
administrative procedures less bureaucratic in order to
render the deployment of the RPF more agile, which we
hope will give UNMISS more flexibility in deploying
to prevent clashes between the parties. We believe that
strengthening the three-level strategy for the protection
of civilians is also a very important point that should
be taken into account in the strategic review in order to
improve the performance of UNMISS.
With regard to the Peace and Security Council
summit that will take place on 27 January during the
thirtieth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African
Union, Bolivia affirms its support for the conclusions
to be adopted on the next steps to address the situation
in South Sudan.
In conclusion, we wish to express our thanks to
the United Nations team and to UNMISS for their
commitment, excellent work and the sacrifices they are
making in that country.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and expresses its gratitude for the comprehensive
briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission; and Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
Our remarks on the alarming situation in South
Sudan will focus on two points: first, on the need
to support the peace process and, secondly, on the
10/20

24/01/2018

obligation to put an end to, investigate and punish the
recurring violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
First, with regard to the peace process, Peru
supports every effort to revitalize the peace process
in South Sudan. We emphasize that there can be no
military solution to the situation in that country; on
the contrary, it is necessary to strengthen the political
dialogue through inclusive and transparent processes in
which all parties participate. We believe that the Highlevel Revitalization Forum, aimed at revitalizing the
peace process and facilitated by the Intergovernmental
Authority for Development (IGAD), constitutes the
most viable initiative to guide the country towards
sustainable peace. We encourage greater participation
by women and young people in that process.
The support of the international community and
of African organizations is important. The United
Nations, the African Union and IGAD must maintain
close cooperation with a view to acting in a consistent
and complementary manner in supporting the
process. At the same time, we believe that the internal
dialogues fostered by the Transitional Government
of National Unity should also be conducted in a
transparent and inclusive manner, and be aimed at
complementing the dialogue initiated by the High-level
Revitalization Forum.
A permanent ceasefire is essential to resume a
credible dialogue about the country’s governance. We
are concerned about violations of the Agreement on
the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access, concluded last December.
We believe that punishing those responsible should be
considered. In that connection, we wish to emphasize
the importance of continuing to make progress in the
full deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
of the need for the South Sudanese authorities to extend
it their due support.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation
and human rights violations, we condemn the attacks
on civilians perpetrated indiscriminately by all parties
to the conflict, including violations of the human rights
of children, women, refugees and ethnic minorities, as
well as the military use of hospitals and schools. We
took note of the statement issued by the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan following
its fourth visit to the country, in December 2017. We
remind the national authorities of their responsibility
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to protect the population against the occurrence of
atrocious crimes, including the duty to investigate and
to punish the perpetrators.
We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians
under extremely difficult circumstances. We call
on the authorities to cooperate with the Mission by
removing any impediment to it fulfilling its mandate.
We believe that it is unacceptable that there continue
to be obstacles to access for humanitarian aid and
an increase in reported incidents, including hostile
acts against humanitarian workers by the State’s own
security forces.
To conclude, we would like to welcome the various
initiatives by UNMISS to promote the participation
of women and young people in the peace process. We
believe that the strategic review under way should
strengthen that line of action with a view to promoting
sustainable peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the briefers — Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and Chairperson
Mogae — for updating us today.
As all Security Council members are aware,
the long-term stability of South Sudan is dependent
upon securing a political agreement. To that end, we
welcome the work of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) on the High-Level
Revitalization Forum, in particular the Agreement on
the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access. I would like to thank, and pay
tribute to IGAD and Ambassador Ismail Wais, who led
efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table. The
Revitalization Forum provides the best opportunity to
secure a political agreement. It must be truly inclusive
in order to deliver an agreement that is accepted and
supported by the people of South Sudan. Women, youth
and the broader South Sudanese civil society must all
be allowed to participate meaningfully.
We made the Council’s expectations clear
in the presidential statement issued last month
(S/PRST/2017/25) — an end to hostilities, cost and
consequences for those who obstruct the Revitalization
Forum process, and unimpeded humanitarian access.
Let us now take stock of the progress that has been made.

S/PV. 8166

First, hostilities have not ended. The cessation of
hostilities agreement was violated almost immediately
after it was signed, and fighting continues across the
country today. We are particularly concerned about
the fighting in Koch. The significant military buildup by the Government and by opposition groups in the
Malakal-Tonga corridor are also extremely worrying, as
are potential offensives in Yei and Akobo. We are also
concerned by the movements of First Vice-President
Taban Deng and his 500 troops in Jonglei state, which
are both a violation of the cessation of hostilities and an
inflammatory action in the run-up to peace talks. We
therefore welcome the statement of the Chairperson of
the IGAD Council of Ministers of 29 December, which
strongly condemned the violations and called for those
responsible to be held to account.
That
brings
me
to
our
second
expectation — consequences for those who obstruct
the negotiations process, which includes violations of
the cessation of hostilities. We call on IGAD to use its
Council of Ministers meeting on 27 January to set out
defined consequences for violators. IGAD can identify
such individuals and, collectively, we can take action
against them. The Security Council must be ready to
support IGAD, using all the measures at its disposal.
We welcome the joint statement by the United
Nations and the African Union on 12 January and fully
support South Sudanese civil society, which is calling
for accountability for violating the ceasefire. We are
concerned by the recent threats against civil society
groups as they comment on the cessation of hostilities,
which, as signatories to the agreement, they have every
right to do.
We also welcome the efforts of the Chair of the
new Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism to increase the timeliness of
reporting. There have been marked improvements in
the short time that he has held that post. We hope that
he will build on those, including reporting on genderbased violence. An effective cessation of hostilities
monitoring body is crucial if we are to prevent further
violence. The Mechanism has a difficult job to do, and
we call on the Government and opposition groups to
stop impeding and criticizing it. We welcome the recent
JMEC statement on that.
The consequences of the conflict are known all too
well by the peple of South Sudan, who are victims of
the dire and deteriorating humanitarian situation. Two

18-0198311/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

thirds of the population are in need of humanitarian
assistance in what is a man-made disaster. We condemn
unreservedly sexual violence in South Sudan. In
November, despite the President’s decree calling for
unimpeded access, nine aid workers were killed and aid
was obstructed on more than 100 occasions. All parties
to the conflict bear a responsibility for that, but the
Government alone is responsible for the bureaucratic
impediments — such as the $4,000 work permit fees
which continue to hinder the efforts of the relief
agencies to save lives.
The Council visited Addis Ababa last September
for its annual meeting with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. At that meeting, we
talked about supporting the African Union and its
subregional organizations. Today, citing statements of
IGAD, Chairperson Mogae asked us to make clear the
consequences to those who violate, spoil or derail the
peace agreement. Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
urged us to show that there would be real consequences
for violators. We therefore reiterate our call for an arms
embargo. It would apply equally to all parties and would
not single anyone out for blame. It would send a strong
message to those who undermine the Revitalization
Forum, and strengthen those in the region who are
trying to bring the South Sudanese parties to peace. It
is in line with what the region has called for — clear
consequences for violators.
The parties in South Sudan must start putting the
people of South Sudan first. They must fully engage
with the Revitalization Forum and refrain from
violence. They must allow humanitarian access to all
who need it. We, as the Security Council, must also do
our part to make the consequence of inaction, including
by us around the table, clear because — make no
mistake — inaction is a decision, too. It is a decision
to allow people to be attacked and to die. We must
hold those responsible to account now. The people of
South Sudan can wait no longer. Let us not protect the
warmongers and abusers. Let that not be a stain on the
Council’s conscience.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Chairperson Mogae and
Ms. Mueller of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their very candid and sobering
briefings to the Council this afternoon.
We remain deeply concerned about the security
and the humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The
12/20

24/01/2018

Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access, signed on
21 December, offers some hope that an end to the
fighting is within reach. We hope that opportunity will
be fully grasped.
Ending the seemingly unbreakable cycle of
conflict, displacement and hunger endured by the
people of South Sudan will require leadership, courage
and commitment. The time has now come for the
violence to end once and for all. We strongly condemn
all violations of the peace agreements reached between
the parties, and we call on all parties to immediately
and unconditionally implement their obligations in
good faith.
We welcome the fact that the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism has been able to conduct timely
investigations and to report on violations of the
agreements. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan should do what it can to support that effort. I
am proud to say that the European Union has decided
to support the Mechanism with more than €5 million.
The international community and the countries
of the region have expressed their determination to
ensure that the parties abide by their obligations and
responsibilities. That determination has been clearly
voiced both by the Council in its presidential statement
of 14 December (S/PRST/2017/25) and in the African
Union Peace and Security Council communiqué
of 20 September last year, quoted here earlier
this afternoon.
We commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development for its preparation of the High-Level
Revitalization Forum, as well as the support provided
by the African Union. The conclusion of its first phase,
with the cessation of hostilities agreement, shows
that constructive dialogue and compromise have the
potential to yield progress. But as we have previously
stated, the Forum represents a unique window of
opportunity to reinvigorate the peace process. To grasp
this opportunity, all parties must recognize that only a
political solution can bring the conflict to an end.
It is imperative that the Council continue to stand
unified behind the High-level Revitalization Forum,
not least in view of the start of the second phase,
which will be tasked with addressing some of the most
difficult and contentious issues. The legitimacy and
future achievements of the Forum will depend on the
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

transparency and inclusiveness of the process. In this
regard, the full and effective participation of women
is crucial, as is the active participation of civil society.
As we have heard, the humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan remain very serious,
threatening the lives and undermining the dignity of
millions. Violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law, including attacks on hospitals and schools, the use
of access to food as a weapon of war, the recruitment
of children and horrifying levels of sexual and genderbased violence are unacceptable and must come to an
end. We welcome the steps taken so far to establish the
hybrid court, which will act as a strong deterrent against
atrocity crimes. I must say that we really appreciate and
support the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the humanitarian agencies
and actors, and we fully agree with the call made here
this afternoon by Ursula Mueller on the parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law, including
humanitarian access, as well as the call on all of us
to step up our humanitarian response in line with the
demands on the ground.
The millions of South Sudanese caught up in this
brutal and futile war have waited for more than four
years for an end to the conflict and an opportunity to
rebuild their lives and their country. The High-level
Revitalization Forum has opened a space for peace,
reconciliation and recovery. All parties must now fully
engage and take this opportunity to set South Sudan on
the path to sustainable peace and to end the suffering of
the South Sudanese population.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Mogae and Ms. Mueller for
their clear and, may I say, disquieting briefings.
Seven years ago this month, an overwhelming
majority of the people of South Sudan voted in favour
of independence. They voted for an independent,
peaceful and stable future. Now, seven years later,
irresponsible political leadership in South Sudan has
created a conflict that the people of that country did not
vote for. Despite the strong support of the international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
currently millions of people are living in urgent need
of food assistance and millions more are displaced, as
Ms. Mueller just mentioned. Only one conclusion is
possible: the political leadership of South Sudan has not
had the interests of its own people at heart.

S/PV. 8166

As others have said, we welcome the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access of 21 December. We thank the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU) for their tireless efforts to
establish the Agreement.
However, within hours the first violations of the
Agreement were reported, and more violations have
been reported since, as Mr. Mogae just said. To make
things worse, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) faces continued obstruction while
attempting to report on the violations. These violations
and restrictions are unacceptable. They raise the
issue of enforcement and that of the consequences of
non-compliance, as Mr. Mogae just said.
I will focus on three key issues for a sustainable
peace in South Sudan: a peace agreement, accountability
and humanitarian access.
First, concerning the issue of a peace agreement,
the revitalization process led by IGAD is the most
urgent challenge. We should put pressure on those who
stand in the way of peace and undermine this process.
We continue to fully support the efforts of IGAD
and call on all actors to engage constructively in the
second round of the High-level Revitalization Forum.
Experience has shown that such engagement will not
take place without strong and united encouragement
from the international community. This especially
includes neighbouring countries. We support the
recent statements issued by IGAD, the AU, the United
Nations, the Troika and the European Union. This, of
course, includes the call for serious consequences for
those who obstruct the peace process and violate the
cessation of hostilities.
The situation in South Sudan has reached a
critical point. The international community, including
the Council, must respond with the strongest
possible pressure.
This brings me to my second point, the issue of
accountability. There can be no lasting peace without
justice. We cannot wait for the guns to fall silent before
we start holding to account those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights, especially horrible crimes of sexual violence, as
was mentioned just now.
The establishment of a hybrid court, as agreed by
the South Sudanese parties in 2015, is an essential step

18-0198313/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to address impunity and bring about justice. We urge
the authorities of South Sudan and the African Union
to establish the court as soon as possible.
My third point concerns the issue of humanitarian
access. Despite the 9 November presidential decree
to allow unhindered movement, access on the ground
has not improved, as Ms. Mueller just highlighted.
Humanitarian organizations continue to face
unacceptable bureaucratic, operational and physical
obstacles in trying to provide assistance to those
most in need. For donors such as the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, this is unacceptable, and it should be
unacceptable for all members of the Council.
In addition, we are extremely concerned by the
interim report of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan,
which concluded that starvation has been used as a
weapon of war in Wau county and surrounding areas.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and all other
parties to allow quick, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to all people in need. This includes respect for
the full freedom of movement of UNMISS, whose work
is essential to facilitate humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, the key to South Sudan’s future is,
of course, in the hands of the people of South Sudan
themselves. But the people of that country, especially
women and children, continue to need our steadfast
commitment as a Council to make their call for peace
heard. Their voice is indispensable to the future of the
country. The Council must stand by the people of South
Sudan. We have to show that there are consequences,
including sanctions, for every actor who continues to
choose fighting over dialogue, conflict over peace,
obstruction over cooperation.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will support
any measure that reduces the possibility of violence,
including an arms embargo. Let me reiterate that we
urge all the parties in South Sudan to allow UNMISS to
do its work. The Security Council should see to it that
UNMISS has the capacity to do so.
From that perspective, we look forward to the
discussion on the renewal of the UNMISS mandate in
March. It is our responsibility as a Council to ensure
that the political leadership of South Sudan has the
interests of its people at heart.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Assistant Secretary14/20

24/01/2018

General Mueller and Mr. Mogae, Chairperson of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
Late last month, thanks to the concerted efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the international community, the Highlevel Revitalization Forum was successfully held,
and the South Sudanese parties signed the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access. China welcomes these
developments and appreciates the active efforts made
by IGAD.
China is ready to continue to support IGAD, the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations in playing a leading mediation role on the
question of South Sudan. But we should also be mindful
of the fact that the current political and security situation
in South Sudan remains fragile and continues to face
many severe challenges. The international community
should further increase its support and assistance to
South Sudan. It is imperative to continue to promote
the political process in South Sudan, as a political
solution is the only way out in addressing the question
of South Sudan. China has noted that after the cessation
of hostilities agreement was signed, there have been
multiple incidents involving clashes and fighting.
China supports the 12 January joint statement of the
Secretary-General and the African Union Chairperson
on the question of South Sudan. We urge the parties to
seize the important opportunity offered by the Highlevel Revitalization Forum, take concrete actions to
implement the ceasefire agreement, immediately cease
the fighting and violence return to the negotiating table.
The international community should continue to
support the mediation efforts of IGAD, the African
Union and other regional organizations and focus on
assisting them to succeed in the second phase meetings
of the High-level Revitalization Forum. Meanwhile, it
is necessary to fully motivate the Government of South
Sudan and enhance communication and coordination
with the Government, while respecting the country’s
ownership and leadership of the political process.
I agree with what was said by the representative of
Ethiopia. The Security Council should remain united
on South Sudan and speak with one voice. We should
provide constructive assistance to South Sudan.
Secondly, it is crucial
humanitarian assistance to

to further increase
South Sudan. The
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8166

humanitarian situation in South Sudan is dire. China calls
on the international community to continue to provide
necessary humanitarian assistance and economic
support to South Sudan, and on the parties in South
Sudan to provide the necessary humanitarian access.

are part is implement the Agreement on the Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access. We encourage the authorities to build credible
and sustainable institutions based on the principle of
good governance.

China supports the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) in continuing to fulfil its mandate,
and we appreciate the efforts and contributions it has
made to maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan.
We hope that UNMISS and the Secretariat will continue
to communicate with the South Sudanese Government
and the UNMISS troop-contributing countries. We
hope that the Secretariat will conduct an objective
and comprehensive strategic review and assessment of
UNMISS and focus its efforts on helping South Sudan
to maintain peace and stability, restore development
and put forward feasible recommendations on future
adjustments of the functions and size of UNMISS.

There can be no other solution to the crisis in
South Sudan than a genuine and inclusive political
process. In that regard, Poland supports the High-level
Revitalization Forum led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which we see as the
most viable initiative for peace at this time. We hope
that the second phase of the forum will serve as vehicle
for developing sustainable arrangements on powersharing, governance and security in South Sudan. We
call on all parties to engage in good faith and to deliver
on their commitments.

China has always supported the peace process in
South Sudan and been committed to assisting South
Sudan to achieve peace and development. China stands
ready to continue to play a constructive role in achieving
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development in
South Sudan.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and Mr. Festus
Mogae for their very comprehensive briefings.
Poland is deeply concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The
humanitarian situation is extremely disturbing.
One-third of the population has been displaced, with
over 2 million seeking refuge in neighbouring countries
and nearly half of the population estimated to be
experiencing severe food insecurity. It is humanitarian
aid that keeps people alive. Poland therefore strongly
insists on ensuring full and safe access for humanitarian
actors in the country.
As in any other conflict, women and children
suffer the most and are exposed on a daily basis to
acts of violence, including ethnically motivated and
gender-based violence. I would like to underline that
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians lies
with the Government, and it is the Government that
must take concrete action to alleviate their suffering.
All parties have to comply with their obligations under
international law and put an end to the violations and
abuses of human rights. It is of critical importance that

While we understand that the IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum is a process and not an event, we
would like to stress that it cannot be an open-ended
process that drags on indefinitely while the population
suffers. We fully agree with the policy of bringing the
perpetrators of war crimes or crimes against humanity
to justice. The Security Council should stand ready to
take more decisive steps, in coordination with IGAD
and members of the African Union.
Poland commends the efforts of UNMISS, which
plays a critical role in protecting civilians, and looks
forward to the finalization of the strategic review of
the UNMISS mandate. We find it deeply regrettable
that UNMISS continues to face several difficulties in
delivering on its mandate. We would like to stress that
the harassment of United Nations staff and restrictions
on their movement are unacceptable. We also note
with regret the level of deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and call on the Government to
facilitate is completion.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our appeal to
all South Sudanese parties to engage in genuine political
dialogue and to work constructively with international
partners towards the aim of bringing peace and stability
to the population, who have suffered over the past five
years more than more than anyone ever should.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller; and Mr. Festus
Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and

18-0198315/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Evaluation Commission, for their respective briefings
on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1011) on
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the overall situation in the country.
My statement will focus on three main points:
obstacles encountered by UNMISS in the implementation
of its mandate, the humanitarian situation in the country,
and the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to revitalize the peace process in
South Sudan.
Turning to my first point, as underscored in the
report of the Secretary-General, UNMISS continues
to face numerous obstacles in discharging its mandate,
despite efforts made to improve security conditions in
South Sudan. My delegation condemns the multiple
obstacles imposed by the Transitional Government
of National Unity to the implementation of the
United Nations status of forces agreement, as well as
the attacks perpetrated by anti-Government forces
targeting UNMISS.
Against this extremely grave backdrop, Côte
d’Ivoire urges all parties to the conflict in South Sudan
to honour their commitments and, in accordance with
the status of forces agreement, guarantee the full
freedom of movement of UNMISS troops and facilitate
administrative procedures required for its operations.
Côte d’Ivoire would also like to encourage UNMISS to
redouble its efforts towards the swift deployment of the
contingents to form the Regional Protection Force. The
operationalization of the Force should enable UNMISS
to better deliver its mandate within an adequately
secure environment.
My delegation also welcomes the commitment
of the troop-contributing countries to the Regional
Protection Force, and invites them, in collaboration
with UNMISS, to accelerate discussions with a view to
effectively deploying various troops to South Sudanese
territory. In the same vein, we call on the Government
of South Sudan to continue discussions with UNMISS
on the use of the Tomping base by the units of the
Regional Protection Force.
Secondly, Côte d’Ivoire is concerned that clashes in
some areas between Government and opposition forces
are displacing thousands of people. With approximately
2 million internally displaced people and more than
2 million refugees, the humanitarian situation in South
Sudan remains more than alarming. Humanitarian
organizations need access to the population more
16/20

24/01/2018

than ever before. Given the multiple obstacles to such
access, Côte d’Ivoire strongly condemns the violence
and abuse perpetrated against humanitarian personnel.
It urges the parties to avoid any act that may obstruct
the smooth delivery of humanitarian aid in the country,
and above all, to respect and protect humanitarian
personnel in their efforts to alleviate the suffering of
the population.
Thirdly, my delegation welcomes the initiatives
taken by IGAD and encourages it to continue its efforts
in the context of the High-level Revitalization Forum. It
also welcomes the holding of the high-level revitalization
forum in South Sudan from 18 to 21 December 2017 in
Addis Ababa, with the aim of laying the groundwork
for a final resolution of the crisis in that sister country.
The Ivorian delegation is also pleased that the
first phase of the Forum has resulted in the signing of
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access by the parties
in conflict. My delegation strongly believes that the
end of the conflict in South Sudan requires that the
recommendations of the High-level Revitalization
Forum be implemented in good faith by all concerned
parties. In that regard, like the entire international
community, it condemns the recent violation of the
cessation of hostilities agreement, which occurred
only days after its signature. Côte d’Ivoire urges the
belligerent parties to exercise restraint and reminds
them of their duty to ensure the protection of civilians,
respect for human rights and humanitarian access.
My delegation calls on all parties to truly commit to
the quest for peace in South Sudan, while expressing
its support for the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum to be held next month.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the strategic
review recommendations to be submitted next month
will enable our Council to strengthen the capacity of
UNMISS in the context of its mandate renewal.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
their particularly insightful briefings on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan
and on the work of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). I would also like to especially
welcome Chairperson Festus Mogae, and thank him for
the clarity and resolve of his briefing, in addition to his
efforts towards the political process.
18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

After more than four years of conflict and many
dashed hopes, the High-level Revitalization Forum is
an opportunity that the South Sudanese parties must
seize in order to finally overcome their differences and
finally commit to the prospect of peace. We welcome
the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), chaired by Ethiopia and
supported by the United Nations and the African Union,
to bring those parties together in Addis Ababa and lead
the first discussions. The Agreement on the Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access, signed on 21 December, was an encouraging
development in itself, but it was immediately undercut
by ceasefire violations.
In that context, the Revitalization Forum is
currently in a key phase and its success will depend
on several factors. On the one hand, it is essential that
all parties respect the cessation of hostilities agreement
that they have signed. In that regard, we commend the
mobilization of IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and many partners that have unequivocally
expressed their expectations. We must consistantly and
vigorously recall that such violations cannot be tolerated.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism must more than ever fulfil its
monitoring role. It must enjoy the capabilities necessary
to fulfilling its mission. Additionally, the parties should
take advantage of the next session of the Forum in early
February to reach a consensus on the revitalization of
the 2015 peace agreement as soon as possible, including
its power-sharing dimensions, governance, security
arrangements and the fight against impunity. That is an
essential issue and the raison d’être of the Forum.
In any case, it will be essential for the South
Sudanese parties to expeditiously demonstrate their
willingness to move forward on all topics. Hopes
have all too often been left unfulfilled in South Sudan
and political processes too often manipulated by the
parties, which seem to continue to believe in a military
solution and are struggling to sincerely engage in a
peaceful settlement of the conflict. The process cannot
be indefinitely open-ended. Neither the country,
the region nor the community of nations can afford
further procrastination.
We must therefore carefully monitor the South
Sudanese parties. In that respect, as was unambiguously
stated by Chairperson Mogae, in the event of violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement or the
obstruction of the political process, we must not hesitate

S/PV. 8166

to adopt the measures necessary, including individual
sanctions, to alter the calculations of the parties that
are obstructing the peace process. France counts on
the unification of IGAD countries to keep pressure on
the parties.
France remains deeply concerned by the ongoing
challenges to the United Nations and non-United
Nations humanitarian actors in their efforts to deliver
necessary assistance to millions of vulnerable civilians.
Ms. Mueller described the myriad obstacles that they
face, including the fees imposed upon on them and
the attacks and harassment they encounter. Fourteen
humanitarian actors lost their lives in South Sudan in
2017, making it the second most dangerous country for
humanitarian action, following Syria. In that regard,
we recall that access to humanitarian aid must be
comprehensive, safe, unconditional and unhindered.
As Ms. Mueller stressed and the Executive Director of
UNICEF pointed out during her recent visit to South
Sudan, children and women are among the first victims
of that unacceptable situation. Rape and sexual abuse
must end. An arms embargo would contribute to the
protection of civilians. France has long supported the
establishment of such an embargo.
France also condemns the impediments that
UNMISS continues to face in the implementation of
its mandate. The blocking of UNMISS patrols and the
arrest and intimidation of its officers and humanitarian
personnel are intolerable. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to fully implement its commitments in
those areas.
The mobilization of the international community
facilitated the convening of the IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum. More than ever, we must push
forward in that joint effort to put an end to violence
in all of its forms and secure prospects for peace for
the people of South Sudan, who so sorely need it. That
tragedy has lasted for far too long.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Mr. Festus
Mogae; and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their briefings.
After hearing the briefings on the monthly reports
of the Secretary-General on the deployment and

18-0198317/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

future needs of the Regional Protection Force and the
challenges faced by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) in discharging its mandate,
let me thank the Secretary-General for the reports
and UNMISS for its work, despite the tremendous
difficulties and risks.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the ongoing and critical situation
in South Sudan. Five years after conflict broke out
in the country, which had recently gained national
sovereignty, it is of great concern that no tangible
progress is being made in the areas of politics, security
and the economy, nor with regard to the humanitarian
and the human rights situations. More than 7 million
are in need of assistance and 4 million are displaced
within the country and in neighbouring countries.
Food insecurity and ongoing clashes between the
Government and opposition forces persist, and the
situation could deteriorate in the upcoming dry season.
In his briefing to the Security Council on 7 December
2017 (see S/PV.8124), the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, stated
that in such a challenging environment, UNMISS
is committed to enhancing its efforts in a proactive
manner in order to protect humanitarian facilities and
supplies, evacuate humanitarian personnel and protect
civilians, thereby preventing illegal recruitment, sexual
violence and so on.

24/01/2018

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
entire UNMISS team for its determination amid
immense challenges. Without the efforts of UNMISS,
the situation in South Sudan would be much worse.
The Security Council should bolster such efforts and
work with the African Union and IGAD to establish
direct contact with the parties directly involved in
the conflict for the purpose of reaching agreement for
sustainable peace that would end the suffering of South
Sudan’s people. As a member of the Security Council,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support all
measures leading to sustainable peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix; the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller; and the Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
Mr. Festus Mogae, for their valuable briefings on the
most recent developments in South Sudan.

It is clear that the Council and the international
community must redouble their support to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and determine how to
shore up the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) in order to revitalize the
political process and end the current impasse. Although
sanctions could serve as a deterrent and break the
deadlock between the parties, it is also important for
the Council to consider other pragmatic approaches,
such as direct contact with the two sides and with
neighbouring countries.

We are concerned about the deterioration of the
political and humanitarian situation in South Sudan. I
would like to start by addressing the political situation.
The State of Kuwait strongly supports the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
revitalizing the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access. We
look forward to the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum, to be held next month, with
the highest possible level of participation of South
Sudan and its neighbours and friends, with the aim of
achieving reconciliation among the South Sudanese
people and thereby paving the way for a safe and
stable future for everyone. We welcome the cessation
of hostilities agreement signed by the parties at the
High-level Revitalization Forum in December in Addis
Ababa as a decisive step forward.

By way of example, Ambassador Nikki Haley
travelled to Juba and Kinshasa in December last year.
The visit yielded positive results in Kinshasa, but not in
Juba, despite the promises made. In that regard, I call on
the Council to ensure that the African Union and IGAD
consider various options to help South Sudan to emerge
from the critical situation that worsens every day. This
year is a crucial one because the Security Council could
make a decision on the future of UNMISS based on the
outcome of the strategic review.

We would like to recall the presidential statement
of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/25), urging the
parties to the conflict to agree on mechanisms to
monitor abuses so as to ensure that there would be
costs and consequences for those who breach the
peace agreement. What is particularly worrisome is
the fact that violations occurred just a few days after
the agreement was signed. We therefore fully support
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism in its efforts to verify abuses,

18/20

18-01983

24/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8166

in particular in Unity, Western and Central Equatoria
and Northern Jonglei states.

constitute an environment conducive to international
cooperation and development.

The disastrous humanitarian situation in South
Sudan demonstrates the magnitude of a tragedy that is
worsening by the day. Sixty per cent of the people are in
need of assistance, including 1.1 million children who
suffer from severe food insecurity. One-third of the
people have become refugees or internally displaced,
as we heard in the statement given by Ms. Mueller. At
this juncture, I would like to thank the neighbouring
countries of South Sudan, in particular Ethiopia,
Uganda and the Sudan, for hosting the vast majority
of South Sudanese refugees. We cannot condone
the obstruction of humanitarian assistance or the
harassment of humanitarian workers. We welcome the
President’s Republican Order for the Free, Unimpeded
and Unhindered Movement of Humanitarian Assistance
Convoys, and stress the importance of closely
monitoring the implementation of the decree on the
ground as soon as possible.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for their
substantive briefings.

In spite of the challenges, the work of UNMISS
peacekeepers, the Regional Protection Force (RPF) and
all humanitarian actors is exceedingly noble and most
deserving of the support and gratitude of the Security
Council and of the international community. That is why
we call upon all of the parties to facilitate their work
by removing all obstacles and fully complying with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and statements.
The Government of South Sudan declared its
commitment to cooperating with UNMISS. Compliance
with resolution 2304 (2016), on the deployment of the
RPF, is very important and a commitment that must be
met without further delay. We commend the tireless
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to finalize the strategic review of UNMISS and look
forward to deliberations on it in the Council before the
time comes to review the mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the strong
ties that exist between the peoples of Kuwait and South
Sudan, going back not merely seven years, to the
independence of the Republic of South Sudan, but 40
years, during which we forged a strong friendship that
translated into development aid affecting the daily lives
of the people of South Sudan. The State of Kuwait looks
forward to contributing to South Sudan’s development
on a basis of constructive bilateral cooperation in a
peaceful environment, because conflict zones do not

We believe that stabilizing the situation in South
Sudan is possible only with a lasting ceasefire and an
inclusive national reconciliation process. We therefore
welcomed the successful conclusion on 21 December of
the first round of the High-Level Revitalization Forum
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We have taken note of the consistent efforts
of regional representatives during the preparations and
of Juba’s constructive cooperation with regional States
throughout this key event. We welcome the Agreement
on the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access reached at the Forum.
However, it is regrettable that almost from the start
of the implementation of this Agreement, which is so
important for the ordinary people of South Sudan, there
have been mutual accusations of violations of it. We
urge all South Sudanese stakeholders to comply strictly
with the Agreement and to participate in the second
round of talks, to be held in February. However, we can
also allow for other negotiation tracks. The important
thing is to ensure that all efforts are closely coordinated
with the IGAD initiative. We call on the States of the
region to maintain a united approach to the settlement
in South Sudan, which is very important to ensuring
proper support for the peace process.
We are pleased at the pace of the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) in South Sudan and
assume that it will continue to operate with respect for
the country’s sovereignty and in accordance with the
basic principles of peacekeeping. It is important that
the front-line forces are already patrolling supply routes
that are critical for the region around the capital. We call
on the Government of South Sudan and representatives
of the troop-contributing countries to assist the RPF in
achieving operational readiness and, together with the
Secretariat, to continue studying mutually acceptable
modalities for the Force, including its deployment in
the area of Juba airport.
We have taken note of the balanced tone of the
Secretary-General’s monthly reports and stand ready to

18-0198319/20

S/PV.8166

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

consider the recommendations of the strategic review
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
is being conducted by the Secretariat at the initiative of
the Secretary-General.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, President Mogae
and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings on the situation in South Sudan.
Kazakhstan commends the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for their
steadfast efforts to advance the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which is the only
way to achieve stability and progress in South Sudan.
We welcome the success of the first phase of the eagerly
awaited IGAD’s High-level Revitalization Forum,
concluded with the signing on 21 December of the
Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access. However, we
are gravely concerned about the reports that the parties
are violating the Agreement.
The continuing military action has deepened the
dire humanitarian and economic crisis, which has
already caused severe food insecurity for more than
half of the population and forced 4 million South
Sudanese to flee their homes. The presidential decree of
9 November ordering free movement for humanitarian
actors has not produced tangible improvements in
humanitarian access for those in greatest need. In this
vulnerable situation, the task of protecting civilians and
of ensuring compliance with international humanitarian
law becomes all the more critical. We therefore call on
all the signatories to immediately cease all hostilities,
abide by their commitments and demonstrate their
genuine political will ahead of the second phase of
the High-level Revitalization Forum, which should
be seen as a unique opportunity, not to be lost. They

20/20

24/01/2018

must invest and commit to making the Forum succeed.
The Security Council must show unity in pressing the
Government and the other parties to end all hostilities
and act in good faith in the interests of the people of
South Sudan.
In order to be more effective, the political
negotiations should be accompanied by intercommunal
reconciliation and confidence-building among local
populations. International support in addressing the
complex causes of the conflict, by implementing
comprehensive strategies in economic development,
disaster-risk reduction and resilience-building, is
equally essential. Women and young people must be
fully engaged in those tasks in order to ensure farreaching and long-lasting results.
Finally, Kazakhstan greatly appreciates the work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
in implementing its mandated tasks. We note that some
progress has been made in deploying the Regional
Protection Force, which will enhance UNMISS’s
capacity to protect civilians, improve the security
environment and support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
Before I conclude, on behalf of the Council I would
like to say goodbye to Mr. Petr Iliichev, first Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
since today is his last meeting in the Chamber in
his current capacity. I hope that all the Heads of
delegations share our sentiments and acknowledge
and appreciate the professionalism and dedication
that he has demonstrated throughout his five years of
tireless work in New York. We cordially congratulate
him on his promotion to the position of Director of
the Department of International Organizations at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
and wish him every success.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-01983
