S/PV.9421

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9421st meeting

Wednesday, 20 September 2023, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rama/Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Vieira
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Lasso Mendoza
Ms. Colonna
Mr. Ndong Sima
Mr. Akufo-Addo
Mr. Kishida
Mr. Abela
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Berset
Ms. Almheiri
Mr. Dowden
Mr. Blinken

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the purposes and principles of the UN Charter through effective
multilateralism: maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
Letter dated 6 September 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Albania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2023/653)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27313 (E)
*2327313*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the purposes and principles of the
UN Charter through effective multilateralism:
maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
Letter dated 6 September 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/653)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, Presidents, Ministers and other
high-level representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico,
Montenegro, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Türkiye, Ukraine and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite
the following to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Charles Michel, President of the
European Council; His Excellency Mr. Bujar Osmani,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe; and His Excellency Grand
Chancellor Riccardo Paterno di Montecupò, Sovereign
Order of Malta.
I also propose that the Council invite His Excellency
Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for
Relations with States and International Organizations
of the Holy See, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
2/30

20/09/2023

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You were hasty, Mr. President, in saying “it is
so decided”. We have two questions.
First and foremost, we wish to ask you on what
basis you propose to give the President of Ukraine,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the floor before the members
of the Security Council speak, many of whom are also
represented at the level of Head of State or Government.
The second question I wish to pose is, on what basis
are you inviting the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
North Macedonia to today’s meeting in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe?
The President: I take note of the remarks made
by the Russian delegation. In response, I would like
to confirm that notice of the planned speaking order
was given to all Council members in advance. In my
view, it would have been preferable had this procedural
matter been resolved at a technical level prior to the
start of this open debate so that we would have been
able to proceed immediately to the substance of our
deliberations today.
I wish to recall that paragraph 33 of presidential
note S/2017/507, agreed by consensus, states:
“when non-members are invited to speak to the
Security Council, those who have a direct interest in
the outcome of the matter under consideration may
speak prior to Council members, if appropriate.”
Given the subject of today’s open debate, we believe
that inviting President Zelenskyy to speak before
Council members is amply in line with paragraph 33.
Moreover, giving the floor to President Zelenskyy
would provide an opportunity for Council members
and the other Member States participating today in
such impressive numbers to respond to his remarks.
Previously, in February of this year (see S/PV.9269),
the Russian delegation raised the same issue and was
assured by the then Council President that ample
precedents existed of non-Council Member States
taking the floor before Council members. Several cases
were cited at the time — and others could be mentioned.
I would add that, at each of the previous five Security
Council meetings at which President Zelenskyy
was invited to participate, he spoke before Council
members. I want to assure our Russian colleagues and
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

everyone here that this is not a “special operation” by
the Albanian presidency, but a continuation of a long
and well-established practice of the Council. Today’s
speaking order is therefore in full conformity with the
Council’s guidelines and practices.
As for the second question, I have some difficulty
in understanding what the problem is, because the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has an important role and is here because
its contribution to this meeting is considered of the
essence. Yes, the OSCE representative here is an
Albanian from North Macedonia. If the representative
of the Russian Federation could be more explicit about
what the problem is, I would be happy to help him.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With pleasure, Mr. President. We do not
believe the arguments that you have advanced are
compelling. A number of members of the Security
Council will be represented in the Chamber today at
the Head of State level. You tried to explain why the
Ukrainian President has been prioritized. However,
that had nothing to do with the Security Council’s
procedures. We could understand the logic when we
discussed Somalia — the President of Somalia spoke
first here (see S/PV.9356) — but he was the only
President from among those present. There are indeed
precedents related to other items on the Security
Council’s agenda. But in those cases, a specific
practice has unfolded. Such a practice is linked to the
particularities of certain regions and has nothing to do
with the situation in Ukraine.
I would like to warn you, Mr. President, that if
you bang the gavel now to formally implement your
decision, the Albanian presidency will be tainted with
an egregious precedent of violating established practice
in the Security Council for the benefit of one delegation,
which time and again continues to demonstrate, with
support from the Western members of the Council, that
rules do not apply to it and everything is permissible.
From the beginning, Western members of the Council
three times pushed through the participation of
Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Security Council meetings via
video-teleconference. That constitutes blatant disregard
for the authority of this key organ. Leaders from
other States find time in their schedule to personally
travel to New York to speak before the members of

S/PV.9421

the Council. In the course of the more than 75 years
of the existence of the Organization, speaking at the
Security Council has been seen as a privilege. The same
applies to statements at the General Assembly rostrum.
But during the Assembly’s recently held emergency
special session, the representative of Kyiv decided
to send a video postcard. At the same time, Western
delegations allege that last year Volodymyr Zelenskyy
was unable to leave the country due to extraordinary
circumstances. Nonetheless, those “circumstances” did
not prevent him from travelling to the United States to
visit Washington, D.C. Yet at that time he did not deign
to travel personally to the United Nations.
The Council President’s violation of the Council’s
working methods is fraught with risks of undermining
the authority of the Security Council, which they are
trying to transform into a one-man show. For that, the
Albanian presidency has convened an open debate in
which a large group of supporters from NATO countries
is present. It is clear to many, if not most, that today’s
meeting will be nothing more than a spectacle. I would
like to stress, for the sake of protocol and for those
who are trying to distort our position, that we do not
object to the participation of the Ukrainian President
at this meeting. But that needs to happen in line with
the rules of procedure and existing practice, according
to which countries invited under rule 37 speak after
the members of the Security Council — especially
when there are both members of the Council and other
representatives here represented at the level of Head of
State or Government.
Turning to the participation of the Foreign Minister
of North Macedonia as the current Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), our bewilderment at that has
nothing to do with his nationality, Mr. President. We
objected to his presence in his capacity. We informed
the Albanian presidency about that just yesterday. As
far as we understand it, there has been no discussion
in Vienna. According to the principles agreed by the
OSCE Permanent Council, any statements made by the
Chairperson-in-Office, the OSCE Secretary General
or official representatives authorized by them must be
in line with their mandates and must not depart from
the consensus decisions of the OSCE. If the Albanian
presidency insists on allowing Mr. Osmani to speak
during today’s meeting, we believe he can voice only
the consensus position of that organization.

23-273133/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

Separately, I would note that, due to the destructive
approach adopted by Western delegations, the OSCE
has long in no way participated in or contributed to the
process of resolving the Ukrainian crisis, but has only
exacerbated the situation. We believe that the attempts
by Western delegations to push through Mr. Osmani’s
participation, which run contrary to the established
Security Council and OSCE practices, reflect their
fervent desire to advance one-sided rules of the game,
which benefit them only, as part of the infamous rulesbased order. We urge members of the Security Council
to adopt a principled position on this issue and speak out
against such an approach. We regret that that Albanian
presidency has demonstrated blatant disregard for the
procedures and practice of the Security Council, placing
the common political and ideological interests of NATO
above the obligations of the Council presidency, which
is the guardian of the procedures and should adopt an
impartial position. Unfortunately, Albania has been
unable to manage that today.
The President: I must say that, coming from you,
this lecture about violating the rules in this building is
quite an impressive show.
As you repeated many times that the violation here
is about President Zelenskyy speaking before Council
members, there is a solution for that, if you agree: stop
the war and President Zelenskyy will not take the floor.
What makes his presence here important — and why
it is important for all of us to hear him first and then
discuss — is because of you, not us.
I take note. We will continue with our meeting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to draw your attention, Mr. President,
to the fact that you are today acting as President of the
Security Council, not speaking in your national capacity
as the representative of Albania. Your objective is to
conduct a meeting as set out in the Security Council’s
rules of procedure, instead of providing political
assessments in your capacity as the President of
the Council.
The President: I just responded to you after you
addressed me as the Albanian Prime Minister and after
you continued to say incorrect things about what the
procedure is here. If you do not want me to answer as the
Albanian Prime Minister, do not provoke me as such.
4/30

20/09/2023

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I addressed you only in your capacity as the
President of the Security Council, and never as the
Prime Minister of Albania. I stress once again that I am
in a procedural dialogue with you, and not a substantive
dialogue. Please refrain from making political
assessments at the beginning of your statements to
the Council.
The President: It was you who talked about
NATO, about Albania being in NATO and about NATO
countries coming here today, which has nothing to
do with my role as President of the Security Council.
May we now, with your permission, continue the
meeting normally?
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/653, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 September 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to Secretary-General
António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: The Charter of the United
Nations is our road map to a more peaceful world. The
tools and mechanisms founded on the principles of
the Charter are a how-to manual to resolve conflict.
Together, our collective efforts over the years have
contributed to preventing war on a global scale and
saving millions of lives — through peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy, United Nations peacekeeping
operations, disarmament and non-proliferation efforts,
humanitarian and development programmes and
activities to promote human rights.
(spoke in French)
This week, the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) Summit adopted a rescue plan for the SDGs,
which are an essential tool for preventing conflicts and
crises of all kinds. Multilateralism works. It is essential
and effective. But multilateral tools and mechanisms are
weakening. Faced with rising tensions and geopolitical
challenges, some multilateral frameworks are failing,
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

while others that are urgently needed do not yet exist.
The number of conflict-related deaths almost doubled
last year. United Nations peace operations are under
unprecedented pressure. Nuclear disarmament is at a
standstill. And there is no adequate global framework to
address the security threats posed by new technologies.
I urge States to go further and do better to renew their
commitment to the obligations of the United Nations
Charter, use all the diplomatic tools that it puts at their
disposal, give priority to the prevention of conflicts and
crises and take into account the proposals for the new
frameworks and tools presented in the New Agenda
for Peace.
(spoke in English)
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, in clear violation
of the United Nations Charter and international law,
is aggravating geopolitical tensions and divisions,
threatening regional stability, increasing the nuclear
threat and creating deep fissures in our increasingly
multipolar world. All that comes at a time when
cooperation and compromise for multilateral solutions
are needed more than ever to tackle challenges ranging
from the climate crisis to unprecedented levels of
inequality and disruptive technologies.
The United Nations organs have been clear
in condemning the war. The General Assembly
overwhelmingly adopted a resolution demanding that
Russia leave Ukraine (General Assembly resolution
ES-11/1), as well as a resolution rejecting Russia’s
efforts to annex Ukrainian territory (General Assembly
resolution ES-11/4). I have consistently and repeatedly
called for a just and sustainable peace in Ukraine,
in line with the Charter and international law — for
Ukraine, for Russia and for the world.
Russia’s invasion was followed by relentless,
systematic attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure and services, including health and
education facilities. The war has killed or injured
tens of thousands of civilians, destroyed lives and
livelihoods, traumatized a generation of children,
torn families and communities apart, devastated
the economy and turned vast areas of farmland into
deadly minefields. Attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure must stop immediately. Nearly half of
Ukraine’s population — some 18 million people — need
humanitarian assistance and protection. More than
6 million Ukrainians have fled the country.

S/PV.9421

The United Nations has worked collectively
to mitigate the impact on people, both in Ukraine
and around the world, and to support civilians. Our
humanitarian programmes have stepped up, distributing
aid to more than 8 million people this year, in partnership
with more than 450 humanitarian organizations, half
of them Ukrainian. The International Atomic Energy
Agency has established a presence at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear plant and other major Ukrainian nuclear sites
to monitor safety, security and safeguards. Together
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, we
successfully organized the evacuation of civilians from
the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol last year.
United Nations agencies have documented
evidence of shocking and widespread human rights
violations, including conflict-related sexual violence,
arbitrary detention, summary executions — mostly by
the Russian Federation — and the forcible transfer of
Ukrainian civilians, including children, to territory
under Russian control or to the Russian Federation.
That documentation is vital for accountability.
Accountability for all human rights violations is crucial,
in line with international norms and standards.
The war contributed to an unprecedented surge in
global food prices, threatening millions with hunger
and poverty. Starting in July 2022, we succeeded in
mitigating that impact through the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the Russian Federation.
During its one-year period of operation, the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, together with the memorandum of
understanding on facilitating exports of Russian food
products and fertilizers, helped to reduce global food
prices by more than 23 per cent from the record high
they had reached in March last year. The Black Sea
Grain Initiative enabled the export of nearly 33 million
metric tons of grain and foodstuffs and allowed the
World Food Programme to transport 725,000 metric tons
of wheat for humanitarian aid to countries, including
Afghanistan and Somalia. Under the memorandum of
understanding, the United Nations delivered solutions
on several of the most challenging areas of trade
facilitation for Russian food and fertilizers, with
continuous work on the remaining issues.
We deeply regret that Russia ended its participation
in the Black Sea Grain Initiative in July, and that
immediately upon leaving Russia launched a
bombardment of Ukrainian ports and grain storage
facilities on the Black Sea and the Danube River. Attacks

23-273135/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

against terminals and grain stores are unacceptable and
such assaults must end. Civilian shipping in the Black
Sea has also been threatened. Further escalation could
instantly shock the markets and destabilize the region.
Volatility and uncertainty have already returned to
international grain markets, while supplies from the
harvest in Ukraine pile up.
The bombardment is also undermining our
efforts in the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding with the Russian Federation. It has led
many of those whose goodwill is needed, notably in
the private sector, to question whether there is any real
interest in returning to the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
We remain engaged with all the parties with the aim
of ensuring safe and secure exports of grain and
fertilizer from Russia and Ukraine, and those exports
must be put on a stable footing without the repeated
threat of interruption. I am grateful to the Government
of Türkiye for its contributions and urge all Member
States to support our efforts.
The United Nations continues to work towards
a just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with the
Charter, international law and the resolutions of the
General Assembly. I urge all countries to do their part
to prevent further escalation and to lay the foundations
for sustainable peace. We are fully committed to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
This war is already causing limitless suffering. Its
continuation risks further perilous escalation. There
can be no alternative to dialogue, diplomacy and
just peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to
His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.
President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): Exactly 574
days of pain, loss and struggle have already passed
since the start of the full-scale aggression launched by
a State that for some reason is still represented here
among the permanent members of the Security Council.
Russia has killed at least tens of thousands of our
people and turned millions into refugees by destroying
their homes. A majority of the world recognizes the
truth about the war. It is a criminal and unprovoked
aggression by Russia against our nation, aimed at
seizing Ukraine’s territory and resources. But it is not
6/30

20/09/2023

only that. Through its aggression, this terrorist State
is willing to undermine all the international norms
designed to protect the world from wars. I am grateful
to all countries of the world who have recognized the
Russian aggression as a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Ukraine is exercising its right to self-defence.
Helping us to do that with weapons, imposing sanctions
and putting all possible pressure on the aggressor,
as well as voting in favour of the relevant draft
resolutions, means helping to defend the Charter. The
General Assembly has adopted resolutions that clearly
acknowledge the fact that Russia is the only progenitor
of the war, and yet nothing has changed for Russia at the
United Nations. However, it is situations like this one
that have changed everything for the United Nations
itself. We should recognize that our Organization is at
an impasse where the issue of aggression is concerned.
Humankind can no longer hope for United Nations
assistance in defending the borders of sovereign
nations. World leaders are seeking new platforms and
alliances that may be able to reduce the disastrous scale
of these problems, which are being addressed within
these walls with rhetoric rather than real solutions, and
with efforts to compromise with killers rather than save
lives. We must be uncompromising in defending life if
we are to succeed in saving lives.
However, I would not be here today if Ukraine had
no proposals for just such specific solutions. In my
address to the General Assembly yesterday (see A/78/
PV.4), I said that the Ukrainian peace formula had
become the basis for modernizing the world’s existing
security architecture and for restoring the real power
of the Charter and the rules-based international order.
I would now like to present some of the specific details
from the peace formula, in particular point 5, which
concerns the implementation of the United Nations
Charter and the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial
integrity and the world order.
The whole world can see what has rendered the
United Nations impotent. Regrettably, the seat on the
Security Council that Russia occupied following the
collapse of the Soviet Union, using behind-the-scenes
manipulation, is now occupied by liars whose job
is to whitewash Russia’s aggression and genocide,
and any action at the United Nations that could have
stopped it, either from the Security Council or the
General Assembly, has been rendered null and void
by the privilege accorded the aggressor in that seat.
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The power of veto in the hands of the aggressor has
forced the United Nations into this impasse. Today any
nation, whatever it is — whether it is one of hundreds
of millions or a small nation; whether it is a nation that
bravely defends its independence or one whose long
history of independence can help others; whether it
is a State in need of help or a State that can provide
genuine support; whether it is a State that relies on its
army or one that considers the Charter of the United
Nations, not the army, to be its first and last line of
defence — regardless, the current United Nations
system still leaves every single one of those countries
with less influence than the veto power possessed by
a few and misused by one, Russia. And that is to the
detriment of every other member of the United Nations.
We hear the word “inequality” too often in the
General Assembly these days, with all kinds of
nations, large and small, talking of inequality. And it
is precisely inequality that renders the United Nations
ineffective. It is regrettable that the Security Council
is nothing but the world’s most visible platform, and
I believe and know that the United Nations is capable
of more. I am confident that the Charter can actually
work in favour of peace and security globally. However,
for that to happen, the years of discussions of projects
for United Nations reform must be translated into a
viable reform process. The priority should not merely
be representation on the Council. The use of the power
of veto is an issue that demands reform, and it could
be a key reform. That is something that can restore the
power of the United Nations Charter.
Five hundred and seventy-four days of full-fledged
Russian aggression means 574 reasons for changes in
this Chamber. And the number of votes in favour of
those changes actually amount to billions. An absolute
majority of people in the world want to live in a world
free of aggression, and the only ones opposed to that
are a few obsessed individuals in Moscow. The veto
should not serve those who are obsessed with hatred
and war.
We are seeing increasing support at the United
Nations for the idea that the power of veto should be
voluntarily suspended in cases of mass atrocities. But
we can also see that Russia will not voluntarily give
up that stolen privilege, and that the General Assembly
should therefore be given real power to overturn the
veto. That is the first necessary step. If it is impossible
to stop the war because all efforts to do so are blocked by
the aggressor or by those who condone the aggressor’s

S/PV.9421

behaviour, we must bring that issue to the attention
of the General Assembly. In the event of two thirds
of votes reflecting the will of nations of Asia, Africa,
Europe, both Americas and the Pacific region — in
other words, a global qualified majority — the veto can
be effectively overcome, and those General Assembly
resolutions made legally binding on all Member States.
The second step is that the Security Council must
be fully accountable to the nations of the world. I
welcome the proposals of various leaders to expand
the representation of nations on the Council. The
composition of the permanent members of the Security
Council should reflect current realities and justice.
Ukraine believes it is unfair that there are billions who do
not have permanent representation on the Council. The
African Union should have permanent representation.
Asia deserves broader permanent representation. It
cannot be considered normal when nations such as
Japan and India or those of the Islamic world are not
permanent members of the Security Council.
If we take into account the changes that have
taken place in Europe, notably the fact that Germany
has become one of the key global guarantors of peace
and security — that is a fact — then it is also a fact
that Germany deserves a place among the permanent
members of the Security Council. Latin America
must have permanent representation on the Council,
as should the Pacific States. However, we should not
focus all our attention only on those top seats. We need
to expand participation in and access to the activities
of the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies for
all members of the General Assembly that are not
acknowledged aggressors. At the same time, any
participation in Security Council membership should
be suspended when a member resorts to aggression
against another nation in violation of the Charter.
The third step is the creation of a system for
preventing aggression through early response to actions
that violate States’ territorial integrity and sovereignty.
It is time. The nations of the world should agree on
a mechanism that responds to aggression in order to
protect others. It should be one that all nations would
want to ensure their own security. The Russian invasion
of Ukraine has shown what such a mechanism could
entail — among others, powerful sanctions against the
aggressor, not just at a stage when an incident such as
Bucha has already happened but at the stage when the
build-up of an invading army is still going on. Anyone

23-273137/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/09/2023

wanting to start a war should see exactly what they
stand to lose before making such a fatal mistake.

the protection of human rights and for the prevention of
aggression and genocidal policies.

The issue of the application of preventive sanctions
should be automatically submitted for consideration by
the Security Council when any member of the General
Assembly reports a threat of aggression. Ukrainian
soldiers now are doing with their blood what the Security
Council should be doing through voting — stopping the
Russian aggression and upholding the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Naturally, the epicentre of such efforts should be
in this very Chamber of the Security Council and, to
an even greater extent, the General Assembly Hall.
If the reform of the United Nations and its organs is
necessary to that end, then we should not be afraid of
such reforms. We are ready to work together with States
Members of the United Nations participating in the
peace formula to work on relevant draft resolutions and
amendments to the United Nations Charter.

As for territorial integrity, that element of both the
Charter of the United Nations and our peace formula is
inextricably linked to the issue of clearing our State’s
sovereign territory from the occupiers. Occupation is
an inexhaustible source of dynamite lurking beneath
the international rules-based order. Therefore, I will
suggest concrete steps to be taken for the strengthening
of the security architecture, using Ukraine as an
example. The following steps are highly specific, just
like us Ukrainians.
First, there must be a complete withdrawal of all
Russian troops and military formations, including its
Black Sea Fleet or whatever leaky remnants of it are left,
as well as the withdrawal of all Russian mercenaries
and paramilitary formations from the entire sovereign
territory of Ukraine within our internationally
recognized borders as of 1991.
Secondly, Ukraine’s effective control over the
entirety of its State borders and exclusive economic
zone, including in the Black and Azov Seas, as well as
the Kerch Strait, must be fully restored.
In fact, only the implementation of those two points
will result in an honest, reliable and complete cessation
of hostilities.
Reforms of our international institutions have
usually been made in the wake of great tragedies and
major wars. We should not wait for the aggression to
end — we need to act now. Our aspirations for peace
should drive such reforms. When I was preparing the
Ukrainian peace formula, I based its points exclusively
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
That is precisely what will enable the Ukrainian peace
formula to become global. The nations that engage
with the formula realize that they are working for the
rules-based international order, for the protection of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States, for
8/30

I would like to make it clear to everyone in the
world what exactly Ukraine is proposing when it
appeals to the nations of the world and calls on them to
join in implementing the peace formula. Every country
can demonstrate its leadership within the framework
of one or several, or perhaps even all, points of the
peace formula.
We will establish groups based on the various
points of the peace formula in which national security
advisers to Heads of State and Government and
diplomatic representatives can work jointly. Those
groups will be tasked with developing a list of decisions
and legislative proposals to be implemented in order to
ensure the corresponding point of the peace formula
is fulfilled. We are ready to hold a founding summit
for leaders. We will then convene 10 conferences at
the advisory, diplomatic and parliamentary levels and
in accordance with the 10 points of the peace formula.
Subsequently, the drafts prepared will be submitted
for consideration by Heads of State and Government at
the relevant summits. Therefore, all peace-respecting
nations of the world will be able to actively participate
in the restoration of peace.
Cooperation is always the key word for Ukraine
in international relations. It is also the key word for
peace. Therefore, let us allow peace to prevail. May our
institutions and our cooperation be ever stronger.
I thank all those present for their attention and thank
the President for the invitation and the opportunity to
address the Council.
Glory to Ukraine.
The President: I thank President Zelenskyy for
his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Prime Minister of Albania.
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

I thank all participants for being here today. The
presence of such a considerable number of dignitaries
speaks to the very high importance of the issue at hand. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks, which
resonate with and reflect the values and principles of
our Organization. I am grateful to President Zelenskyy
for his presence here at such a tragic moment in his
country’s history. His strong words translate the pain of
his compatriots and convey very clearly, together with
his firm determination, the grit of his people and the
unwavering hope of his nation.
While the world today more than ever needs
an acute sense of responsibility from all of us to
confront the multiple challenges and threats facing
our planet — conflicts; the unconstitutional seizing
of power; and climate change, with devastating floods
and unforgiving droughts, including unpredictable
and severe wildfires — we are instead witnessing
increasingly disruptive attitudes, reckless acts and
growing conflictuality within and among States.
In many parts of the world, examples of force have
proliferated, while the force of example has become
a rarity.
Until not long ago, who could have imagined that, in
the third decade of the twenty-first century, a disastrous
war started by a permanent member of the Council
would put Europe at risk by brutally undermining all
of the principles that gave birth to the United Nations?
Until only a few years ago, who could have imagined
that an unjustified, unjust and unprovoked act of
military aggression by a big country against a new
democracy would not be immediately, promptly and
universally condemned by all nations that gather here
and share the same goals and principles?
How does one understand the “yes, buts”, or the calls
on both sides with arguments in order to avoid calling
a spade a spade, refusing to call brutal aggression by
its only and real name: a humanmade tragedy that is
inflicting untold suffering on the Ukrainian people, but
that is also reverberating across all regions of the world,
hurting growth, raising prices and threatening with
hunger and starvation hundreds of millions of people?
An act of aggression in the heart of Europe
cannot be Europe’s problem alone, as some think, as
some say or as some whisper. Cynics may think that
Ukraine is just a problem dropped into the lap of the
democratic West to deal with. They may even mumble
that what goes around comes around, implying that

S/PV.9421

it is natural payback for what might have happened
before, elsewhere, in other times. Is it? Really? I invite
everyone to think twice.
This war of aggression must be everyone’s business.
Let me remind us of that by paraphrasing Martin
Niemöller’s tragic account:
“First, they came for Georgia — I did not speak
out. Then they came for Crimea — it was not my
country, so I did not speak out. Then they came for
the whole of Ukraine, but I was not Ukrainian, and
I did not speak out. Then they came for me, but
there was no one left to help or defend me.”
As we speak, more than 26,000 civilians have
passed away. Tomorrow the number will be higher,
and it will increase every day for as long as this war
continues. Given the inexcusable nuclear sabre-rattling
that keeps coming time and again from different layers
of the Kremlin, one is right to fear that, one day — God
forbid — this madness could turn into something far
worse — and let us not forget, as unimaginable today
as today’s war was yesterday.
We have a duty to help those in need, and in that
respect to help Ukraine and Ukrainians. We may of
course differ on how to support Ukraine in its fight for
freedom and dignity. We may have different views on
how to end the war. Let us discuss them. But it would
be an insult to the intelligence of the Organization if we
were to fail to unanimously recognize and say loudly
who is the aggressor and who is the aggressed. It is
the same sharp difference between war and peace, as
Tolstoy reminds us. I ask members to go back and read
him. If we fail to admit that crystal clear truth, we are
not only letting down Ukraine and its people but we
are failing our core responsibility, compromising the
future and betraying all our children from Brazil to
Spain, from the Arctic to the South Pole.
The struggle of Ukraine is also the struggle of
everyone who aspires to live in a world in which nations
are free and equal, territorial integrity is indisputable
and the right to live in peace is unquestionable. The
contrary is not only short-sighted but utterly dangerous
for everyone under this roof. That is why everyone
has to do their part. Albania is a small country. Our
continued support for Ukraine may not change the
dynamics on the battleground, but it contributes to not
rewarding aggression, not accepting annexation and
not letting the obvious become dubious. I once again
repeat that we may differ on how to deal with this and

23-273139/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

we may have different views on how to move towards
peace, but how can we possibly have different views on
who is the aggressor and who is the aggressed?
(spoke in French)
The primary duty of the Security Council is to act
decisively on behalf of and in the service of the entire
world. We cannot blame the increasing number of people
who wonder: What is the Security Council doing? The
Council has sadly been held hostage by the abusive
exercise of the right to the veto. It has paralysed the
Council, but it has nonetheless not reduced it to silence,
as this meeting attests. We cannot allow the power of the
rules-based order and the values that bring us together
to be replaced by the rule of force and opposing values.
We refuse to be complicit in dangerously overturning
the world order, the consequences of which would be
unthinkable, if not tragic, for all.
(spoke in English)
Let me recall the experience of the Western
Balkans. We have seen where the path of brutality
can lead and its tremendous cost for all, including the
perpetrators. History has confirmed that those who
have seen war as a shortcut to achieve their goals have
ended up regretting it forever. Russia has tried many
times to use — or better, misuse — the changed reality
in the Western Balkans, in particular the birth of the
Republic of Kosova, to justify its neo-imperial dreams
and the subsequent nightmare that it has exported to
Ukraine. No matter how hard one may try, Kosova,
whose independence has been confirmed by the
International Court of Justice under Chapter XIV of
the Charter, cannot be allowed to serve as a pretext
for a territory grab or an illegal annexation. If today
a lasting peace in our region is within reach, that has
to do first and foremost with the lesson learned that
the most efficient way to overcome the past and shape
a common future is through cooperation, not through
division — that is, by promoting the free movement of
people, goods, services and capital, and not by raising
artificial barriers, and by building bridges for our kids
to enjoy freedom and prosperity, regardless of their
language, race or nationality. It is not by erecting walls
for our ghosts of the past to seek and hide in endless
blame games.
I will conclude with the following. The Preamble
to the United Nations Charter calls on us to practice
tolerance and live together in peace with one another, as
good neighbours. Important decisions are never a matter
10/30

20/09/2023

of chance; they are always a matter of choice. Albania
has made its choice to stand for peace, development
and progress, to stand with the aggressed, not with the
aggressors, and to stand with and for Ukraine.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Guillermo Lasso
Mendoza, Constitutional President of the Republic
of Ecuador.
President Lasso Mendoza (spoke in Spanish):
Let me first commend Albania for its presidency of
the Security Council for September. I also thank you,
Sir, for convening this critical debate, as it has been
almost 19 months since the beginning of the military
aggression against Ukraine. I also underscore the
briefing by Secretary-General António Guterres, and I
support his continued call on the Russian Federation to
give peace a chance.
This war cannot be allowed to continue another
day. The Russian Federation must immediately cease its
military operations in accordance with the 16 December
2022 order of the International Court of Justice, the
highest court of this Organization. In addition to
destroying Ukraine and costing the lives of thousands
of people, the protracted war, which was initially denied
as such and was subsequently claimed to be merely a
special military operation, is undermining the very
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular the principle of territorial
integrity. When the Organization was founded, “[w]e
the peoples of the United Nations” resolved “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war ... and
for these ends, to practice tolerance and live together
in peace with one another as good neighbours”. That is
the foundation on which the Charter rests — and there
is only one Charter.
Ecuador has said it before and we say it again today:
There is not one Charter for the South and another one
for the North, or one for the West and another one for
the East. The content of the Charter is the same in all
languages. It is one and indivisible. There is not one
version in Russian and another one in Spanish. In no
case is the use of force authorized against the territorial
integrity or political independence of a State, or in any
way that runs counter to the purposes of the United
Nations. How can we uphold the principles of the
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Charter for the sake of effective multilateralism, while
at the same time invading a neighbouring country, or
not condemn such an invasion and show indifference
or complicity? On the contrary, in order to defend the
territorial integrity of States, we must respect and
implement the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and maintain peace and security, not attack
other countries and abstain in voting on disputes in
which we are involved.
There are those who attribute the peace and
security crisis to the Charter’s alleged inadequacies.
However, no reform or new institutional framework
will be sufficient to maintain peace and security if
States are not determined to respect and implement
those higher principles. What poison could be more
lethal to multilateralism than the military invasion
and occupation of a neighbouring country? This war,
which has affected the entire dynamics of the Council’s
work, continues to put our confidence in the United
Nations system to the test. Nevertheless, aside from
the difficulties that the Council is facing in achieving
a concrete response, I must highlight the enormous
contribution that the United Nations has made for
the benefit of thousands of people and humanitarian
partners on the ground, providing emergency assistance,
particularly to women and children. I acknowledge the
Secretary-General’s humanitarian efforts, including
through what was the Black Sea Grain Initiative, and
we call for it to be resumed.
There are corrosive narratives that seek to justify
this war, but no justification has any legal standing. We
have been told, for example, that the invasion against
Ukraine is in response to an alleged plot by Western
countries to weaken Russia. We have been told that
Russia is acting in self-defence against anti-Russian
policies towards certain inhabitants or aimed at Russian
culture. However, what greater act of xenophobia or
contempt for the other can there be than war against
that other? Nor is it true that the so-called global South
had taken a different stance. One need only look at
the voting pattern in the General Assembly during
its adoption of resolutions on the territorial integrity
of Ukraine by an overwhelming majority. Needless to
say, no veto can contain the Assembly’s strength when
the time comes to defend the territorial integrity of its
members. Moreover, that majority is not a majority
merely of alignment, as certain parties claim.
Ecuador rejects any invasion, regardless of the
country that commits it, and all the more so if that

S/PV.9421

country occupies a permanent seat in this Chamber. As
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali put it, only
one power is left that can impose order on chaos, and that
is the power of principles that transcend the changing
perceptions of expediency. Among the hundreds of
thousands of people who fled the war there were nearly
1,000 Ecuadorians, many of whom we had to evacuate
as part of emergency operations with a support team
in Ukraine and its neighbours. They were among the
first to feel the impact of the severe humanitarian
consequences of the invasion, which continue to
deteriorate a year and a half later as millions are forced
from their homes, with women, girls and boys being the
worst affected.
Moreover, this war continues to have global
consequences. It has exacerbated the nuclear threat,
aggravated global food insecurity and especially
affected the economies of developing countries. For all
these reasons, I call on Council members to individually
and collectively redouble our support to advance the
efforts and good offices of the Secretary-General at
the humanitarian and political levels, so that progress
can be made without further delay towards a just peace
based on territorial integrity and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I thank President Lasso Mendoza
for his statement.
I now call on His Excellency Nana Addo Dankwa
Akufo-Addo, President of Ghana.
President Akufo-Addo: I thank you, Mr. President,
for making me a part of this important meeting on how
we can better uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, with the unfortunate
tragic events in Ukraine serving as a backdrop. I am
grateful to Secretary-General António Guterres for
making a compelling case for the shared benefits
we derive as Member States when we choose to be
peace-loving, as the Charter requires.
None of us here in this Chamber can claim to be
unaware that our world is in a troubled place. The sharp
differences in geopolitical competition among major
Powers, and the intense convergence of the crises in the
world, particularly crises of conflict, climate change,
inequality, unconstitutional changes of Government
and unsustainable development, have undermined
global trust and solidarity and unravelled the common
logic that has prevailed since 1945, which is that it is
better to suffer the inadequacies of the multilateral

23-2731311/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

system for the greater good than to pursue the chaos of
the unknown for national advantage.
In that context, and mindful of the reality that
neither geographic boundaries nor political ideologies
have been able to isolate any State from the burden of
the prevailing crises, Ghana continues to hope in earnest
for an end to the war on Ukraine and for the construction
of a future marked by peaceful coexistence, mutual
cooperation and brotherly relations between the two
neighbouring countries. The fact is that the Russian
Federation’s aggression against Ukraine is plainly
wrong, and we have said so on many platforms. The war
has taken an increasingly devastating toll on the people
of Ukraine and the rest of the world, particularly those
of us in Africa, and has challenged our shared values of
international peace and security.
The turnings of the war have constrained collective
efforts to reinvigorate multilateralism and impeded
common approaches to effectively confronting a number
of complex challenges of our time. For us in Ghana,
however, the unfolding situation is not a lost cause.
While we are rightly distressed by what is happening
around us, we believe that together we can still mitigate
the challenges of the unknown if we are prepared to
cooperate in a peaceful, carefully managed process of
reform of global institutions that would redistribute
responsibilities and authority fairly to reflect the
present realities of our world. We also believe that
history has a lesson to teach, and the painful lessons of
the two World Wars inspired the solemn commitments
made by the founders of the United Nations to refrain
from the use of force in relations among States. That
common understanding — to replace force and might
with the rule of law, cooperation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes — underpins the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
remains valid, if we are to avoid a Hobbesian state of
affairs in inter-State relations.
We must thus work together strongly to reverse the
growing fragmentation of our world and the intervention
of nationalist ideologies and actions among commonly
accepted rules. Violations of sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and attempts to normalize such
violations or selectively apply the rules of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations would only
undermine the promise of the past and the hope for
future generations.
12/30

20/09/2023

It is in that regard that Ghana continues to be a
firm advocate for dialogue and diplomacy in resolving
the Russian war against Ukraine. We do not do so
because of want of a resolution of the dispute at any
cost. United in our belief with many others, we believe
the only pathway for a comprehensive, peaceful and
sustainable resolution of the dispute is one that must be
just and based on the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
In taking a principled position on the conflict
in Ukraine, Ghana has been concerned about the
ramifications of the war on the global community and
multilateralism. We therefore welcome the opportunity
that the New Agenda for Peace provides, which is to
reset our common understanding of how, among other
factors, the way we relate with each other as States can
reinforce the peremptory norms of international law
that have provided us stability for almost eight decades
and to find new ways of addressing old challenges
that continue to undermine States and the sovereignty
of nations.
In support of the choices we need to make for a
renewed and inclusive and multilateralism, I would like
to share three key messages.
First, many of the organs and institutions
established by the Charter of the United Nations, such
as the Security Council, continue to be relevant, but
the Council’s composition and working methods need
renewal through the completion of the long-outstanding
reform. In support of the common African position on
Security Council reforms, contained in the Ezulwini
Consensus, Ghana urges the transformation of a
dialogue among Member States to envisage an end-point
that delivers a Security Council that is representative
and that also addresses the historical injustice done to
the continent of Africa.
To overcome knotty discussions around the veto,
we encourage the ongoing efforts to limit its use and
the subsequent placement of a moratorium on its
use that will lead progressively to its removal over a
reasonable period of time. We cannot continue to have
a Security Council that is structurally limited from
being effective and yet demands universal acceptance
for its decisions. As with many other things in life, with
changes, we need to adapt, and with authority, comes a
responsibility that must be kept.
Secondly, the peace of the world is indivisible and
integrated with all other global arrangements beyond
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

our collective security. Our efforts of preventive
diplomacy must be comprehensive and broad-based. We
need to be aware that, for instance, inimical economic
and financial policies have an enduring impact on peace
and that global policies on the structure and function of
international institutions cannot remove the centrality
of peace from their raison d’être. We must strengthen
in a comprehensive and integrated manner our efforts
to prevent the outbreak of violence and the resurgence
of new conflicts.
Thirdly and finally, multilateralism at the global
level must be accompanied by effective regional
partnerships — partnerships that help to anticipate
better threats to our common humanity, which prioritize
specific means for resolving differences and which cut
across regions to enhance their effectiveness when
required. When we fail to leverage fully the potential
of regional bodies, we can only have ourselves to blame
when multilateral efforts at the global level are unable
to deliver.
In conclusion, I call again for peace in Ukraine,
and emphasize, as my delegation has often done in the
Council, that there is no alternative to winning the
peace in Ukraine. We hope the Council can help the
United Nations to assume an enhanced role in support
of peace efforts around the world, but in particular in
Ukraine, for the benefit of all peoples.
The President: I thank President Akufo-Addo for
his statement.
I now call on His Excellency Mr. Alain Berset,
President of the Swiss Federation.
President Berset (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I would also
like to take the opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. In addition to his statement,
I would like to thank him for his steadfast commitment
to the advancement of peace and dialogue, especially
when it is most difficult.
First of all, I will address the facts, and they are
not positive. The times we are living in are marked by
the questioning of multilateralism, the multiplication of
conflicts and the deepening of inequalities. There is a
question as to what is the shared responsibility of those
of us who have convened at this meeting. At the very
minimum, we must recall the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations — I
have a copy with me, of course — and ensure that we

S/PV.9421

fulfil the mandate entrusted to us. That essential text
expresses the common will of all peoples to live in
peace. It is a guarantor of universal values and the main
principles of multilateral order — from the sovereign
equality of States to the prohibition of the use of force,
from the defence of human rights to the economic and
social progress of peoples.
In war, the suffering of civilians is the common
denominator. It is always civilians suffering. However,
international humanitarian law imposes obligations on
us and on all parties to conflict.
As Council members know, Switzerland, as the
depositary State of the Geneva Conventions and
faithful to its long-standing humanitarian tradition, is
committed to defending and upholding international
humanitarian law. And as an elected member of the
Council, we are committed to fulfilling the clear and
unique mandate conferred by the Charter of the United
Nations on us — all of us — namely, the maintenance
of international peace and security.
With Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine,
the Charter of the United Nations is being violated on
a massive scale. Yet, in meeting after meeting, Russia,
a permanent member of the Council, is denying its
responsibility for the thousands of dead and wounded in
Ukraine, its responsibility for the millions of displaced
persons and, finally, its responsibility for all those
plunged into deep insecurity, wherever they are in the
world, including Russia.
The consequences of the war are global. Global
food security has been undermined. The energy sector
has been disrupted. Nuclear risks are increasing.
Inequalities are growing.
Switzerland demands that the Russian Federation
respect the Charter of the United Nations and its
principles. Switzerland once again calls on the Russian
Federation to cease hostilities, to withdraw its troops
from Ukrainian territory and to respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
While the Security Council’s mandate is clear, it
is not always as effective as it should be. While the
objective is to save lives, guarantee global security
and reinforce stability, our discussions on certain
issues get bogged down in endless cycles that fail to
produce results. The Council must not squander the
most precious asset at its disposal — the trust of those

23-2731313/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

who rely on its work to guarantee them a life of dignity
and peace.
We have the means to fulfil our mandate, as
illustrated by the 26 resolutions we have adopted since
January. Those resolutions seek to promote peace and
security in Colombia, Afghanistan, Iraq and South
Sudan. These examples remind us that the Security
Council — even if it is more difficult than before — has
retained and must retain its capacity for action. Of
course, the Council must urgently be reformed. For
many years, Switzerland has been advocating for
greater representation on the Council, starting with
African countries, and for better working methods.
However, we all know that no reform can replace the
will of States to respect the Charter. In his New Agenda
for Peace, the Secretary-General outlines the steps to
be taken now to strengthen our action and to bolster
multilateral action — namely, closing ranks behind the
principles of universality, solidarity and trust.
Switzerland is assuming this duty of solidarity.
In Ukraine, we are committed to alleviating the
suffering of the civilian population, rendering justice
to the victims and promoting a political solution to
the conflict in due time. We have opened our doors to
people fleeing the war, are providing humanitarian aid
and are working with the Ukrainian Government on the
process of reconstruction.
The challenges that Ukraine is facing are immense.
To give just one example, an area four times the size
of Switzerland is contaminated with mines in Ukraine.
Switzerland is not a very large country, but it is still
a vast area in Ukraine. Here, too, we are supporting
humanitarian demining with our know-how and the
supply of equipment. And we plan to further step up
those commitments. It is in that spirit of solidarity that
we are calling for the Black Sea Grain Initiative to be
relaunched. Switzerland expresses its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his tireless efforts in that regard.
Multilateralism is the only option to achieve peace,
to move away from individualistic thinking, in which
each side seeks only to defend its own interests and
maximize its own influence, to relaunch the search for
shared, sustainable solutions that guarantee a dignified
life for all.
Against that backdrop, Switzerland welcomes
the diplomatic initiatives towards a lasting peace
in Ukraine — a peace rooted in the principles of the
United Nations Charter, cornerstone of the peaceful
14/30

20/09/2023

coexistence of all States. Never have isolationism,
threats and violence provided the answers to the
dysfunctions and imbalances of the world in which
we live.
The Council can successfully fulfil its mandate
and advance the common desire of all people to live
in peace and security only if it acts in a spirit of trust
and collaboration. That spirit must guide the actions
of everyone around this table. Today we have the
opportunity to change things, but we must truly want it,
for lasting peace is worth more than any fleeting gain.
The President: I thank President Berset for
his statement.
I now call on Prime Minister of Japan.
Mr. Kishida (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to commend the leadership of Albanian
Prime Minister Rama for convening this high-level
Security Council meeting on multilateralism and the
situation in Ukraine. I also welcome the participation
of President Zelenskyy of Ukraine.
Today the international order based on the rule of
law is facing an unprecedented crisis and challenge. It is
the Charter of the United Nations that is the foundation
of the international order. The Charter stipulates that
the Security Council has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are gathered here today because of the infringement of
the rule of law by one of the permanent members of this
very Council.
I visited Kyiv and Bucha in March and went to the
sites of the tragedies. I will never forget the heartbreaking
feelings I felt then. I renew my determination that Japan
stand with Ukraine. We condemn in the strongest terms
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which is a clear
violation of international law, including the United
Nations Charter.
That aggression must be stopped now, and the troops
must be withdrawn immediately and unconditionally.
Any attempt to unilaterally change the peacefully
established status of territories by force or coercion must
not be tolerated anywhere in the world. Irresponsible
nuclear rhetoric, the deployment of nuclear weapons
in Belarus and the occupation and militarization of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant pose a threat to
world peace and stability. Russia’s nuclear threats, let
alone its use of nuclear weapons, are unacceptable. The
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community cannot accept any abuse of
the veto power to obstruct the decisions of the Security
Council and undermine its credibility.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has exacerbated
concerns about a rule of lawlessness around the world.
We must not allow the creation of a second or third
Ukraine. It is essential to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine conforming to the
principles of the United Nations Charter in order to
protect an international order based on the rule of law.
Japan supports President Zelenskyy’s sincere
efforts to uphold the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter in his Peace Formula. In Hiroshima in
May, together with leaders of a wide range of countries,
including Ukraine, I affirmed the importance of
the principles of the Charter, including respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. Following those discussions,
two meetings of national security advisers on Ukraine
were held. Japan welcomes the participation of many
countries, including the so-called Global South, and
will continue to make a positive contribution.
We must not forget that the aggression against
Ukraine has caused serious problems such as refugees,
food and energy insecurity and threats to nuclear safety
and has led to suffering for many people around the
world. Japan is committed to working together with
other nations to promote efforts to support the afflicted
people. Japan strives to promote human-centred
international cooperation to overcome differences in
regimes and values in order to protect human dignity.
Never has effective multilateralism, the theme of
today’s debate, been more needed. We must overcome
numerous calamities, including the aggression against
Ukraine, and realize multilateralism rooted in a spirit of
solidarity. Bearing that in mind, I myself have engaged
in a series of discussions with leaders of various
countries. Japan also organized an open debate on the
rule of law and peacebuilding during our presidency of
the Security Council (see S/PV.9241) in order to listen
to the diverse voices of the international community.
Japan will further strengthen its efforts to resolve issues
concerning international peace and security, including
through preventive diplomacy, while upholding the rule
of law under multilateralism.
Now is the time to return to the unshakable
principles that we, the Member States, have built up
since 1945, including the United Nations Charter, and

S/PV.9421

to work towards a world of cooperation — not one of
division and confrontation. To that end, strengthening
the functions of our Organization is an urgent task. The
Council must be enlarged, in terms of both its permanent
and non-permanent seats, in order to better reflect the
realities of today’s world, including Africa. We must
now take concrete action in that regard, looking ahead to
the Summit of the Future and the eightieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations. It is time to
move forward in making the United Nations a platform
that listens to people facing difficulties and works with
them to confront challenges together, aiming for a
world that respects human dignity.
Mr. President: I now call on the Prime Minister of
the Republic of Malta.
Mr. Abela (Malta): I would like to begin by thanking
the Albanian presidency for organizing today’s highlevel open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
for sharing his thoughts with us earlier today.
Some 12 years ago, soon after the outbreak of the
Arab Spring, Malta launched its bid to serve on the
Security Council. That was a time, I remember, of
turmoil and instability in our immediate neighbourhood,
but also a time of hope and aspirations. The decision to
embark on that journey stemmed from our commitment
to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, which are timeless, universal and an integral
part of our foreign policy. Our unwavering belief is that
multilateralism — the major theme we are discussing
today — holds the answer to contemporary challenges,
and that all countries should engage proactively to that
end, which served as our point of departure back then.
Today, as an elected member of the Council, those
convictions continue to serve as our guiding light.
More than ever, the world needs an effective
multilateral system with the United Nations at its
core. We must redouble our efforts to uphold — and
defend — the fundamental principles that unite us. We
must promote our common values, at a time when they
are being aggressively undermined and threatened.
We must protect them and adequately respond to any
contempt for them. At the same time, we must not lose
sight of the fact that we are living in a world in which
conflicts are unfortunately on the rise. The nuclear
threat still looms. The climate crisis is unfortunately
spiralling out of control. Democracy and human
rights are under systematic attack. Global inequalities
are deepening. Disinformation and misinformation

23-2731315/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

campaigns are feeding and amplifying tensions. No
country can tackle those complex and existential
challenges by itself. They require our full and collective
attention. Effective multilateralism is the only avenue
for addressing them in a decisive and holistic manner.
If we are to reach those ambitious goals, we cannot
resign ourselves to living in a world in which might
is right. Last year, the Russian Federation began its
aggression against Ukraine, violating its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Those acts constitute a
blatant violation of the United Nations Charter and
international law. They were overwhelmingly deplored
and rejected by the General Assembly, which called for
Russia’s immediate withdrawal of its military forces
and a cessation of hostilities. This war profoundly
undermines the multilateral system. It weakens and
destabilizes this very Council. The immediate and
long-term consequences of such actions by a permanent
member cannot be emphasized enough. On the
occasion of this debate, I reiterate Malta’s full support
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
I equally underline Ukraine’s inherent right to selfdefence, as enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter.
The Ukrainian people have paid the heaviest
price as a result of this unjustified and unprovoked
war of aggression. It has led to another human-made
catastrophe, as the world was still struggling to find
the path to normality following a crippling pandemic.
All wars are devastating, and this one is of course no
exception. The lives lost are gone forever and will never
be recovered. The scars of those wounded, injured and
traumatized by conflict never fully heal. Once the
fighting is over, the road to recovery will still be a long
and arduous one. Through its actions, Russia not only
brought war back to Europe’s shores but also generated
a global food crisis that has seriously affected most
developing countries around the world. And while the
Black Sea Grain Initiative allowed almost 33 million
tons of grain to be shipped, Russia’s unilateral decision
to pull out of the deal has caused grain prices to
unfortunately soar upwards. I once again state Malta’s
uncompromising position that using hunger and food
supplies as weapons of war is completely unacceptable.
In conclusion, I reiterate and emphasize once again
that there can be no peace in our future if the strong
can trample on the weak. There can be no peace if
international law can be brushed aside when geopolitical
interests so demand it. There can be no peace if the
16/30

20/09/2023

rights of States and individuals can be suspended or
revoked at any time. Malta’s commitment to peace,
dialogue and multilateralism remains as strong as ever.
We remain firm in our resolve to stay at the forefront
of the defence of the United Nations Charter. No matter
how difficult or disheartening the circumstances may
seem, we must never give up on peace. We must never
give up on dialogue. We simply cannot afford to do so.
In this time of upheaval, our collective response
is to redouble our efforts over and over again and
continue to invest in our multilateral system. In doing
so, we must also reform the Council to make sure that
it is truly fit for purpose in today’s world. That means
a Council that it is more transparent, more effective,
more representative, more accountable and more
democratic. Meanwhile, we remain convinced that
the only step towards a lasting peace in Ukraine is
for Russia to immediately cease all hostilities. It must
unconditionally withdraw all its forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Prime Minister of the Republic of Gabon.
Mr. Ndong Sima (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
informative briefing on the terrible state of affairs of
the war in Ukraine, 19 months after its outbreak.
From the outset of the hostilities in Ukraine, my
country has expressed its opposition to the war and
condemned the violation of Ukraine’s territorial
integrity. We have unequivocally reaffirmed that the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations are
the glue that binds us together. Above all, Gabon has
continued to call for an immediate ceasefire and for
good-faith negotiations between the parties to silence
the weapons.
Five hundred and seventy-four days after the start
of this deadly war, the shock wave has continued to
spread beyond the borders of Ukraine. Millions of
people have been forcibly displaced within Ukraine
and millions more are now refugees beyond its national
borders. Thousands of deaths have been recorded, while
indiscriminate shelling continues to target essential
infrastructure, sparing neither nuclear power plants,
bridges, hydroelectric dams, schools or hospitals. And
the nuclear threat itself has continued to expand.
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The international system, especially the agricultural
sector, as well as many value chains, continues to suffer
in the fallout from the conflict, which contributes to
a rising global humanitarian toll by causing not just
hunger, precarity, despair and fear but invisible wounds
as well, such as hatred and the rejection of others. It is
not yet clear how much the trauma suffered by children,
women and men exposed to the horrors of war will
be reflected in the final tally of the conflict. In that
regard, it is worth asking how far the horror must go
before de-escalation is finally considered. What level
of terror must be reached before the warring parties
agree to talk?
Since the hostilities began, every rostrum at the
United Nations has been a stage for invective and
antagonism, providing neither relief nor remedy
for those fallen in the trenches or crushed under the
debris of the battlefield and in the cities and villages of
Ukraine. An alternative to war is possible. It must be
found in the existing channels outlined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the Council. We must reconcile without delay with the
spirit of the Charter, whose beating heart is our shared
determination to save present and future generations
from the scourge of war.
My country reiterates its call on the parties to
negotiate in good faith to put an end to the war. We call
on them to show restraint and responsibility. Everything
must be done to advance towards de-escalation and
create conditions conducive to diplomacy. Gabon
firmly believes that we must reject any unilateral
action that makes the situation more difficult, hardens
positions and fuels antagonism. I reiterate my country’s
opposition to the war in Ukraine and to all wars in
the world, in particular the many chronic and cyclical
wars in Africa. Rejecting the mindset of war is neither
running away nor a sign of cowardice, and it is certainly
not an opportunistic stance.
It is vital to draw from the indelible lessons of the
history of unjust wars, which have hammered home
the fact that the people who provoke or prolong those
wars are rarely the winners. Beyond the criminal
responsibility that can be established, the court of
history is the most implacable of all, and that is why
rejecting the mindset of war means upholding the noble
ideals of the United Nations. My country has a longstanding tradition of peace that has never been denied.
Even when we have had to make existential choices
about our future, we have always been able to choose

S/PV.9421

peace. We will continue to defend that ideal, which for
us remains an ontological imperative. Because war is
contrary to the values of the United Nations and the
Security Council, every day of war calls into question
our will, mandate and credibility.
In conclusion, I want to work together with the
parties to restore peace in Ukraine, because we stand for
peace in Ukraine. We will support each peace process,
each step towards dialogue and each initiative through
diplomatic channels aimed at silencing the weapons in
Ukraine. We will support the initiatives for peaceful
coexistence between Russia and Ukraine.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Mr. Dowden (United Kingdom): I am proud to sit
here today in solidarity with President Zelenskyy. He
and the Ukrainian people have met Russia’s invasion
of their country with bravery and courage, and I pay
tribute to their fortitude. Ukraine’s fight against
Russian aggression is not only a fight for freedom but
for the principles on which the United Nations itself is
based. They are principles underpinned by the Charter
of the United Nations, which says that all States’
sovereignty is equal, territorial integrity is inviolable,
disputes should be settled peacefully and that we must
work together to protect those things.
When Russia’s tanks rolled into Ukraine, they
trampled on every one of those principles. They have
done so ever since. Every missile, bomb, false arrest
and piece of propaganda has been a flagrant assault not
only on freedom but on our multilateral rules-based
system. If we allow Russia to lay waste to what we have
built here, the risks to the world order, the risks to us
all, are grave. For more than a year and half, Ukraine
has been suffering the terrible consequences of
Russia’s war of choice. We must never forget the human
costs — 9,500 civilians killed, 17,000 people injured
and reports of half a million military casualties on both
sides. Russia has callously targeted schools, hospitals
and even playgrounds. Ukrainians have been tortured
and raped. Men, women and thousands of children
have been forcibly deported from their homes. And the
devastation flows beyond Ukraine’s borders. Thanks
to the destruction of 280,000 tons of grain, the hungry
and malnourished people of the developing world are
also Russia’s victims. That is why the United Kingdom
will contribute a further £3 million to the World Food

23-2731317/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

Programme to continue President Zelenskyy’s Grain
from Ukraine initiative.
Of course, the only way to end the widespread
suffering is through just and lasting peace. Ukraine
has demonstrated its commitment to peace time and
again, including in Copenhagen and in Jeddah this
summer. But this summer Ukrainians have also shown
on the battlefield that they are capable of restoring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity that must be the
foundations of any peace. Ukraine’s counteroffensive
has put Russia under pressure. In total, Ukraine has
regained 50 per cent of the territory seized since the
war began. And in Kharkiv and Kherson, the yellow
and blue flag flies high once again. That flag is flying
all over the world, reflecting the solidarity we feel
towards Ukraine.
Yet we might wonder what difference that support
makes when Russia seems so impervious to United
Nations demands, when it seeks to fuels its aims with
arms from sanctioned States such as Iran and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and when it
conducts sham elections on Ukraine’s own sovereign
territory. The truth is that Russia knows the power
of collective action, and that is why it tries so hard to
weaken and divide the international community.
Therefore, just as we need to confront our biggest
challenges on global poverty, climate change and
artificial intelligence collectively, we need effective
multilateralism to achieve resolution, to seek justice for
the many victims, to rebuild ruined cities and create
new opportunities, to get grain exports flowing again,
to help put Ukraine back on the path to prosperity and
to secure peace. That is what we shall do together.
The President: I now call on the Secretary of State
of the United States of America.
Mr. Blinken (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for placing the focus of the Security
Council on this critically important issue. I also thank
the Secretary-General for the moral clarity that he has
shown in dealing with Russia’s war against Ukraine.
We are grateful to have been able to welcome President
Zelenskyy to the Council table and thank him for
reminding us yesterday (see A/78/PV.4), today and
every day what is at stake in the conflict, not just for
Ukraine and for Ukrainians but for all of us.
Two weeks ago I was in Yahidne, a small Ukrainian
town about two hours north of Kyiv. Russian forces
18/30

20/09/2023

seized the village in the first days of the invasion. They
went door to door, rounding up residents at gunpoint,
and marched them to the local elementary school,
where Russian soldiers had set up a command post.
Then, soldiers forced more than 300 civilians — mostly
women, children and elderly people — into a basement
not fit for human habitation. It consisted of just a few
small rooms, with no windows, no air circulation and
no running water. The soldiers held residents there for
28 straight days, using them as human shields, before
fleeing when Ukrainian defenders arrived to liberate
the town.
In Yahidne, two residents took me into the
basement where they and others had been imprisoned.
My guide said that they were packed together so tightly
that they could barely breathe. There was no room to
sit, let alone lie down. When they cried out to their
captors that people were sick and needed medical
care, a Russian soldier yelled back “let them die”. My
guide pointed to two handwritten lists of names on the
basement wall. One was for the villagers whom Russian
forces had executed; the other for the people who died
in the basement. The oldest victim was 93 years old;
the youngest six weeks old. The Russians only allowed
the removal of bodies once a day. Children, parents,
husbands and wives were therefore forced to spend
hours next to the corpses of their loved ones.
I begin here because, from the comfortable distance
of the Chamber, it is really easy to lose sight of what it
is like for Ukrainian victims of the Russian aggression.
That is what happened in just one building, in one
community in Ukraine. There are many others like it.
In the past week alone, Russia has bombed apartment
buildings in Kryvyi Rih, burned down humanitarian
aid depots in Lviv and demolished grain silos in Odesa.
It shelled eight communities in Sumy in a single day.
That is what Ukrainian families are living through
every day. It is what they have experienced for the
574 days of the full-scale invasion. It is what they will
endure tomorrow and the day after that for as long as
Russia wages its vicious war.
President Putin has openly declared from the
outset that the war is aimed at erasing Ukraine from
the map as a sovereign country and restoring Russia’s
lost empire. In this war there is an aggressor and there
is a victim. One side is attacking the core principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, while the other
fights to defend them. For over a year and a half, Russia
has shredded the major tenets of the United Nations
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and international humanitarian law and has flouted one
Security Council resolution after another. Let us review
the situation.
First. Russia’s invasion itself violates the central
pillar of the United Nations Charter, namely, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations.
Secondly, Russia is committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Ukraine on an almost
daily basis.
Thirdly, Russia continues to engage in reckless
nuclear sabre-rattling, announcing that it is stationing
nuclear weapons in Belarus and continuing to
use Europe’s biggest nuclear power plant and its
employees as a shield for its aggression, risking
catastrophic consequences.
Fourthly, Russia is weaponizing hunger. Thanks
to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, brokered by the
Secretary-General and Türkiye, approximately
33 million metric tons of grain reached global markets,
driving down food prices around the world. Nearly two
thirds of the wheat exported through that deal went to
developing countries. Not only did Putin pull out of
the deal, but Russia is now mining Ukraine’s fields,
bombing its ports and rails and burning its silos. As
a result, Ukraine’s wheat exports will likely fall by
2.8 million metric tons this year. That is the equivalent
of 5.5 billion loaves of bread trapped in the world’s
breadbasket. Russia, meanwhile, is on track for a record
year of grain exports. The hungrier the world, the more
Moscow profits.
Fifthly, Russia is using Iranian drones to attack
Ukrainian civilians. Russia procured those drones from
Iran in violation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, just last week, Russia hosted North Korean
dictator Kim Jong Un. Putin said that they discussed
ways to cooperate militarily, while Kim pledged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s “full and
unconditional support” for Russia’s war of aggression.
Of course, the transfer of arms between Moscow and
Pyongyang would violate multiple resolutions of
the Council.
It is hard to imagine a country demonstrating more
contempt for the United Nations and all that it stands
for, especially a country with a permanent seat on the
Council. President Putin is betting that, if he keeps
doubling down on the violence and remains willing

S/PV.9421

to inflict enough suffering on enough people, the
world will cave on its principles and Ukraine will stop
defending itself.
But Ukrainians are not giving up, for they have
seen what life would look like if they were to submit
to Russian control. It is that basement in Yahidne. It
is families having their children torn away from them
and deported to Russia — children taken away from
their parents and deported far away. It is the rubble of
Mariupol. It is the mass graves of Bucha.
We are not giving up, either. Indeed, since we
were last here (see S/PV.9269), a growing number of
countries have come together to try to forge a different
way forward. In June, over a dozen countries met with
Ukraine in Copenhagen to discuss the path towards a
just and lasting peace — one that upholds the United
Nations Charter and its core principles. Two months
later, more than 40 countries, including many members
of the Council, carried forward that discussion with
Ukraine in Jeddah. President Zelenskyy has put forward
a 10-point plan for such a peace. President Putin has put
forward nothing.
Some argue that continuing to stand with Ukraine
and holding Russia accountable distracts us from
addressing other priorities, such as confronting the
climate crisis, expanding economic opportunity and
strengthening health systems. That is a false choice.
We can and we must do both. We are doing both. We
must work together to tackle the global challenges
that are affecting our people, to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals and to invest in a world where all
people have an opportunity to reach their full potential.
The United States is the world’s leading contributor
to those efforts. As President Biden told the General
Assembly yesterday (see A/78/PV.4), we will continue
to do more than our share to answer the imperatives
of our time. At the same time, as President Biden has
made clear, we must continue to shore up the pillars
of peaceful relations among nations, without which we
will be unable to achieve any of our goals. That is why
we must send a clear message, not only to Russia but
to all would-be aggressors, that we will stand up, not
stand by, when the rules that we all agree to are being
challenged — not only to prevent conflict, instability
and suffering but to lay the foundation for all that we
can do to improve people’s lives in times of peace.
I opened by sharing the horrors that I saw in
Yahidne. Let me conclude by telling Council members

23-2731319/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

what else I saw that day in Ukraine. I saw volunteers
rebuilding homes that had been razed by Russian
bombs, farmers harvesting fields, people reopening
businesses, citizens clearing mines and unexploded
ordnance and children returning to schools. In short,
I saw a nation rebuilding and reclaiming its future.
That is the right of all Members of our United Nations.
That is what we defend when we stand up for the
international order — the right of people not only to
survive, but to thrive and write their own future. Our
people, Ukraine’s people and the people of all nations
get to write their own future. We cannot — we will
not — let one man write that future for us.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The existing international order was built
on the ruins, and following the colossal tragedy, of
the Second World War. Its foundation was the Charter
of the United Nations, the cornerstone of modern
international law. Thanks mostly to the United Nations,
a subsequent world war that could have ended in
nuclear catastrophe was averted. Unfortunately, after
the end of the cold war, the collective West, led by the
United States, single-handedly designated itself as the
master of the destiny of all humankind and, driven
by its exceptionalism complex, began to increasingly
disregard the legacy of the United Nations founding
fathers. The West today selectively refers to the Charter’s
norms and principles on a selective case-by-case basis,
strictly in line with its parochial geopolitical interests.
That has inevitably led to undermining global stability,
exacerbating existing tensions and igniting new ones.
The risks of global conflict have also increased.
In order to manage and resolve events peacefully,
Russia urges that all the provisions of the Charter
be respected and applied not only in a non-selective
manner, but holistically, including the principles of the
sovereign equality of States, non-interference in their
internal affairs, respect for their territorial integrity and
the right of peoples to self-determination. The actions of
the United States and its allies demonstrate a systematic
violation of the balance of obligations enshrined in the
Charter. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
establishment of independent States in its place, the
United States of America and its allies have egregiously
and openly interfered in Ukraine’s internal affairs. As
United States Deputy Secretary of State Victoria Nuland
publicly and even proudly admitted, at the end of 2013,
20/30

20/09/2023

Washington had spent $5 billion on cultivating Kyiv
politicians loyal to the West. All the facts pertaining to
the engineering of the Ukrainian crisis have long been
known, but they are trying to silence them in every
possible way and suppress the narrative leading up to
2014. Therefore, the topic of today’s meeting, proposed
by the Albanian presidency, is very fitting, as it enables
us to re-establish the chronology of events, specifically
with regard to the relations among the main actors
responsible for the implementation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
During the period from 2004 to 2005, in order to
bring a pro-American candidate to power, the West
authorized the first coup d’état in Kyiv, forcing the
Constitutional Court of Ukraine to adopt the unlawful
decision to hold a third round of elections, not provided
for by country’s Constitution. Even more cavalier
interference in its internal affairs was demonstrated
during the second Maidan coup from 2013 to 2014. At
that time, a slew of Western leaders directly encouraged
participants in anti-government demonstrations to
engage in acts of violence. Victoria Nuland herself
discussed with the United States ambassador to Kyiv the
composition of the future Government, which would be
shaped by the putschists. At the same time, she pointed
out to the European Union (EU) its real place in world
politics, as Washington sees it. We all remember her
obscene two-word curse. Notably, the European Union
decided to let it pass.
In February 2014, the actors chosen by the
United States became key participants in the brutal
coup organized — I will recall — one day after the
agreement reached through the mediation efforts of
Germany, Poland and France between the legitimately
elected President of Ukraine, Mr. Yanukovych, and the
opposition leaders. The principle of non-interference
in internal affairs had been repeatedly trampled on.
Immediately after the coup, the putschists announced
that their top priority was to suppress the rights of the
Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine. And the residents
of Crimea and the south-east of the country who refused
to accept the results of the anti-constitutional seizure
of power were declared terrorists. A punitive operation
was launched against them. In response, Crimea and
Donbas held referendums on their independence, in
full compliance with the principle of the equality and
self-determination of peoples, as enshrined in Article
1, paragraph 2, of the Charter. Western diplomats and
politicians are turning a blind eye to this important
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

norm of international law with regard to Ukraine in an
effort to reduce the entire background and essence of
what is happening to the inadmissibility of violating
territorial integrity.
In that regard, I would like to recall the 1970
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, adopted by consensus, enshrines the tenet
that the principle of respect for territorial integrity is
applicable to:
“States conducting themselves in compliance with
the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples... and thus possessed of a government
representing the whole people belonging to
the territory” (General Assembly resolution
2625 (XXV)).
The fact that the Ukrainian neo-Nazis who seized
power in Kyiv in a coup d’état did not represent the
population of Crimea and Donbas requires no proof.
And the unconditional support of Western capitals
for the actions of the criminal regime in Kyiv is
nothing less than a violation of the principle of selfdetermination, following a gross interference in
internal affairs. The adoption of racist laws banning
everything Russian — education, media, culture — the
destruction of books and monuments, the banning of
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and the seizure of its
property that followed the coup d’état during the years
of Poroshenko’s and then Zelenskyy’s rule was a defiant
violation of Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter on
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all, without distinction as to race, gender, language
or religion. It goes without saying that those actions
directly contravened the Constitution of Ukraine, which
sets forth the State’s obligation to respect the rights of
Russian and other national minorities. When we hear
calls for the implementation of the peace formula to
return Ukraine to the 1991 borders, the question arises
as to who is calling for that? Are they familiar with
the statements made by the Ukrainian leadership in
terms of what they intend to do with the residents of
the territories concerned. At the official level, threats
have been repeatedly made concerning their physical
or legal annihilation. The West has not been only
refraining from deterring its protégés in Kyiv, but has
been encouraging such racist policies.

S/PV.9421

Incidentally, in the same manner, EU and NATO
members have for decades encouraged the actions of
Latvia and Estonia in stripping the rights of hundreds
of thousands of Russian-speaking residents, who
have been designated as non-citizens. Now they
are seriously discussing criminalizing the use of
their native language. High-ranking officials have
officially declared that the spread of information
about the possibility for local students to take Russian
remote-learning programmes should be considered
as a virtual threat to national security, which must be
addressed by law enforcement agencies.
Returning to Ukraine, the conclusions of the
February 2015 Minsk agreements were endorsed by a
special Security Council resolution, resolution 2202
(2015), in full compliance with Article 36, paragraph
2, of the Charter, which supports “any procedures for
the settlement of the dispute which have already been
adopted by the parties.” In this case, it concerned Kyiv
and the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
However, last year, all the signatories of the Minsk
agreements, except for Mr. Putin — I am referring
to Merkel, Hollande and Poroshenko — publicly, and
even joyfully admitted, that, when they signed the
document, they had no intention of implementing it.
They were simply looking to play for time in order to
strengthen Ukraine’s military capability and pump it
full of weapons to be used against Russia. For all these
years the EU and NATO have directly supported the
sabotage of the Minsk agreements and pushed the
Kyiv regime to use force to solve the so-called Donbas
problem. That has all been done in violation of Article
25 of the Charter, according to which all members of
the United Nations are obliged to “accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council”.
I would like to remind the Council that in the Minsk
agreement package the leaders of Russia, Germany,
France and Ukraine signed a declaration in which
Berlin and Paris pledged to do a great deal, including
helping to restore the banking system in Donbas, but
did not lift a finger. They merely stood by and watched
as, contrary to all those obligations, Poroshenko
announced a trade, economic and transport blockade
of Donbas. In the same declaration, Berlin and Paris
pledged to help strengthen the European Union-RussiaUkraine trilateral agreement in order to find a practical
solution to trade issues of concern to Russia, and also
to promote the establishment of “a joint humanitarian
and economic space from the Atlantic to the Pacific”.

23-2731321/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

That declaration was also endorsed by the Security
Council and subject to implementation in accordance
with Article 25. However, that obligation undertaken
by Germany and France’s leaders was also an empty
promise and yet another violation of the principles of
the Charter.
Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Union’s legendary
Minister for Foreign Affairs, repeatedly pointed out
that 10 years of negotiations were better than one day
of war. Following that precept, we negotiated for years
to reach agreements on European security, we approved
the NATO-Russia Founding Act and adopted at the
highest level the 1999 and 2010 declarations of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on the indivisibility of security. And since 2015 we have
insisted on seeing the unconditional implementation of
the Minsk agreements, which were concluded as a result
of negotiations. All of that was done in full compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which requires
the establishment of:
“conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law can be maintained”.
Our Western colleagues were trampling on that principle
too when they signed all those documents while fully
aware that they had no intention of complying with
them. Speaking of negotiations, we are willing to
have them even now, and President Putin has talked
about that repeatedly, including very recently. I would
like to remind the Secretary of State that President
Zelenskyy has signed a decree prohibiting the conduct
of negotiations with Mr. Putin’s Government. If the
United States is so interested in negotiations, I think
that it would not be very difficult to give the order that
Zelenskyy’s decree be lifted.
In our opponents’ rhetoric today we have heard only
slogans about invasion, aggression and annexation,
but not a word about the root causes of the problem or
the years spent nurturing an openly Nazi regime that
blatantly rewrote the outcomes of the Second World
War and the history of its own people. The West has
avoided any substantive discussion based on facts and
respect for all the requirements of the Charter. It clearly
has no arguments for an honest dialogue.
We get the definite impression that Western
representatives fear professional discussions that would
expose their demagoguery. While uttering incantations
about Ukraine’s territorial integrity, the former colonial
22/30

20/09/2023

centres of empire are silent about the United Nations
resolutions on the need for Paris to return the so-called
French island of Mayotte to the Union of the Comoros
or for London to withdraw from the Chagos archipelago
and begin talks with Buenos Aires on the Malvinas
Islands. Those so-called champions of Ukraine’s
territorial integrity now act as if they do not remember
the aim of the Minsk agreements, which — I will remind
them, concluded with the reunification of Donbas and
Ukraine while guaranteeing respect for fundamental
human rights, and above all the right to one’s mother
tongue. Having disrupted their implementation, the
West bears direct responsibility for the collapse of
Ukraine and for inciting civil war there.
Among other Charter principles where respect
for them could have prevented the security crisis in
Europe and helped to agree on confidence-building
measures on the basis of a balance of interests, I would
point to Article 52 of Chapter VIII, which enshrines
the importance of developing the practice of peacefully
settling disputes with the help of regional organizations.
In line with that principle, Russia, together with its allies,
has consistently advocated for establishing contacts
between the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) and NATO in order to facilitate the practical
implementation of the decisions I just mentioned of the
OSCE summits on the indivisibility of security, which
stipulate, among other things, that
“no State, group of States or organization can have
any pre-eminent responsibility for maintaining
peace and stability in the OSCE area or can
consider any part of the OSCE area as its sphere
of influence”.
We all know that that was exactly what NATO was
doing, attempting to establish its total superiority in
Europe and now in the Asia-Pacific region. However,
numerous appeals from the CSTO’s highest bodies to
NATO were ignored. As we can all see once again today,
the reason for the arrogant position of the United States
and its allies is their unwillingness to have any kind
of dialogue on an equal footing with anyone. If NATO
had not rejected the CSTO’s proposals for cooperation,
it might have been possible to avoid the many negative
processes that led to the current European crisis,
resulting from the fact that Russia has been either
ignored or deceived for decades.
Today, when at the proposal of the Council
presidency we are discussing “effective multilateralism”,
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

we should not forget the numerous instances of the
West’s ingrained rejection of any form of equitable
cooperation. Consider Josep Borrell Fontelles’ pearl of
wisdom that Europe is a flourishing garden surrounded
by jungles. That is pure neocolonialism, scorning the
sovereign equality of States and the work of “upholding
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
through effective multilateralism” that is the subject of
our debate today.
In an effort to prevent the democratization of
international relations, the United States and its allies
are ever more openly and unceremoniously privatizing
the secretariats of international organizations,
circumventing established procedures in order to
push through decisions creating mechanisms under
their control and mandates that lack consensus while
claiming the right to blame anyone whom Washington
does not like for whatever reason. In that connection,
I would like to remind the Council that it is not
only Member States but also the Secretariat of our
Organization that is required to strictly comply with
the Charter. In accordance with its Article 100, the
Secretariat is obliged to act impartially and shall not
receive instructions from any Government.
We have already mentioned Article 2, and I want to
draw attention to its key paragraph 1, which says, “The
Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members”. The General Assembly,
building on that principle, reaffirmed in the Declaration
of 1970, which I cited earlier, that
“every State has an inalienable right to choose its
political, economic, social and cultural systems,
without interference in any form by another State”.
In that regard, we have serious questions about the
Secretary-General’s remarks on 29 March that
“autocratic leadership is not a guarantor of stability;
it is a catalyst of chaos and conflict”, [while] “strong
democratic societies are places that are capable of
self-correction — and self-improvement. They can
enable change — even radical change — without
bloodshed and violence”.
One cannot help recalling the so-called changes
brought about by the aggressive ventures of such socalled strong democracies in Yugoslavia, Afghanistan,
Iraq, Libya, Syria and many other countries.
António Guterres went on to say that democracies
“are centres for broad-based cooperation, rooted in the

S/PV.9421

principles of equality, participation and solidarity”.
It is noteworthy that all those statements were made
at the so-called summit for democracy convened by
President Biden outside the United Nations framework,
whose participants were selected by the United States
Administration on the principle of loyalty — loyalty not
so much to Washington but to the ruling Democratic
party in the United States. Attempts to use such forums
among allies to discuss global issues are a direct
contravention of Article 1, paragraph 4 of the Charter,
which enshrines the importance of ensuring the role of
the Organization as “a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in the attainment of these common ends”.
Contrary to that principle, many years ago France
and Germany proclaimed a so-called alliance of
multilateralists, to which once again only the obedient
were invited. That in and of itself affirms the entrenched
nature of the colonialist mentality and the attitude of its
initiators to the principle of “effective multilateralism”
that is on our agenda today. In parallel we saw the
propagation of a narrative about the European Union
as the ideal of that very multilateralism. Now there
are calls from Brussels to expand the membership of
the EU as soon as possible to include specifically the
Balkan countries. The loftiest statements, however,
are not about Serbia or Türkiye, which have been in
hopeless talks about their entry for decades now, but
rather about Ukraine. Josep Borrell Fontelles, who
seemingly aspires to be the chief ideologist of European
integration, recently said that the Kyiv regime should
become a member of the EU as soon as possible.
According to him, had it not been for the war, that
would have taken years, and now there is a need and the
chance to do so without respect for any criteria. Serbia,
Türkiye and others can wait, but the Nazis can skip the
queue to enter the ranks of the EU.
Incidentally, at the same Summit for Democracy,
the Secretary-General proclaimed:
“Democracy flows from the United Nations
Charter. Its opening invocation of ‘We the peoples’
reflects the fundamental source of legitimate
authority: the consent of the governed.”
It is useful to compare that premise with the track
record of the Kyiv regime, which unleashed a war
against a huge part of its own people —against those
millions who did not consent to be governed by neoNazis and Russophobes who have illegitimately seized
power and buried the Security Council-approved

23-2731323/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

Minsk agreements, thereby undermining the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Those who, contrary to the Charter
of United Nations, divide humankind into democracies
and autocracies better try to respond to the question of
which category they place the Ukrainian regime in. I
will not wait for an answer.
Speaking of the principles of the Charter, there is a
question regarding the relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. For a while now, the
team of Western States has been aggressively peddling
the theme of the abuse of the veto right and, by quite
improperly pressuring other States Members of the
United Nations, have managed to secure the decision
that, after each exercise of veto, the General Assembly
will consider the matter. That is not a problem for us
at all, because Russia is open about its approaches to
all agenda items, we have nothing to hide, and it is not
difficult for us to expound on our positions yet again.
Besides, the use of the veto is an absolutely legitimate
instrument provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations to prevent the adoption of decisions that coulod
potentially divide the Organization. But since there is a
procedure for discussions in the General Assembly on
the use of the veto, why not also consider why Security
Council resolutions that were adopted without a veto,
including those that were adopted many years ago, are
not being implemented despite the provisions of Article
25 of the Charter of the United Nations. Why should the
General Assembly not consider the reasons for that, for
example, with regard to the Security Council resolutions
on Palestine, the whole range of issues related to the
Middle East and North Africa, the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and, naturally, resolution 2202 (2015),
which approved the Minsk Agreements on Ukraine?
The issue of sanctions regimes is also worthy of
attention. It is now the norm: the Security Council,
after protracted negotiations, in strict compliance with
the Charter of the United Nations, adopts sanctions
against a particular country, and then the United States
and its allies impose against the same State additional
unilateral restrictions, which were not approved by the
Council and are not included in its resolution as part of
the agreed upon package. Another egregious example
of that is the decision just adopted by the national
legislative bodies of Berlin, Paris and London to extend
restrictions against Iran that were set to expire in
October, and which are subject to a legal termination,
in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015). In other
words, European countries and Great Britain declare
24/30

20/09/2023

that , the Security Council ruling is no longer valid, but
that makes no difference to them, because they make
their own rules. This makes it all the more relevant to
consider making it a rule that, after the Council adopts
any sanctions resolution, no State Member of the
United Nations would have the right to devalue it by
introducing their own illegitimate restrictions against
that same country.
It is also important that sanctions regimes adopted
by the Security Council be time-bound, as their openended nature deprives the Council of flexibility in
influencing the policies of the sanctioned Governments.
The so-called humanitarian limits of sanctions
must also be considered. It would only be right that any
draft resolutions on sanctions introduced to the Security
Council should be accompanied by assessments of
their consequences for civilians by United Nations
humanitarian agencies, rather than by demagogic
exhortations by Western colleagues that “ordinary
people will not suffer”.
Evidence suggests that there is a deep crisis in
international relations and the West’s lack of desire and
will to redress the situation. However, I hope that a way
out of this situation exists and will be found. To start
with, everyone needs to recognize their responsibility
for the fate of our Organization and for the fate of the
world, based on historical context, rather than guided
by parochial, short-sighted arrangements for the
upcoming national elections of some Member State.
Let me recall once again: nearly 80 years ago,
having signed the Charter of the United Nations, world
leaders agreed to respect the sovereign equality of all
States — large and small, rich and poor, monarchies
and republics. In other words, even then, humankind
recognized the need for an equitable, polycentric world
order as a guarantee for the sustainability and security
of its development. Therefore, today it is not a question
of submitting to some rules-based world order, but of
fulfilling all the obligations we assumed when signing
and ratifying the Charter of the United Nations in their
integral and interconnected nature.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of the French Republic.
Ms. Colonna (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
I would like to begin by applauding the statement
delivered by the President of the Republic of Ukraine,
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Volodymyr Zelenskyy. For more than 18 months, he
has embodied and led the Ukrainian nation, giving
a face and a voice to the millions of Ukrainians who
are fighting for their freedom with admirable courage.
His appeal to the Security Council, whose mandate
is focused on international peace and security, is
something we must respond to.
On 24 February 2022, Russia chose to engage in a
war of aggression against a sovereign State, in violation
of all its international commitments and the principles,
which, for eight decades, have governed relations
among nations — a war with no other motivation than
the Russian desire to revive a fantasized imperial past,
even though that has been condemned by history.
Ukraine is obviously the primary victim of this war.
Ukraine and its people are suffering atrocities, crimes,
bombings and torture on a daily basis. Thousands of
Ukrainian children have been forcibly taken from their
families and transferred to the Russian Federation. That
is an abomination. Ukrainian women, men and children
have been subjected to mass rape, which has been used
as a weapon of war — another crime.
Yes, this war is a war against Ukraine, against
the Ukrainian people, but it is also a war against the
rules of international life. For it is a war against the
most fundamental principles of our shared Charter of
the United Nations: first and foremost, respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. It is a war
against the very idea of the United Nations.
It is a war against the foundations of our collective
security, at a time when Russia has harnessed the
security of civilian nuclear facilities as a lever to
advance its aggression. It is a war against the shared
heritage of humankind — be it cultural heritage, which
Russia is targeting in Odesa and elsewhere, or global
food security, with the sudden and cynical termination
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and more than 270,000
tonnes of grain systematically destroyed by Russian
bombing in August alone. For a member of the Council
to use hunger as a weapon is yet another transgression,
following on a litany of others, in the moral framework
within which should frame our action.
This is a war that concerns us all. That is why we
will not waver. In the face of this aggression and the
destabilization it is causing throughout the world, only a
handful of States — and what States they are — support
Russia’s catastrophic choices. The General Assembly,
like the Council, is largely united around our common

S/PV.9421

principles. Everyone understands that pitting the
aggressor against the aggressor does not bring peace,
justice or stability. If we allow Russian aggression to be
rewarded today, let us make no mistake, we will have to
reconvene the Council because other aggressions will
occur, here or elsewhere, and no one will be safe anymore.
Almost all the countries around this table have,
in their more or less recent history, experienced the
trauma of war. They have experienced first-hand the
destruction and human tragedy that war brings. They
know that war is never a solution.
Tomorrow we celebrate the International Day of
Peace, as we do every 21 September. In that context, all
of us here have both a responsibility and a moral duty
to act to put an end to Russia’s aggression, as expressly
requested by the General Assembly. On 21 September,
like on every day since the beginning of the war, France
will mobilize to ensure that this aggression fails, for the
good of us all.
France will continue to act in accordance with our
common principles. The first such principle is selfdefence, as set forth in the Charter. We will continue
to provide Ukraine with military and civilian support
to help it resist this aggression and defend itself.
The second principle is justice and dignity. We will
continue to support Ukrainian and international courts
to ensure that there is no impunity for the crimes
committed by Russia. The third principle is solidarity.
We will continue and increase concrete support for the
countries hardest hit by the global food crisis caused
by Russia, and we will boost our humanitarian aid to
people in need all over the world.
The primacy the rule of law over the rule of force,
international solidarity and support for those most in
need are principles that lie at the heart of President
Zelenskyy’s peace formula. That is why, with every
passing day, more and more of us endorse it. I call on
all States that have not yet done so to work towards
that goal.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federative Republic of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank the presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this meeting.
The conflict in Ukraine has added numerous
stresses to the multilateral system, which was already
subject to multiple complex challenges and increasing
dissent. The current context of polarization and distrust

23-2731325/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

does not create favourable conditions for the multilateral
forums of international peace and security to operate
effectively. The world is facing the highest number
of violent conflicts since the Second World War, and
2 billion people — one quarter of humankind — are
living in areas affected by conflicts. Yet our collective
institutions are not adequately responding to those
challenges. As the concept note (S/2023/653, annex)
of this debate rightly points out, the inability of the
Security Council to adequately fulfil its mandate is
undermining its credibility and leading to renewed
calls for its long-overdue reform.
In these troubled times of daunting violations of the
core values and principles of the United Nations, Brazil
has been encouraging Member States to revive the spirit
of San Francisco in the search for peace for present and
future generations, which is the fundamental vision of
this Organization. Brazil fully respects and upholds
the right to self-defence of all Member States, under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
At the same time, we must recognize that the recent
escalation in the conflict, with the introduction of even
more sophisticated weapons and ammunition or the
inadmissible threat of use of nuclear weapons, seriously
undermines peace and security well beyond the
battlefield, violating the core principles and provisions
of the United Nations Charter.
That dynamic has grave consequences, above all,
for the civilian population, in particular, women and
children, who are disproportionately affected by wars.
The destruction of civilian infrastructure worsens the
humanitarian crisis, especially as winter approaches.
Moreover, the persistent threat to the integrity of
nuclear facilities risks a catastrophe of unimaginable
proportions. As we have consistently noted, the war
in Ukraine also affects other regions, especially as
developing countries bear the burden of food and
energy insecurity. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
effort to explore alternatives to alleviate the suffering
of millions of people who, once again, face hunger or
the threat of hunger.
Brazil strongly supports a resumption of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative under terms that would
be acceptable to all concerned parties. Brazil also
underscores the need for addressing the root causes of
food and energy insecurity, such as excessively high
interest rates and external debt that severely impact
prices and limit the ability of developing countries to
26/30

20/09/2023

invest in sustainable food and energy production. The
current international financial structure is not well
equipped to assist those countries in addressing their
major challenges. As recently announced by President
Lula da Silva, during our Group of 20 presidency, Brazil
will launch a global alliance against hunger, which is a
top priority for Brazil and should be for us all.
It is worrisome that we are witnessing a conflict
with such geopolitical reverberations well into the
twenty-first century. We must reverse this course.
Brazil, along with many others, continue to call for the
deceleration of hostilities, the resumption of dialogue
and a peaceful solution to the conflict — an obligation
of all Member States, under Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter. There is no military solution to
this conflict. Only a political solution that takes into
account the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and the legitimate security concerns
of all parties will bring lasting peace. The international
community will have to assist the parties to come to a
negotiated and lasting solution.
Brazil is prepared to do its part. The space for
diplomacy and peaceful solution is narrowing. We must
set aside practices that only deepen divisions instead of
contributing to a more peaceful world and work together
for renewed multilateralism, Brazil firmly advocates for
mediation and preventive diplomacy as indispensable
tools to prevent the escalation of crisis. To that end,
Brazil has been engaged in several forums with a view
to dealing with the Ukrainian crisis. We have sent High
Representatives to Copenhagen and Jeddah. We have
also spoken bilaterally to the concerned parties.
We strongly encourage that in these conversations,
both parties be heard and their views carefully taken
into consideration. Talking to only one party or the
other will not help advance the cause of durable peace.
A comprehensive approach, as proposed, will be the
only way forward to enable peaceful negotiations. With
that in mind, during our presidency of the Security
Council next month, we will organize a high-level open
debate on the contributions of regional, subregional and
bilateral arrangements to the prevention and peaceful
resolution of disputes. I am counting on everyone’s
participation in October.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Climate Change and Environment and Chief of the
International Affairs Office at the Presidential Court of
the United Arab Emirates.
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Almheiri (United Arab Emirates): I extend my
gratitude to Secretary-General Guterres for his valuable
briefing and wish to acknowledge the Heads of State
and Government and other high-level representatives
present today. I also welcome the participation of
President Zelenskyy. I commend Albania for convening
this critical open debate. The United Arab Emirates has
long advocated for a peaceful resolution to the war in
Ukraine that upholds the Charter of the United Nations.
The war has wrought a devastating toll on human
life, including the displacement of almost two out of
every three children in Ukraine. The country now
bears the grim record for the highest concentration of
landmines in the world, rendering nearly one third of
the country no longer safe due to unexploded ordnance.
The conflict has further ravaged food and transport
infrastructure. We stress once again the need for all
the parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and, specifically, the
protection of those objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population. We are deeply concerned about
the ramifications of the destruction of infrastructure on
survivor services, health care and other critical forms
of support, especially on women and children, who
already bear the brunt of the armed conflict.
The United Arab Emirates has pledged $100 million
to help address the humanitarian crisis. We have sent 11
airlifts of relief and medical supplies for children and
the elderly, provided more than 2,500 generators and
sent 23 ambulances just this week. My country has also
provided $4 million in funding for First Lady Olena
Zelenska’s foundation’s programming for orphans.
Beyond Ukraine, the war’s global ripple effects
are evident, especially in terms of the pronounced
impact on food security, including in our own region.
Let me restate that the United Arab Emirates remains
steadfast in supporting the renewal of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and the full implementation of the
memorandum of understanding on Russian fertilizers
and food products, as well as any discussions that
support those goals.
While crucial, those measures only alleviate the
suffering rather than end it. World leaders, especially
this week in the General Assembly, have made clear
the global desire for a just and sustainable peace in
Ukraine — one that upholds the United Nations Charter.
A diverse set of countries is increasingly coming
together around the common cause of peace in Ukraine.

S/PV.9421

We welcome the role played in that regard by countries
such as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and China, as
well as the African peace initiative, in supporting all
possible routes to a peaceful settlement. In those calls
for peace, there is a growing recognition of the urgency
of that task, not just for Ukraine but for all of us.
The war has amplified the erosion of faith in
multilateralism, but achieving peace can begin its
restoration. Of course, peace will only come out of
diplomatic talks between Russia and Ukraine, and
it will only be just and sustainable if it upholds the
Charter. The Security Council and its members have a
vital role to play in that process. We can encourage and
incentivize de-escalation, extend the urgency to uphold
the Charter on every file before us and expand the circle
of peacemakers to reflect today’s global realities. We
would welcome an increasingly representative Council
and believe that the discussions on reforming it should
move forward with serious intention.
Although the path to peace in Ukraine may be
arduous, that does not license inaction. There is only
one sustainable path to a just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, in line with the Charter, and to preserving
the country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The United Arab Emirates stands ready to
support that objective.
Mr. Zhaoxu Ma (China) (spoke in Chinese): China’s
position on the Ukraine issue is consistent and clear.
President Xi Jinping put forward four points on what
must be done, four things the international community
must do together and three observations in that regard.
They have become the fundamental guidelines for
China to deal with the Ukraine issue. We believe that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be respected, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations should be observed, the
legitimate security concerns of all countries should be
taken seriously and all efforts conducive to resolving
the crisis should be supported.
In February, China issued its position on the political
settlement of the Ukraine crisis, laying out 12 proposals,
including respect for sovereignty, ceasing the hostilities,
resuming talks and ending unilateral sanctions. The
core message of the proposals is to facilitate peace
talks. China maintains close communication on the
Ukraine crisis with the various relevant parties and
the rest of the international community. The Special
Representative of the Chinese Government on Eurasian

23-2731327/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

Affairs has visited the countries concerned and attended
the international conference on Ukraine in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia. China has facilitated talks for peace in
its own way and played a positive and constructive role
in resolving the Ukraine crisis.
The Ukraine crisis continues to drag on. The
intense situation on the battlefield and the accumulating
risks of a spillover have had a significant impact on the
international situation. The Ukraine crisis has become
what it is today for a variety of deep and complex
reasons. A prolonged and expanded crisis is not in the
interest of any party. In the light of the current situation,
I would like to stress the following four points.
First, we need to stay committed to facilitating
peace talks. History has proven that conflicts have
no winners and that war cannot solve problems. The
pursuit of one’s absolute security or efforts to stoke
bloc confrontation will only intensify disagreements
and conflict and will come to no good. No matter how
complex the situation or how challenging the task is,
we must adhere to the general direction of a political
settlement and encourage the parties concerned to build
consensus, initiate peace talks and cease the hostilities
at an early date. The international community needs
to create the conditions and atmosphere necessary
for that. The relevant parties should take a long-term
view, uphold the concept of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security, respect each
other’s legitimate security concerns and promote
the building of a balanced, effective and sustainable
security architecture in Europe.
Secondly, we need to refrain from pouring fuel on
the fire. All the parties should exercise restraint, refrain
from exacerbating tensions or taking any measures
that would escalate the situation and work to create
the conditions necessary for a political settlement. We
must safeguard the bottom line of nuclear security and
prevent manmade nuclear accidents.
Thirdly, we need to manage the spillover risks.
The Ukraine crisis has dealt a heavy blow to economic
recovery and global development and severely affected
global food, energy and financial security. Developing
countries are the first to bear the brunt of that. The
relevant countries should stop abusing unilateral
sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction and protect the
security and smooth operation of global production
and supply chains. We support the relevant parties in
maintaining communication with Russia and Ukraine
28/30

20/09/2023

on the Black Sea Grain Initiative and resuming the deal
on the basis of balanced consideration of the concerns
of both sides with a view to effectively protecting global
food security.
Fourthly, we need to ease the humanitarian crisis.
In 2023, as many as 339 million people around the world
are in need of humanitarian aid — some 70 million more
than at the beginning of 2022. The Ukraine crisis has
produced millions of displaced people and destroyed
much important large-scale infrastructure. The parties
to the conflict should strictly observe international
humanitarian law, follow the principles of necessity,
distinction and proportionality, protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure and provide rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access in order to reduce the
suffering of civilians. The international community and
humanitarian institutions should honour the principles
of humanitarian aid and intensify efforts to help those
affected overcome difficulties.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine. At the beginning of the crisis, we
put forward a six-point initiative to prevent a massive
humanitarian crisis and have continually played a
constructive role in easing the humanitarian situation.
We have provided multiple batches of humanitarian
supplies to Ukraine.
China will remain committed to true multilateralism
and to our objective and just position. We will always
stand on the side of dialogue and peace and on the right
side of history. We are ready to work with Security
Council members and relevant parties to continue
playing a constructive role to find a political solution to
the crisis in Ukraine.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I wish to thank the
Albanian presidency for convening today’s briefing.
We also wish to express our deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his invaluable insights.
It is not redundant that we remind ourselves of the
importance of multilateralism in fostering cooperation,
partnership and interaction among States, based on a
shared system of norms and values. Multilateralism
also involves consultation, dialogue, inclusion, respect
and solidarity and is guided by collectively developed
rules that ensure sustainable and effective cooperation.
More
significantly,
the
importance
of
multilateralism lies in its ability to enable us, sovereign
States, to collectively solve complex challenges that
23-27313

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

could not be overcome individually. By nurturing peace
before, during and after conflicts, multilateralism
contributes to sustainable and lasting peace. It is in that
regard that the Security Council must play its crucial
role in maintaining international peace and security
by facilitating political processes, protecting civilians,
preventing wars, promoting human rights and restoring
the rule of law.
The protracted conflict between Russia and
Ukraine constitutes a grave risk to the maintenance of
global peace and security. That, in essence, perfectly
illustrates the struggles multilateralism faces. Despite
numerous international appeals, including from
the Council, we are now entering the 574th day of
hostilities, with mounting civilian casualties and no
clear end in sight. It is indeed a twenty-first century
tragedy unfolding under our collective gaze and the
scrutiny of the entire world. The conflict unfolds both
on the battlefield and amid a perplexed and divided
public opinion, pushing our contemporary multilateral
system to its breaking point.
As we all can attest, despite its imperfections,
our multilateral system has weathered numerous
crises. The ongoing crisis poses a serious threat to the
foundational principles of global stability. Not only
has the conflict caused immense suffering for Ukraine
and its people, but it has also compounded global food
security issues, pushing more individuals into poverty
and destabilizing regions far from the conflict’s
epicentre. Moreover, the conflict impedes our joint
efforts to reach vital multilateral milestones, such as
the Sustainable Development Goals, which are a focal
topic of this year’s General Assembly, and jeopardizes
our collective efforts towards non-proliferation.
Of particular concern to Mozambique is the
intensification of military rhetoric and the possibility
of further escalation. It is evident that the parties
involved continue to prioritize military strategies
over dialogue and compromise, increasing the risk of
severe miscalculations. We maintain that there can
be no purely military resolution to the crisis. Should
one be pursued, it will weigh heavily on the Council’s
conscience for generations to come.
We remain unyielding in our advocacy for a political
and negotiated end to the conflict. We once again urge
all parties to silence the guns and engage in earnest
and diplomatic efforts, aimed at a swift resumption of
direct negotiations. A lasting peace, consistent with

S/PV.9421

the Charter of the United Nations, remains the sole
viable solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Chancellor of Germany.
Mr. Scholz (Germany): It has been almost 19
months since Russia started a brutal war of aggression
against its sovereign neighbour, Ukraine. Tens of
thousands of soldiers and Ukrainian civilians have
been killed. Countless Ukrainian children have been
abducted. Russian troops have murdered, raped and
tortured. They raze towns and villages to the ground.
They lay mines across entire regions, turning cornfields
into death traps.
The war is taking place in Europe, but its
repercussions are felt throughout the world. Russia
has deliberately removed millions of tons of grain
and fertilizer from the world market, which countries
around the globe need to guarantee food security.
Russia is deliberately targeting grain silos and port
infrastructure. Russia has withdrawn unilaterally from
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, triggering more poverty
and food insecurity all over the world. There is no
justification for that.
Any claims that sanctions are hampering Russian
exports of crops and fertilizer are false. There are no
sanctions impeding such exports. On the contrary,
Russia dominates the global fertilizer market, and 2022
was a record year for Russian wheat exports. The reason
for the continued suffering in Ukraine and around the
world is shockingly simple — Russia’s President wants
to follow through with his imperialistic plan to conquer
his sovereign neighbour, Ukraine.
The United Nations has expressed very clearly what
it thinks of Russia’s war of aggression, most recently
on 23 February of this year. The General Assembly
called for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. That
demand is directed at Russia. It remains unanswered.
Nothing rings out louder today than Russia’s silence in
response to that global call for peace.
Some argue that the war could have been prevented
by diplomatic means. In fact, France and Germany have
held hundreds of meetings with Moscow and Kyiv since
the beginning of Russia’s attack on eastern Ukraine in
2014. Our aim was to find a diplomatic solution that is in
line with international law. All those endeavours failed
because one party, Russia, chose war over diplomacy,
but there has been no lack of diplomatic efforts.

23-2731329/30

S/PV.9421

Maintenance of international peace and security

Some call for an immediate ceasefire. I acknowledge
their good intentions. We all want an end to the killing,
today rather than tomorrow. And yet we must be wary
of seemingly easy solutions that promise peace in name
only. Peace without freedom is oppression, and peace
without justice is a diktat. In the resolutions of the
General Assembly, we have laid out the path towards
peace. Peace means respecting the Charter of the
United Nations. Peace means respecting the territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine. That is
the promise the United Nations Charter gives to every
Member State of the United Nations.
No one longs for peace more than the Ukrainians.
The peace plan that the Ukrainian President has laid
out is proof of that. The recent meetings in Copenhagen
and Jeddah were important. That work should be
continued. It should be continued in the pursuit of one

30/30

20/09/2023

goal — finding peace that respects the principles of the
United Nations Charter. The more decisively we rally
behind those principles, the more determined we are in
pushing for a just peace and the more united we are in
our rejection of Russian aggression, the sooner the war
will end, and the sooner human suffering will end in
Ukraine and around the world. That goal is worth our
utmost efforts.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 2 p.m.

23-27313
