S/PV.9066

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9066th meeting

Thursday, 16 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Osei
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mrs. Thomas Greenfield

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (S/2022/481)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38554 (E)
*2238554*

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2022/481)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Dominican Republic and Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Religion of Haiti.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La Lime,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, and Mr. Arnoux Descardes, Executive
Director, Volontariat pour le développement d’Haïti.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/481, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: It is an honour to once again provide
the Council with an update on the situation in Haiti
where, amid a rapidly deteriorating security situation,
discussions about the country’s future governance
arrangements remain deadlocked in a protracted
stalemate. Since I last briefed the Security Council (see
S/PV.8969), the grip with which gangs are controlling
swathes of the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area has
grown increasingly tighter as their zones of influence
have expanded. Kidnappings and intentional homicides
have risen by 36 and 17 per cent respectively compared
to the last five months of 2021. In May alone, the
Haitian National Police (HNP) reported 201 intentional
homicides and 198 abductions, an average of almost
seven cases a day each.
2/20

16/06/2022

The horrific violence that unfurled over the
suburbs of Cité-Soleil, Croix-des-Bouquets and Tabarre
in late April and early May, when women and girls
were particularly exposed to sexual violence, is only
one example of the state of terror into which Haiti’s
political and economic heart has been plunged. Dozens
of schools, medical centres, businesses and markets
have been forced to close. Many people are trapped
in their neighbourhoods and sometimes even their
residences. At least 17,000 others have been displaced
from their homes, and many are struggling to find basic
necessities such as food, water and medicine. Movement
along the main national roads connecting the capital to
the rest of the country is seriously compromised, as
gangs have erected barricades to restrict access to areas
under their control, severely affecting the flow of goods
throughout the country.
The pervasive and deepening sense of insecurity
exacerbated by the HNP’s seeming inability to address
the situation and the manifest impunity with which
criminal acts are being committed is dangerously
fraying the rule of law in the country. Less than a week
ago, the Port-au-Prince Court of First Instance was
overrun by a local gang that proceeded to loot and burn
both case files and pieces of evidence. In some parts of
the country, acts of vigilantism against suspected gang
members are increasingly garnering popular support.
More than ever, Haiti requires immediate assistance
to develop its National Police and counter increasing
criminality and violence. The HNP currently lacks the
human, material and financial resources to effectively
fulfil its mandate. Its limited operational and
logistical capacities compromise the implementation
of a comprehensive public safety agenda that relies on
intelligence-led policing and violence reduction. It is
therefore with great urgency that I call on Member States
to provide greater support and contribute to the newly
established basket fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme and dedicated to supporting
the HNP and helping it address the challenges it is
contending with.
The acute instability currently affecting Haiti
is in large part a result of its prolonged institutional
vacuum. The country has been without a functioning
Parliament for two and a half years, was left aghast
by the assassination of its President almost a year ago
and in addition is suffering from an almost complete
paralysis of its justice sector.
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

To date, the multiple initiatives and proposals to
foster a common vision among national stakeholders
as to how Haiti can move forward have yielded
few concrete results. On the contrary, previously
homogeneous coalitions have started to fracture. Amid
that growing political polarization, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) is intensely focused
on reviving contacts between parties at all levels,
notably through a series of informal gatherings aimed
at encouraging consensus on a path towards elections.
In late March, a civil society-led tripartite
committee was formed to enlarge consensus among
various political platforms, including the Government,
to forge a common path forward. In parallel, Prime
Minister Henry has been holding direct talks with the
leadership of the Montana Group, which has proposed
new modalities to relaunch formal negotiations. Yet,
with the formation of a new Provisional Electoral
Council frustratingly still a distant prospect and the
organ having effectively ceased to function for many
months, it is highly unlikely that elections, which
would usher a return to democratic governance, will be
held this year.
The stalled investigation into the assassination of
late President Moïse — to which the fifth judge in 11
months was recently assigned — epitomizes the deeply
entrenched issues affecting Haiti’s judicial system,
a branch crippled by limited financial and material
resources, frequent strikes by judicial personnel and
the deteriorating security situation. Resolute efforts are
needed not only to enable courts to process and try a
myriad of pending cases but also for prolonged pretrial
detention levels to be sustainably reduced.
It is urgent for the Government and relevant judicial
institutions to reach a consensus on the appointment
of Court of Cassation judges in order to allow Haiti’s
highest court to resume its activities. Every effort must
also be made to efficiently prepare and implement
the long-standing criminal code reform, which aims
to further align the Haitian legal framework with
international norms and standards.
The protracted insecurity and prolonged political
uncertainty, combined with the dire economic situation
and the growing humanitarian needs, are severely
hindering the country’s socioeconomic development,
widening economic inequalities and undermining
peacebuilding efforts.

S/PV.9066

With the gross domestic product having contracted
by 1.8 per cent in 2021 as Government revenues shrank,
Haiti’s economic situation remains a serious cause for
concern. Meanwhile, humanitarian needs continue to
increase, particularly in the aftermath of the earthquake
that devastated the southern peninsula last August. This
year, some 4.9 million Haitians are expected to require
humanitarian assistance, with at least 4.5 million people
forecasted to need urgent food assistance.
It is essential that Haiti remain at the forefront of
the international community’s agenda and that national
authorities receive the assistance they need to address
those interconnected challenges. Nonetheless, only
Haitians hold the key to unlocking sustainable solutions
to the country’s protracted crisis. BINUH will continue
to encourage all parties to constructively engage and
come together to chart a common, consensual path to a
return to democracy.
Similarly, under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the peace and security and development
arms of the United Nations will continue to work
hand in hand to support Haiti in moving from
emergency assistance to longer-term stability and
enduring development.
The President: I thank Ms. La Lime for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Descardes.
Mr. Descardes (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for inviting
me to brief the Security Council on the situation
in Haiti.
I understand that this meeting is being held
following the assessment of the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) by an
independent expert.
I come from a country ravaged by a multidimensional
crisis in the hope of providing an authentic Haitian
perspective. In my daily work at my organization,
Volunteers for the Development of Haiti, a civil society
organization, I am continually confronted with the
harsh reality of Haiti.
In 2020 and 2021, for example, I coordinated with
colleagues no less than 10 regional workshops and a
national civil society forum on proposals to end the
crisis. I was also able to coordinate the implementation of
a methodology known as a “360 degrees methodology”,
which allowed us to gather proposals from the major

22-385543/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

actors of the crisis. Closer to home, on 8 and 9 June
I was once again able to hear the views of several
dozen Haitian leaders at a multisectoral workshop on
governance in Haiti.
From what I hear in the public debate and my
engagement on the ground, I have come to understand
that Haiti must today address the following pressing
challenges: the establishment of inclusive and
consensus-based governance, ensuring security with
a view to promoting the rule of law and reducing
violence, the organization of transparent elections and
the strengthening of public finances.
For inclusive and consensus-based governance, we
must welcome the initiatives already taken and those
under way. However, we must recognize that we must
also broaden the current consensus. The resumption
of consultations between Prime Minister Ariel Henry
and the Montana Group’s monitoring office, as well as
the establishment of a tripartite facilitation committee
with high-level representatives of the religious
sector, the business sector and academia, are also
commendable initiatives that correctly aim to identify,
through an inter-Haitian dialogue, a Haitian solution
to the problems of Haitian men and women. Only an
inter-Haitian dialogue can build a broader consensus. I
therefore encourage the actors to go beyond statements
of good intentions.
With regard to security and human rights, the
Human Rights Analysis and Research Institute, a
Haitian organization, reported that the incidence of
kidnapping had increased more than 18 per cent in
2021 as compared to 2020. For the month of May 2022,
200 cases were reported. In recent months, human
rights abuses, particularly those involving physical
abuse, killings and acts of sexual violence, have
worsened. Armed gangs, which use young people as
both a channel for recruitment and in their operations,
occupy almost all the territories in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area and paralyse land routes between the
capital and towns in the provinces, which affects the
transport of products, especially agricultural products,
thereby aggravating the acute food crisis facing more
than 4.5 million Haitians.
Impunity continues to prevail to the point that, a
few days before the first anniversary of the heinous
assassination of President Jovenel Moïse, justice
remains silent. There is an urgent need for transnational
action to be taken against those involved in Haiti in
4/20

16/06/2022

smuggling, the illegal arms trade and financial crimes.
The Haitian National Police, with the support of judges,
must establish effective operations to dismantle gangs,
although in the view of the public there is much doubt
concerning the capacity of the Haitian National Police
to deal with them alone without external assistance,
given that the police is understaffed and underequipped
while armed gangs seem to be well equipped and
well organized.
The Government must also take steps to strengthen
judicial institutions and infrastructure, whose
deficiencies are contributing to the denial of justice,
prolonged pretrial detention and the violation of
prisoners’ rights. In addition, steps must be taken for
the Court of Cassation and the Superior Council of the
Judiciary to function better.
A fund for socioeconomic support for the residents
of disadvantaged neighbourhoods, with an emphasis on
women, must be created to prevent the effects of poverty
on violence and interrupt the cycle of recruitment
and integration of young people into networks of
armed groups.
Similarly,
the
public-private
international
community partnership that is being tested in the
education sector, which will enable the reopening of
schools in tough neighbourhoods, should be encouraged
and pursued.
With respect to the elections, which are crucial
to the stability and re-establishment of the country’s
democratic institutions, the Government must appoint
a consensus-based electoral council, mobilize the
financial resources necessary for the elections and
guarantee political parties financial support to prevent
dirty money from influencing election campaigns. At
the same time, the political parties should work towards
a political panorama that groups them according to
their affiliations to avoid fragmenting the electorate
and to ensure that the winners have genuine popular
legitimacy. It would of course be a good idea to revise the
Constitution, including where it concerns the length of
terms of office, the balance of powers, the authorization
and timing of the discharge of administrative duties,
the definition of roles at the local-authority level and
the conditions for integrating the Haitian diaspora into
the political, economic and social life of the country.
With respect to cleaning up public finances, the
Government must regain control of the collection
agencies and reorganize the economic and financial
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

institutions in agreement with the private sector. It
should also set up boards of directors and management
bodies for the audit agencies, with the participation
of technocrats who reflect the make-up of the various
groups, especially the Petrochallengers. The situation
being what it is, it is up to the current authorities, the
political actors and civil society to stand together to
face these challenges, which taken together are not
insurmountable if we take advantage of the critical
mass of Haitians, both in the diaspora and living in
the country, who are capable of improving Haiti’s
poor prospects.
The international community is also called on to
contribute. In that regard, I am pleased to note various
programmes that have been implemented by technical
and financial partners. In particular, I welcome BINUH,
which for three years has taken on the difficult mission of
supporting Haitian actors in a context of unprecedented
institutional crisis and growing political polarization.
BINUH has further engaged with Haitian civil society,
including youth and women’s organizations, especially
during the past year, and has tried to encourage all
stakeholders to build a broader consensus capable of
facilitating a political and security climate conducive
to holding elections. I therefore encourage BINUH to
increase its efforts along those lines, including working
more closely with young people and civil society.
However, BINUH would be even more effective if it
had adequate resources to strengthen its good-offices
mission and its work of advising and supporting the
efforts of the Haitian National Police in combating the
violence of armed gangs. That would help the Haitian
authorities meet the people’s demands and the country’s
urgent security needs, which if not managed could lead
Haiti into irreversible chaos.
The root causes of human rights abuses, which
often originate in a lack of respect for economic, social
and cultural rights, must be addressed. In 2012 Haiti
ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, and we would therefore like to see
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights strengthen the Haitian authorities’
implementation of those rights, including by signing
an agreement with the Government to support the
realization of economic, social and cultural rights in
concert with the United Nations.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the need for
women to be more integrated into the decision-making
arenas. I also want to acknowledge and encourage the

S/PV.9066

commitment and participation of young people. In view
of the demographic transition that is under way in Haiti,
in which young people will have a significant numerical
advantage, it is crucial to create new alliances with
young Haitians in their quest to build their lives and to
prepare them to better shape a new Haiti in the service
of its 12 million inhabitants.
The President: I thank Mr. Descardes for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative La Lime for
her briefing on the situation in Haiti and for the ongoing
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) and the United Nations country team. I
thank Mr. Descardes for his invaluable perspective on
the issues faced by civil society and its essential role
in finding lasting solutions to Haiti’s long-standing
challenges. We also welcome the participation of
representatives of Haiti and the Dominican Republic
in this meeting. I thank Foreign Minister Généus for
joining us today.
Once again, the Security Council has before it
a report from the Secretary-General (S/2022/481)
highlighting gang violence, insecurity and worrying
humanitarian and economic conditions in Haiti. Once
again, we will all express our concern about the trends
highlighted in this report, as well as the more recent
reports of attacks on a courthouse in Port-au-Prince.
Once again, we will condemn the horrific toll the
ongoing violence has exacted on women and children
in Haiti. And once again, we will all reiterate that it is
long past time for Haiti’s stakeholders to set aside their
differences and to finally put Haiti and Haitians first.
That action can be taken only by Haiti’s leaders.
Until they choose to do so collectively, the years
of discussions in search of a political accord, along
with the years of deteriorating security conditions,
will remain fundamental challenges to an electoral
process. The people of Haiti deserve better. As we have

22-385545/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

repeatedly emphasized to Haiti’s stakeholders, the time
is long past for Haiti’s various competing coalitions to
find their way to a consensus. The United States stands
ready to support Haitian efforts to establish a broadly
representative and inclusive provisional electoral
council. In the interim, the Government of Haiti must
also start the technical work needed to enable free and
fair elections when conditions permit. In response to
the security situation, the United States will continue to
provide increased levels of capacity-building assistance
to the Haitian National Police, technical assistance and
other logistical support to improve citizen security.
Haiti’s ongoing political impasse, difficult human
rights conditions and high levels of poverty and food
insecurity only underscore the importance of BINUH.
The United States commends BINUH for its expertise
and its coordination of the international community’s
efforts in support of political progress, human
rights and security in Haiti. We also take note of the
Secretary-General’s assessment that a special political
mission remains the configuration recommended by
the United Nations for addressing Haiti’s most pressing
challenges, his endorsement of a 12-month mandate
and his recommendation to further enhance BINUH’s
effectiveness. And we look forward to beginning
mandate renewal discussions with the Council and the
reauthorization of BINUH’s mandate in the coming
weeks. But we must also make it clear that while
BINUH and a robust United Nations presence in Haiti
are essential, they are not substitutes for meaningful
reforms that can only be undertaken by Haiti’s leaders.
Ultimately, only the people of Haiti can determine the
way forward.
Given the challenges ahead, Haiti needs the strong
support of the Security Council and the international
community. Together with Mexico, the United States
looks forward to working with all Council members to
help deliver that urgently needed support by renewing
the mandate of BINUH.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. La Lime and Mr. Descardes for
their briefings. I also welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
and the representative of the Dominican Republic. We
once again recognize the commendable work done by
civil society and the United Nations staff in Haiti. We
also express our solidarity with the staff of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) who have
been victims of violence.
6/20

16/06/2022

Four months ago, the members of the Security
Council agreed that the situation in Haiti could hardly
be more disturbing than it was at that time, given the
political, humanitarian, economic and human rights
crises it faced. Today, however, we regret that the
situation has worsened.
The levels of urban violence, mainly in Port-auPrince, are staggering. The cases of sexual violence
perpetrated against women, girls and young men are
truly alarming. Juxtaposed with the impunity of the
gangs are the deplorable conditions of the detainees in
Haitian prisons, most of whom are being held without
trial. Victims are unlikely to find justice under the
current circumstances.
The growing security crisis and the suffering of
the Haitian people aggravate the multidimensional
challenges to political stability and limit any progress
towards sustainable development. Moreover, weapons
are readily available, including some high-calibre
weapons in the hands of gangs. We must focus on the
sources of such weapons as an indispensable first step
to address the crisis. In that regard, we believe that
the container inspection programme and support for
customs authorities are essential.
Given the weakness of the justice and police
apparatus, international cooperation is essential to
strengthen the rule of law. In that regard, my country
will join the joint support programme of the Haitian
National Police, as part of the efforts to coordinate
international collaboration efforts in security matters.
We also welcome initiatives put forward by the
Peacebuilding Fund and the support provided by the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
to implement a national weapons and ammunition plan.
The deterioration of Haiti’s natural environment,
in particular the deforestation of its territory and the
adverse effects of climate change, is another important
factor that contributes to its instability, which is clearly
exacerbated by food insecurity.
On the political front, Mexico regrets that no
agreements have been reached to date among the
main political actors. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/481) essentially rules out the holding of
elections this year. However, we need to start by setting
up an Electoral Council to coordinate and conduct
the upcoming elections. The Haitian people need
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

democratically elected authorities who can address the
current crises.
Against that dire backdrop, we underscore what
was stated in the Secretary-General’s assessment of
BINUH: Haiti needs a robust United Nations presence
in the form of a special political mission with a strong
and stable mandate. BINUH’s good offices are essential
to encourage political dialogue and unite efforts to
revitalize the judicial system, support assistance to the
Haitian National Police and coordinate efforts among
the various United Nations programmes in Haiti. In
addition, it is time to strengthen the Mission’s human
rights and sexual violence components.
While we recognize the undeniable limits of the
United Nations presence in Haiti in recent decades, it is
essential that, as an international community and as the
Security Council, we assume our responsibility to the
Haitian people, with full respect for their sovereignty
and self-determination. Mexico is committed to
supporting its sister Caribbean nation. In that regard,
together with the United States, we must take action,
with the support of all Council members, in view of the
renewal of BINUH’s mandate, which clearly needs to
be strengthened.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime for her briefing and her team’s work in an
increasingly challenging context. I welcome hearing
from our civil society briefer, and I welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti,
who is joining us today.
Allow me to make three points.
First, the international community must remain
committed to supporting a Haitian-led solution to the
complex security, health and economic challenges
faced by the Haitian people. The United Kingdom
firmly believes that the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) is fundamental
in facilitating a united approach to resolving those
multifaceted challenges. By strengthening the Haitian
National Police and facilitating dialogue between
Haitian political stakeholders, BINUH’s efforts lay the
groundwork for stability in Haiti. It is therefore critical
that BINUH continue that work, and we look forward to
discussions on the renewal.
Secondly, while we support Haitian-led solutions,
we understand there has been limited progress by

S/PV.9066

Haitian stakeholders in resolving the political gridlock.
We are disappointed that that continues to obstruct
potential solutions for securing the welfare of the Haitian
people. We call on all actors to resume negotiations and
agree to form a Government capable of ensuring the
necessary security environment within which free and
fair elections can be held as soon as possible.
Furthermore, it is extremely regrettable that the
perpetrators of the assassination of President Moïse
have not yet been brought to justice. That abhorrent
act undermined the Haitian people’s right to determine
their own future democratically.
Thirdly, as the Security Council discussed in May,
the security and human rights situation continues to
deteriorate, notably with the increase in kidnappings,
indiscriminate criminal violence and instances of
human trafficking. Those kidnappings increasingly
target members of the international community who are
often supporting the efforts of the Haitian Government
to overcome those crises.
Women and girls in Haiti experience myriad
human rights abuses, including sexual and genderbased violence. The United Kingdom urges the
Haitian authorities to improve access to medical
and psychosocial services for survivors and to hold
perpetrators to account. We continue to support
BINUH’s work with the Government of Haiti and the
international community to tackle those challenges.
We look forward to renewed efforts by BINUH to help
restore human rights and the rule of law through its
next mandate.
We remain deeply worried by the humanitarian
situation in Haiti. Existing economic and health crises
have been compounded by the devastating earthquake
in southern Haiti last year and the rise in global food
prices exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
The United Kingdom encourages all actors to work
constructively to find solutions to the root causes of
those crises and to support recovery and progress for
the Haitian people.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Kenya and my country, Gabon.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Helen La Lime for her enlightening briefing,
and Mr. Arnoux Descardes for his contribution. We

22-385547/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

also welcome the participation of Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti and the representative of the Dominican
Republic at this meeting.
Since our previous meeting in February (see
S/PV.8969), the situation in Haiti has rapidly
deteriorated, raising serious concerns. Gang violence
has continued to cause unprecedented suffering among
civilians and a worsening of the humanitarian situation.
People have been forced to flee their homes, children
have dropped out of school and the overwhelmed
Haitian National Police has been forced to focus on
combating armed gangs and protecting internally
displaced persons.
Those who have studied Haiti’s history understand
that the revolution resulted in a heavy burden for it, as
it was made to pay reparations for its freedom. Haiti’s
legacy of underdevelopment and insecurity cannot be
separated from the historical injustices it has suffered
for rising up against slavery. In a country that has for
decades remained resilient in the face of every form of
adversity, it is disheartening to see such high levels of
unrest, with thousands of young people fleeing their
homes in search of safety and a better life. The Council
has always been united in the view that Haiti faces
serious political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges. The situation in Haiti today demands
greater attention from the international community and
it is imperative to ensure that the Council takes more
decisive and urgent measures. In that regard, the A3
would like to make the following comments.
First, with regard to the political situation, while
recognizing the initiatives that are under way, the A3 also
notes the challenges that the various stakeholders have
encountered in engaging in a comprehensive national
dialogue process. As Africans, we are very interested in
the role that the region can play in resolving the crisis.
We therefore commend the Caribbean Community for its
commitment and initiatives, particularly in the context
of the post-earthquake recovery. The best solution to the
current political situation is through a genuine process
of inclusive, broadly Haitian-led and -owned national
dialogue, which must include the full participation of
women and young people. The A3 therefore calls on
all Haitian stakeholders to set aside their differences,
build trust, unite in the common interests of the Haitian
people and move towards a democratic electoral
process. We reaffirm the importance of creating the
conditions essential to holding transparent, inclusive,
secure and credible elections. To that end, we welcome
8/20

16/06/2022

the establishment of the tripartite committee and urge
all stakeholders to support its activities in order to
ensure a political consensus. We call on regional and
international stakeholders to support the facilitation
of a Haitian-led and -owned initiative to address the
current political situation.
Secondly, the A3 is deeply concerned about the
horrific atrocities, including heinous murders and
mutilations, that armed gangs are committing against
innocent civilians. The reports of people being burned
alive and houses set on fire are deeply shocking. We
strongly condemn the terror that has been inflicted on
vulnerable populations, including women and children,
in Haiti. The recruitment of minors by armed gangs is
deeply worrying, and we reaffirm that the perpetrators
of such revolting crimes must be held accountable.
While we recognize the various efforts to strengthen the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and reinforce the State
security apparatus, the rise in gang violence, sexual and
gender-based violence and kidnappings has laid bare
the inadequacies of existing security measures. The
Haitian National Police’s capacity must be strengthened
by providing it with human resources and equipment to
combat cross-border crime and community violence.
We welcome the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and other
partners to strengthen the capacity of the HNP, with
a particular focus on anti-gang operations. Only when
we are able to adequately support the HNP in that
endeavour can we hope to reduce gang control and
achieve the minimum security conditions necessary
for Haiti to begin its return to stability. We also urge
the donor community to contribute generously to
the basket fund established to strengthen the HNP’s
capacity to combat the illicit cross-border trade, as
well as to promote the professionalization of the police
and improve its effectiveness in terms of intelligence
gathering, governance and accountability. We know
what the international community is capable of when it
is truly mobilized around a cause. We need to mobilize
massively around the situation in Haiti before it is too
late for the entire region.
We welcome the prospect of the presence of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in Haiti and the promising opportunities it can offer
in terms of controlling the flow of arms and illicit
substances, strengthening customs controls and
increasing Government revenue. Breaking the link
between politics, gangs and illicit financial flows is still
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

crucial. We urge the Council and other international
partners to help the Haitian Government combat
corruption and illicit financial flows into and out of the
country in order to disrupt the supply chains supporting
armed gangs.
Thirdly, to restore the rule of law, the Haitian
authorities must enact comprehensive reform of the
justice sector in order to address prolonged pretrial
detentions, expedite court cases and establish
functional court registries. That will also ensure that
the perpetrators of various heinous crimes and violence
are held accountable. They cannot go unpunished. We
commend the positive role of BINUH and the United
Nations specialized agencies in that regard, particularly
through the appointment of 113 judges, which is
intended to help restore the functioning of the courts,
as well as their efforts to implement the new criminal
and criminal procedure codes.
Fourthly, the lack of economic opportunities and
insufficient access to basic services have prompted many
Haitians to leave the country, which for many means
risking their lives and those of their loved ones. The
country continues to lose the valuable labour force that
is vital to ensuring its reconstruction and investment.
The challenges that Haitian migrants are facing are a
clear reminder of the dire economic situation. There
is an urgent need to strengthen Haiti’s fiscal systems
in order to enable it to mobilize domestic resources
for its development. We encourage the international
community to come together and provide additional
support for food security, infrastructure development,
justice and security-sector reform, education and
disaster risk management.
We are closely following the ongoing discussions
between the Government and international donors to
find structural solutions to the economic crisis. In a
country where 31 per cent of the population is between
the ages of 10 and 24 and where the youth unemployment
rate is high, there is an urgent need to provide job
opportunities. The future prospects for Haiti’s youth
cannot be reduced to a choice between exile and gangs.
We urge the country team to adopt an approach that
focuses on employment and women’s empowerment in
order to support economic recovery. We welcome the
work of the United Nations Development Programme
in that regard, including action to operationalize
national food sovereignty, as well as food security and
nutrition policy, and the development of a road map for
food processing.

S/PV.9066

(spoke in English)
Fifthly, as the BINUH mandate comes up for
renewal next month, the A3 reaffirms its support for the
work of the Mission and welcomes the recommendations
in Mr. Mourad Wahba’s independent assessment. We
encourage the Council to consider them carefully in the
light of the current situation and to come up with an
appropriate mandate to comprehensively address Haiti’s
growing challenges. The A3 would also like to echo
the statement made on Monday by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, recommending that the human rights
component of the BINUH team be strengthened by the
addition of personnel specialized in sexual violence.
Impunity must be met with an implacable response.
In conclusion, the current situation offers the
Council a unique opportunity to prevent Haiti from
descending into a deeper crisis by coming up with
practical solutions. We need to unite and act in a
manner that is supportive of Haiti and all Haitians. The
situation in Haiti must concern all of us, because Haiti
is less than 2,500 kilometres from where we are now
and the extreme poverty that prevails there cannot,
and must not, leave us indifferent. The A3 reiterates
its solidarity with the Haitian people and its support
for BINUH.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to express my
appreciation to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Helen La Lime for her comprehensive yet stark
report. I also thank Mr. Descardes for his valuable
input. We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
As the discussions on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) — which should be adopted no later than
15 July — start to gain momentum, it is imperative
to recognize that the efforts of the international
community regarding Haiti have simply not yielded the
expected results.
As pointed out in the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2022/481), nearly one year after the
assassination of President Moïse and two and a half
years since the dissolution of Parliament, the political
deadlock remains, gang violence has increased and
the legislative and judicial branches of power remain
inoperative. Not only do there seem to be no relevant
signs of improvement regarding any of the dimensions

22-385549/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

16/06/2022

of the multifaceted crisis in Haiti, but the situation
in some respects, such as the security situation, also
seems to be deteriorating.

Secondly, we must provide BINUH with a specific
mandate to support the Haitian authorities in controlling
illicit financial flows.

We had hoped that, during our presidency of
the Security Council in July, we would to be able to
organize a field mission to Haiti before the renewal
of the BINUH mandate, but the security conditions in
Haiti and BINUH’s insufficient resources to guarantee
the safety of the Mission made us postpone that idea.

Thirdly, we must scale up BINUH’s capacity to
support the Haitian judiciary.

The economic, political and institutional situation
of the country is extremely fragile, and holding elections
in such a context remains a daunting and elusive
objective. Such a bleak scenario makes it almost selfevident that United Nations efforts in Haiti, especially
BINUH’s structure, are currently insufficient to prompt
progress on the ground. Let me be clear: there is an
urgent need to change our approach before the situation
spirals out of control and becomes a possible threat to
regional security.
The assessment of BINUH’s mandate at the request
of the Security Council, conducted under the leadership
of Mr. Mourad Wahba, provides important insights into
some of the changes needed. In addition to BINUH’s
good-offices initiatives to break the current political
stalemate, its efforts should encompass urgent measures
to support the Haitian authorities in controlling gang
violence and improving the functioning of the justice
system, which are paramount for bringing institutional
normalcy to Haiti, as well as longer-term projects to
help Haiti address the root causes behind the persistent
levels of violence and instability in the country.
As we firmly believe in Haitian solutions for Haitian
problems, we are glad that the assessment recognizes
that the Haitian National Police, “with steady national
and international commitments and investments”, may
acquire the necessary capabilities to curb violence
in the country. With those elements in mind, Brazil
proposes the following actions in the context of the
renewal of BINUH’s mandate.
First, we must reinforce BINUH’s structure to
provide specialized support to the Haitian National
Police to deal with the deteriorating security conditions
and the greater sophistication of gang activities. In
addition, BINUH’s security contingent needs to be
strengthened and better equipped to guarantee the
safety and mobility of United Nations staff.
10/20

Fourthly, we must strengthen BINUH’s mandate
concerning the prevention, monitoring and investigation
of human rights abuses, in the light of the serious reports
on the pervasive levels of human rights violations,
especially those of a sexual or gender-based nature.
Fifthly, we must encourage more proactive use
of strategic communications in order to raise local
awareness of BINUH’s mandate and build trust and
confidence among the local population. The assessment
of the independent expert, Mr. Wahba, found there is a
lack of clarity of BINUH’s purpose and an expectation
gap among local actors. Strategic communication is an
important tool to help address that issue.
Finally, we concur with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that BINUH’s mandate should be kept
broad enough to allow for some flexibility to respond
to the instability and changing situation on the ground.
In summary, we consider it a moral imperative
to increase efforts to relieve the plight of the Haitian
people. We therefore propose that the United Nations
presence in Haiti be strengthened in terms of resources,
capabilities, personnel and security. BINUH needs
bold and innovative approaches, as well as an enlarged
structure that is better equipped for the challenges that
it faces.
Furthermore, Brazil encourages enhanced cooperation
between the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies, such as the Economic and Social Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission. It is clear that there is
no short-term solution to Haiti’s problems. But I would
like to stress, once again, that Brazil’s commitment to
Haiti is unwavering and that the Haitian people may
count on our continued support and solidarity.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Helen La Lime, for her valuable briefing and her
efforts in Haiti. We welcome the participation of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
and the representative of the Dominican Republic in
today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Descardes for his
extensive information.
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Today’s meeting comes at a critical juncture for
Haiti. We are witnessing a deteriorating security
situation there, including a significant increase in gang
violence that has killed nearly 200 people in one month.
In addition, women and girls continue to be subjected
to sexual violence, with no accountability for those
crimes. Kidnappings, including of United Nations
personnel, have become a major source of income for
the gangs.
All of those challenges have exacerbated the already
fragile humanitarian situation in the country, in which
more than 4.5 million Haitians are suffering today from
acute food insecurity. Meanwhile, Haiti continues to be
exposed to natural disasters owing to climate change,
which has further increased humanitarian needs and
impeded the delivery of aid.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates welcomes
the findings of the Secretary-General’s strategic
assessment, which will inform our discussions in
the upcoming period as we consider the best ways to
enhance the support provided by the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) to the country. We
look forward to engaging constructively with the other
members of the Security Council in that regard. We are
also sincerely grateful to Mr. Mourad Wahba and his
team for their role in providing a clearer picture of the
situation in Haiti. In my statement today I would like to
focus on the following three areas.
First, setting up an inclusive, nationally led political
process is one of the most important ways to support
Haiti on its path toward peace and stability. We believe
that BINUH can contribute to achieving that objective,
particularly through its efforts to facilitate a national
dialogue. In addition, and as we have repeatedly
emphasized in the Council, sustainable peace requires
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in all peacemaking processes, and we therefore welcome
BINUH’s efforts to work with women at the local level
to identify recommendations aimed at enhancing their
participation in the political arena.
Secondly, we must support anti-corruption
measures in order to advance the restoration of
stability and security in Haiti. Such measures include
addressing the trafficking and proliferation of illegal
arms and financial flows, which amplify gang violence
and undermine stability in Haiti and the entire region.
In that context, we appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to build

S/PV.9066

Haiti’s anti-corruption capabilities through initiatives
supporting border security such as the Global Container
Control Programme. We also support ongoing efforts to
enhance cooperation between UNODC, the Government
of Haiti and BINUH.
Thirdly, the capacity of the Haitian National
Police (HNP) must be strengthened to enable it to
respond effectively to the growing security challenges
and rising levels of gang-related violence. That
includes increasing its presence across the country
and improving its intelligence capabilities. In order to
address the continuing rise in conflict-related sexual
violence and hold the perpetrators accountable, it is
important to appoint HNP officers who specialize
in providing protection to women and girls, which
would help to improve women and girls’ sustainable
access to basic services and to temporary response
measures such as mobile medical clinics. It should be
noted that improving the security sector in Haiti will
be more effective if it is complemented by community
violence-reduction programmes, which can address the
root causes of violence and socioeconomic disparities
in Haiti directly.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its solidarity with Haitians and its full support for
BINUH and its efforts to achieve security and stability
in Haiti.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Representative La
Lime for her briefing. I also listened carefully to the
statement by the representative of civil society.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/481)
and the briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General show that Haiti is deeply mired in
political, economic, security and humanitarian crises,
which is dispiriting and disquieting. We are profoundly
sympathetic to the Haitian people in their tragic plight,
as well as seriously concerned about the escalations
of gang violence and the kidnapping and maiming
of women and children. A large number of Haitians
have fled their homes in despair only to be violently
expelled and repatriated en masse by some countries
in an inhumane way. The basic human rights of Haitian
refugees, especially women and children, have been
grossly violated, and the situation is cause for great
concern. China strongly condemns the kidnapping of
United Nations staff and calls on the Haitian Government
to protect their safety and security effectively.

22-3855411/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

We strongly appeal to all political parties in
Haiti to actively respond to people’s expectations,
reject self-interest, show political responsibility and
accountability, end the senseless political struggles,
restore constitutional law and order and State
governance as soon as possible and put an end to
disorder and paralysis. That is the only way for Haiti
to achieve security and stability and emerge from
the crisis.
Over the past 30 years, the United Nations has made
immense efforts and invested huge resources in aid of
Haiti. But the security and humanitarian situations
have gone from bad to worse, while the people have
continued to suffer terribly. As we speak, according
to the Secretary-General’s report, 4.9 million Haitian
people — 43 per cent of the total population — are
reliant on humanitarian assistance. Gang violence is
spiralling upwards. From January to May, the number of
kidnappings increased by 36.4 per cent year on year, with
nearly 200 kidnappings and more than 2,000 murders
in May alone, which is a record high. The collusion
between gang forces and Government officials has
contributed to rampant transnational crime, smuggling
and drug trafficking, while national governance might
as well be non-existent. The international community
should respond to the realities, learn from the lessons
of the past, eliminate the systematic and structural
problems that hinder Haiti’s peaceful development
and explore ways to provide it with more targeted and
effective support and assistance.
First, it is imperative to push Haiti to end the political
deadlock as soon as possible. An effective constitutional
mechanism and order are the fundamental sine qua non
for Haiti’s ability to attain lasting security and stability.
To promote a political solution that is Haitian-owned
and -led, the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) needs a greater sense of urgency and must
step up its political mediation efforts. One immediate
priority should be urging the Haitian Government and
political leaders to shoulder their responsibility for
managing the country effectively, encourage all the
parties to proceed in the interests of the country and the
people and use dialogue and consultation to determine
the transitional political process and general election
arrangements, with a view to restoring constitutional
order as soon as possible.
Secondly, effective measures should be taken to
first deal with the root causes in order to improve the
security situation effectively. The Secretary-General
12/20

16/06/2022

points out in the BINUH mandate assessment report that
attention should be given to addressing the underlying
causes of the volatile security situation in Haiti. We have
noted that BINUH is assisting Haiti in strengthening
its police capacity-building and is cooperating with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
strengthen controls at the ports and combat smuggling.
Lessons from the past show that in order to restore
social stability and security and crack down thoroughly
on gang activities, it is essential to cut off the supply
chain of gang funding and weaponry, especially to
severely punish the gang leaders and politicians who
are colluding for profit. The Security Council should
consider taking effective measures in that regard, give
a clear warning about acts that obstruct and undermine
the process of political dialogue and threaten Haiti’s
security and take measures against gang leaders and
politicians who collude with gangs.
Thirdly, countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean can leverage their advantage and play a
greater role in supporting peace and development
in Haiti. The situation in Haiti has remained turbulent
for a long time. Its spillover effects are posing an everincreasing threat to regional security and stability.
China calls on the countries of the region and regional
organizations to help Haiti promote political dialogue
and to enhance coordination and cooperation in
combating drug trafficking, arms smuggling and illegal
financial flows.
China hopes that the Security Council will seize
the opportunity of the renewal of BINUH’s mandate
to carry out a comprehensive review of its work
and, in the light of the current situation in Haiti and
the Secretary-General’s mandate assessment report,
explore more effective ways for BINUH to provide
Haiti with support. BINUH’s mandate should have the
right focus, seek to address Haiti’s problems pertinently
and be results-oriented.
In addition, the Mission should use a regular
review mechanism to assess the implementation of
all mandated tasks and make timely adjustments in
order to optimize such implementation. The Council’s
support for BINUH should produce results and hopes,
rather than one disappointment after another.
China stands ready to have in-depth discussions
with other Council members on the renewal of BINUH’s
mandate, including its mandated tasks and duration, as
well as on the coordination and cooperation between
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

BINUH and the United Nations system agencies
present in Haiti, particularly on how to take strong and
effective measures to control illicit money and arms
inflows, so as to jointly explore practical, effective and
sustainable ways to curb illicit financial flows and help
Haiti exit the crisis as soon as possible and embark on a
clear path towards peaceful development.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I too would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General La
Lime for her briefing, as well as Mr. Arnoux Descardes
for his important testimony today. I also want to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Haiti to the Chamber.
I will focus my remarks this afternoon on three areas of
particular concern.
As we have heard, today’s lived reality for
the Haitian people is one of constant intimidation,
grievous violence and absolute terror. The collapse
of State control and rampant gang activity has led to
the population living in fear — of being caught in the
crossfire or kidnapped if they leave their homes — and
with no guarantee of protection from sexual violence or
assault, even in their own homes.
Ireland condemns in the strongest possible terms
the systematic use of sexual violence as a weapon
against countless women and girls across the country.
Men and boys are also affected. Testimony from
victims and survivors make clear the scale and brutality
of the acts being perpetrated against the Haitian people,
with the perpetrators being emboldened by impunity
and seemingly untouchable in the context of a failed
judicial system.
Civil society space in Haiti is shrinking as a direct
consequence of the violence utilized by gangs to exert
control and dominate the population. Social leaders, not
least women leaders, risk their lives and those of their
families in standing up for their rights and working
constructively to create a better, more peaceful future
for Haiti. The many and varied challenges confronting
the Haitian people cannot be overcome in the absence
of active, stable and representative governance. The
need for an inclusive dialogue in which women can
participate fully, meaningfully and safely has never
been more urgent.
Those committed to working to overcome political
deadlock in Haiti need to be protected. They need the
support, encouragement and assistance of the United
Nations and the international community. As we look
towards the renewal of the mandate of the United

S/PV.9066

Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), what is
clear is the dire and urgent need to help build capacity
within the Haitian National Police. It is also crucial
to support judicial reform, strengthen the capacity to
provide protection from gender-based violence and
provide a holistic response to victims.
The Security Council is keenly aware of the impact
the current food security crisis is having on fragile
countries across the globe. Haiti has not escaped that
ripple effect, with almost half of its population now
facing severe food insecurity. Violence has disrupted
food production, transport and access to markets for
millions, who are falling deeper into hunger and acute
malnutrition. Spiralling fuel costs further compound
the situation.
Humanitarian access has grown more precarious,
curtailed by gang control of roads, ports and border
crossings. Humanitarian workers, focused solely on
alleviating dire need, are being targeted by gangs
and are at risk of kidnapping and sexual violence. Yet
against that challenging environment, the humanitarian
response plan in Haiti remains less than 30 per cent
funded, which is one of the lowest levels of funding of
any plan. At a time of global turbulence, we must not
allow the humanitarian needs of Haiti to be forgotten.
The Council has a responsibility to those carrying
out its good offices and its mandate. That means
ensuring that BINUH has adequate resources to carry
out all its mandated functions. We have heard about
the extreme jeopardy facing its staff in their efforts to
carry out our mandate. They carry an unimaginable
burden in our name.
Ireland looks forward to engaging constructively
with Council members to deliver a mandate in support of
the Haitian people that includes resources, both human
and financial, that are sufficient to the task at hand. We
welcome the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral resulting from the independent assessment.
Over the coming weeks, we have a responsibility to
consider how to translate those into actions through
the new mandate. Today’s meeting has left us in no
doubt — if any doubt had existed — as to the scale of
the challenges being faced by the Haitian people. Our
deep regret and concern are not enough. The people of
Haiti deserve our action.
Mr. Mathur (India): At the outset, let me thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime
for her comprehensive briefing on the implementation

22-3855413/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

of the Security Council mandate given to the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and on
the recent developments in Haiti. I would also like to
thank the civil society briefer, Mr. Descardes, for his
remarks. We welcome the presence of Haiti’s Foreign
Minister at today’s meeting and the representative of
the Dominican Republic.
As we have seen in the past decade, recovery
from the multidimensional challenges in Haiti has
not been easy. The resilience of the people of Haiti
has been tested repeatedly by unpredictable political
developments and tragic natural calamities. Last year,
Haiti faced challenges on both those fronts. First, there
was the assassination of President Moïse in July last
year, followed by the devastating high-magnitude
earthquake and subsequent hurricane in August. All of
those calamities exacerbated the humanitarian crisis.
The political and security situation has remained
precarious over the past four months. Haitian political
stakeholders have yet to reach any agreement on the
transition, the restoration of functioning institutions
and the holding of elections. The dire humanitarian
situation has been further complicated by the prevailing
situation of economic stagnation.
In that context, we note the recent efforts of Special
Representative La Lime and her team in facilitating
dialogue among the interim Government, the opposition
and civil society groups. It is important to have a clear
timeline and road map for the transition and the holding
of elections in Haiti. All Haitian stakeholders need
to work constructively to build trust and confidence
and arrive at a consensus on the restoration of the
constitutional order through a realistic and practical
road map.
The restoration of law and order has remained
one of the biggest impediments to Haiti’s progress.
The persisting gang-related violence and kidnappings,
including in the capital city of Port-au-Prince,
have further contributed to the prevailing sense
of insecurity. In some instances, United Nations
personnel have also been targeted. Such attacks
deserve the Council’s strongest condemnation, and we
call for swift action against the perpetrators. We also
reiterate the importance of proactively pursuing the
capacity-building of the Haitian National Police. In that
regard, we welcome the formal request of the interim
Government to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for assistance in addressing the perennial
14/20

16/06/2022

problem of the entry of illicit goods into Haiti. We also
underscore the importance of the smooth and efficient
functioning of the respective judicial institutions to
address the environment of impunity.
On mandate renewal with regard to BINUH, we
have taken note of the Secretary-General’s findings that
Haiti is undergoing one of the most difficult periods in
its history. The presence of BINUH is important, and it
needs to be empowered to support Haitian authorities in
a more purposeful manner. My delegation will engage
constructively in the mandate renewal discussions.
India has had a long-standing relation with Haiti and
its people. India has been a major troop-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Haiti and contributed three formed police units to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. These
were in operation until 2017. India has also extended
assistance to Haiti in its times of need, commencing
with the 2010 earthquake rehabilitation efforts. We
also extended emergency financial aid of $2,050,000 to
Haiti in the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew in October
2016. More recently, we donated essential life-saving
medicines to address the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We have full confidence that the people of Haiti
have the strength and resilience to overcome the current
challenges they face. India reiterates its commitment to
support the people of Haiti in these testing times.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for
her briefing today and the pertinent recommendations
in the report (S/2022/481). We thank her and team for
their dedication and efforts in Haiti. We would also like
to thank Mr. Arnoux Descardes for his valuable input,
and we welcome the presence today of the Foreign
Minister of Haiti in the Chamber.
Once again, we must stress our deep concern for
what Haiti and the Haitian people are going through. As
the recent report sets out, almost every indicator shows
a negative situation. Violence has affected the ability of
Haitians to meet their basic needs.
Approximately 17,000 citizens have reportedly fled
gang-affected areas, and there is evidence of recruitment
of minors by armed gangs. The chronic kidnapping
situation is also a worrisome example drawing together
the exploitation, insecurity and the disregard for human
rights that is endemic in Haiti.
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

We are also alarmed by reports of increasing use
of sexual and gender-based violence against girls
and women by gangs as a form of retaliation and
punishment. It is vital that victims and survivors have
safe access to comprehensive health services, legal
services and information.
We are also concerned that the Haitian National
Police sexual and gender-based violence data centre is
no longer functional. The rule of law and the justice
sector must be strengthened in order to end this cycle of
impunity and promote accountability for human rights
violations and abuses. In addition, as we head into
hurricane season, we once again call for greater focus
on resilience-building.
Climate disasters take multidimensional forms
and impact the poorest rural communities the most. As
people are forced to flee to cities, they are increasingly
vulnerable to exploitation by gangs. The relationship
is clear — there are climate elements that contribute
to instability. We therefore believe that this should
be a stronger part of the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the United
Nations family.
Norway remains committed to the presence of the
United Nations in Haiti through BINUH, the country
team and agencies, funds and programmes. We look
forward to actively engaging in the upcoming mandate
renewal process as a strong partner of Haiti. Norway
will remain a development partner and provide further
support in areas such as climate resilience, food
security, water and sanitation and the empowerment
of women.
In facing those challenges, we urge all political actors
in Haiti to come together to find a joint way forward
and restore legitimately elected institutions. Political
will must be found to forge reconciliation and a path
towards free, fair and transparent elections. The only
solution for Haiti is one created by Haitians themselves.

S/PV.9066

community must mobilize further. I would like to now
touch upon several aspects.
First, there is no alternative to dialogue for breaking
the current political impasse. In that connection, the
direct contacts established between the Prime Minister
and the opposition are positive. All political actors
must work to build the necessary consensus to organize
elections once the conditions are met, particularly
security conditions. In order to succeed, it is important
to appoint Provisional Electoral Committee members
that are acceptable to all.
Secondly, gang violence must be stopped at all
costs. We made that assessment less than a month
ago when we met. Those criminal groups act with
impunity and, as a result, the number of homicides and
kidnappings this year has surged. Gangs undermine
the authority of the State and plunder its resources.
Without security, there can be neither rule of law
nor development. Against that backdrop, our priority
must be to strengthen the Haitian National Police. We
therefore welcome the proposal to increase the ceiling
for police advisers in the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH). The creation of a multi-donor
funding fund is also a very welcome development.
France has stepped up its security cooperation and will
continue to do so.
Thirdly, we need to return to the normal
functioning of institutions. As mentioned, the prisons
are overcrowded and dilapidated, without water or basic
services. The Haitian judicial system, lacking resources,
is also failing and unable to carry out the investigation
into the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse,
in particular. Impunity, like widespread corruption,
undermines confidence in the State and destroys social
ties. The budding cooperation between Haiti and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is therefore
a welcome and positive step.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I wish to join others in thanking
Special Representative La Lime for her briefing. I
would also like to thank Mr. Descardes for his briefing.
I welcome the presence today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Religion of Haiti.

Finally, the economic and humanitarian situation
in Haiti is alarming and is rapidly deteriorating. As
mentioned several times today, nearly half of the Haitian
population will need humanitarian aid in 2022. There
is therefore an urgent need to strengthen humanitarian
support, particularly food aid. Against that backdrop,
it is essential that the Haitian State work to strengthen
governance and the accountability of its institutions,
particularly in the fight against corruption.

As we just heard, there is an emergency in Haiti. The
Haitian authorities must respond, and the international

Before concluding, I would like to return to the
important work that the United Nations is doing in

22-3855415/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti. As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/481)
stresses, maintaining a robust United Nations presence
in Haiti is essential, particularly in the political and
security arenas. We hope that BINUH is renewed for
another 12 months and provided a robust mandate and
the necessary resources to carry out its difficult mission.
France stands by Haiti, which is linked to France
by ancient ties and a common language. I would like to
commend the political and field work carried out by the
International Organization of La Francophonie. France
is determined to support the Haitians to bring the crisis
to an end, which the country so desperately needs.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in this meeting
of Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Religion of Haiti. We listened carefully to the
remarks made by Mr. Arnoux Descardes. And we thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Helen
La Lime for her briefing on the situation in the country
and the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH).
We are increasingly concerned by the developing
situation in Haiti. The recent four-month reporting
period was again characterized by continuing
deterioration on all key issues — from political
settlement to the security and humanitarian situation.
Key stakeholders in the Government, civil society and
the business sector still fundamentally disagree on how
to overcome the political deadlock. While we can see
that Prime Minister Ariel Henry is trying to establish
a dialogue with some forces, we have to admit that
considering everything, it is premature to talk about
concrete results. Unfortunately, BINUH’s assistance
in organizing informal discussions between various
groups is not having any perceptible effects either. We
hope to see some fresh ideas in the discussions in the
tripartite committee of representatives from academia,
religious organizations and the business community.
The security situation is being exacerbated by the
armed groups that are fighting one another as well as
the Government. In the first five months of the year,
the number of kidnappings has increased by a third,
murders went up, the number of internally displaced
persons once again reached 17,000 and sex-related
crimes were off the charts. All that demands that
Haiti consolidate and enhance the effectiveness of its
system of law enforcement, which is on the front lines
of the country’s challenges. Nor should we forget the
16/20

16/06/2022

likely impact of the global food crisis caused by the
irresponsible actions of Western States, for which they
try to blame Russia, to no avail.
We understand the Secretary-General’s logic
when he concludes in his report (S/2022/481) that
the current domestic political and security situation
means that we cannot count seeing the long-overdue
elections held before the end of the year. However, we
believe that only a political settlement of the country’s
internal contradictions can lead to a genuinely
sustainable settlement.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General’s
conclusions about the independent review of the work
of the special political mission prepared in accordance
with resolution 2600 (2021). We have noted his most
detailed recommendations were about helping to
strengthen the capacity of the Haitian National Police,
and we are ready to give due consideration to the relevant
recommendations as part of the work on the next draft
resolution. However, we would like to see more details
on the mission’s mandate to provide assistance to
Haitians in establishing an internal dialogue. Without
progress on the political track, tackling the country’s
security problems may be merely tilting at windmills,
because it is the chaos in the legislative, executive and
judicial branches of the Government that is creating
fertile ground for the rise in crime.
Haitians must come up with a viable solution for
emerging from their political nosedive on their own.
Externally imposed solutions are not capable of dealing
with the unique and complex nature of the underlying
causes of Haiti’s crisis. We firmly believe that one
of those causes is the years of external interference
and the imposition of democratizing models that fail
to consider the country’s specificities. That crude,
bull-in-a-china-shop approach has become the primary
cause of countless crises all over the world. Any
international assistance, including that provided by
the United Nations, must be responsible and based on
broad national discussion.
For our part, we will continue our efforts to achieve
results through the work of the Security Council and
the United Nations mission, which should be centred
round a Haitian-led and exclusively Haitian-owned
settlement process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

I join others in thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General La Lime for her comprehensive
briefing today, and I would like to express our special
appreciation to Mr. Descardes for giving us a frank
account of the situation in his home country and for
providing us with some clear recommendations on how
to better support the people of Haiti in their struggle
for peace, stability and development. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Jean Victor Généus,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, and of the
Ambassador of the Dominican Republic.
Every United Nations and media report confirms
that the security situation in Haiti is deteriorating
rapidly. Gangs control most of the country’s territory.
We are particularly concerned about the rise in sexual
violence and the recruitment of minors by armed
gangs. Some speak of a black hole in the Caribbean.
In such a desperate situation, it is difficult to establish
priorities, because everything is needed and everything
becomes a priority. It is important to restore security
and replace the rule of gangs with the rule of law. Haiti
and its people cannot continue be subject to the law of
the street.
The Haitian National Police must be professional.
It must be strengthened, assisted and trained in order to
address the violence and to fight back against organized
crime. Urgent measures are needed to guarantee law
enforcement and improve judicial institutions. It is the
responsibility of the Government of Haiti to protect its
people, but as reality shows, it cannot do it alone. The
international community should stand ready to listen to
the pleas of the people of Haiti and do more to support
the security institutions wherever necessary. In that
regard, we welcome the creation of the multi-donor
basket fund, in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme, to support the Haitian
National Police in becoming a more responsible,
professional and accountable law-enforcement agency,
as well as the establishment of the new joint country
team units of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH). The recommendations of the assessment
mission to strengthen BINUH’s mandate and operations
concerning the justice and law enforcement sectors will
be very useful in reshaping the mandate, and we thank
the United Nations and the independent expert for their
work in that regard.
We welcome the joint efforts of BINUH, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other international partners, in cooperation with the

S/PV.9066

national authorities, to tackle corruption and illicit
financial flows, which are used by gangs for their
illegal activities and which undermine State authority.
We believe that BINUH’s mandate should address
the needs of the Government in overcoming those
challenges, while also ensuring proper monitoring of
the situation on the ground, including regarding human
rights. With the increase in human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual violence, BINUH’s human
rights mandate and human rights services should
be strengthened. We look forward to engaging with
all Council members to design a strong mandate for
BINUH, based on the findings of the assessment report,
that will be fit for purpose in the challenging security
and political context in Haiti.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s efforts to
guide all the parties towards a conducive political
environment. We know it is not easy, but we strongly
believe that a sustainable solution for peace in Haiti can
be achieved only through an inclusive dialogue among
all political actors, the private sector, civil society and
representatives of women and youth, paving the way
for free and democratic elections as soon as feasible to
bring back legitimacy, impose legal authority and build
a State that works for all.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Jean Victor Généus,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): I am
particularly honoured to be able to take part in this
meeting of the Security Council to consider the
Secretary-General’s eighth periodic report (S/2022/481)
on the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH), pursuant to Council resolutions 2476 (2019)
and 2600 (2021).
Before presenting Haiti’s remarks, I would like
to warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on
Albania’s assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of June. We wish you every success in
conducting its work. I would also like to greet the
other members of the Council and thank them for
their contributions to this discussion, their expressions
of concern and their thoughtful comments, which
demonstrate their continued solidarity with Haiti and
which we have duly noted.

22-3855417/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

I extend my congratulations to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen
La Lime, and thank her for her introduction of the report
(S/2022/481), of which we took note with renewed
interest. I also welcome the presence among us
of Mr. Arnoux Descardes, Executive Director of
Volontariat pour le développement d’Haïti, and thank
him for his enlightening comments. I also welcome
the presence of the Ambassador of the Dominican
Republic, our neighbouring country, with which we
have good relations.
The report comes at a time when the security
situation continues to worsen in Haiti. The activities
of armed gangs has created a widespread climate
of insecurity. Kidnappings for ransom and violent
killings have become commonplace, and even foreign
diplomats, including Members of the United Nations,
are not spared. Clashes between rival gangs have
claimed numerous victims among the population, and
thousands of people have had to flee their homes to
escape the violence.
However, the authorities are not standing idly by.
With the very limited resources available to them they
are doing everything possible to incapacitate those who
seek to maintain chaos and prevent the situation from
being normalized.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
report recognizes the efforts made by the Haitian
National Police to counter gangs’ criminal activities. Its
efforts have led to the arrest of a number of individuals
suspected of involvement in kidnappings or killings.
The Haitian National Police, the force on which the
Government relies to respond to those phenomena,
cannot go it alone in current circumstances despite the
courage and the determination that it has shown so far
despite its limited means.
The Government of the Republic of Haiti has
decided to make every sacrifice to free up the resources
necessary to provide the Haitian National Police with
the means it requires to carry out its mission effectively.
The difficulties faced by the Haitian Administration
in acquiring armoured vehicles and lethal weapons
continue to put the Haitian National Police at a
disadvantage vis-à-vis the gangs, which are able to
acquire such weapons by means of smuggling.
Given those circumstances, it is urgent for the
Haitian National Police to receive, in the coming
days, not the coming weeks or the coming months,
18/20

16/06/2022

robust support from our partners in the international
community so that we can put an immediate end to this
deeply unacceptable situation.
The countries and organizations that are friends
of Haiti must determine the most appropriate way to
rapidly provide considerable assistance to us to give us
sufficient equipment and means, training on the ground
and to carry out the vetting of Haitian National Police
personnel. That is essential if we wish to restore a stable
security situation.
The Government genuinely appreciates the
assistance received from the international community
to help the Haitian National Police uphold their
responsibilities to protect and serve the population.
I would highlight the initiatives taken by the United
States, Canada and France of holding meetings with
our international partners to discuss the numerous
problems Haiti that faces and to provide the necessary
international support.
Several States Members of the United Nations
have promised bilateral support to the Haitian Police
Force, including financial and material assistance and
specialized police advisers.
We have taken note of the creation by the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) of a basket
fund to support the Haitian National Police in combating
gang violence and organized crime. We warmly thank
our international partners for their active cooperation
and their solidarity.
On that point, I welcome the recent report by the
Secretary-General on the mandate of BINUH, which
clearly points out the limits of the Haitian National
Police as well as its lack of capacity and expertise
in terms of the number of experts and degree of
specialization in order to address the unprecedented
level of crime in the country.
We do not want the international community or
foreign forces to replace the Haitian National Police
and come in and do our work for us. What the Haitian
Government wants is to see the remit and the capacity
of BINUH bolstered to provide effective training and
support for the Haitian National Police.
The experience of the United Nations presence in
Haiti in recent decades has shown the limits of that
form of intervention, which is aimed at substituting for
local forces in order to achieve satisfactory targeted
results. However, we cannot but recognize the fact that
22-38554

16/06/2022

The question concerning Haiti

following the withdrawal of international forces, local
structures cannot achieve the same level of performance
because they have not received adequate training and
do not have the same means at their disposal.
Security is a public good; it is a priority not only for
our Government but also for the Haitian people, who
are at their wits’ end. Urgent solutions are required
as quickly as possible if we wish to restore Haitian
democracy. We cannot seriously imagine any free,
honest and democratic election in such an environment,
much less a national economic recovery or sustainable
development undertakings.
Restoring normal functioning for our institutions
can be achieved only through concerted action, so that
we can put an end to armed-gang activities, which
terrorize our people and prevent the free circulation of
persons and goods.
In addition to resolving the existing security
problems, we need also to address, through effective
management, other related short-term and structural
issues that are directly related to the phenomenon of
insecurity. I refer here to the dysfunctional judicial
system, illicit trafficking in weapons, munitions and
drugs, and corruption and smuggling.
The exchange of information on individuals involved
in those reprehensible acts and concerted actions is
essential so that we can effectively combat insecurity.
In the complex situation in Haiti today, the solution
cannot be solely repressive. Many other parameters
must be taken into account. Ending gang activity
presupposes that the forces of law and order will be
able to maintain control over recovered areas so that
the State can fulfil its obligations, such as by providing
basic services to the population, restoring police
stations, building roads, providing drinking water,
electricity and garbage collection, reopening schools,
operating health centres and creating job opportunities.
It is under such conditions that we will be able to settle
citizens and stop irregular migration, which is a major
challenge not only for us but also all the countries of
the region.
Moreover, we must not lose sight of the fact that
finding a sustainable solution to the phenomenon of
insecurity also requires the promotion of Haiti’s longterm socioeconomic development. Even if there is no
causal relationship, there is nevertheless an intimate

S/PV.9066

relationship between the level of crime and the situation
of extreme poverty in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this exchange of views on the situation
in the Republic of Haiti, which is an issue of importance
for my country and the international community.
In 2004, the international community supported
the demands of Haitian society to establish a force
capable of guaranteeing security and peace in Haiti.
For that reason, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) enjoyed recognition
and political legitimacy. Unfortunately, 18 years
later, the situation has dramatically worsened in the
absence of an institutional mechanism to confront the
crisis. Although one of goals of MINUSTAH was to
guarantee the restructuring of the police, the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/481) informs us that that
remains a pending issue.
It is clear that the Haitian National Police has not
adequately developed its capacity to guarantee order
and subdue the many armed gangs that are terrorizing
the population. In that context, the extremely high
levels of street violence have produced such insecurity
that immediate responses are required. But a plan to
gradually improve the Haitian National Police will not
be enough because stabilization work does not concern
only the violent actions of gangs.
That is why the Dominican Republic believes that
stabilization efforts in Haiti must focus on both peace
and political dialogue in order to establish lasting
agreements to build sustainable peace. It is incumbent
upon the United Nations to act urgently for the peace and
stability of Haiti and the region by providing a robust
plan and immediate support for the Haitian National
Police and extending the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti in order to mitigate the
uncertainties faced by Haitians in their lives, which are
of great concern to their neighbours, who are affected
by such profound instability, including several States
members of the Security Council.
I recall that, less than three years ago in this very
Chamber (see S/PV.8559), our country warned of the
negative consequences of reducing the United Nations

22-3855419/20

S/PV.9066

The question concerning Haiti

16/06/2022

presence in Haiti. We are seeing the results of that
disastrous decision today.

community must not and cannot abandon the
Haitian people” (A/76/PV.9. p. 3).

We reiterate that there must not be any delay in
delivering aid to Haiti. The chilling macroeconomic
data clearly illustrate the situation. According to
studies by the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, 5.3 million of the country’s
11 million habitants suffer from chronic hunger. That
statistic has doubled over the past four years. Those
high levels of acute food insecurity are mainly due to
economic decline, political instability, low production,
poor resilience to frequent natural disasters and the
insecurity caused by the gangs that currently control
the country’s critical infrastructure to a large extent.

We must support them at this time of global crises
and unprecedented disasters. We cannot continue to
be spectators of the process of social deterioration in
Haiti. We cannot continue to attend meetings and listen
to reports and try to avoid what is happening in Haiti.
We must act now.

Since stability is not possible as long as there is
hunger, and even less so as long as citizens remain
insecure, the immediate pacification of the situation
is the only way to confront the violence and chaos,
because the threat of a major bloodbath hangs in the
balance and could result from the exacerbation of the
current clashes among criminal gangs and possible
attacks against property by segments of the population
in their search for food.
For our country, the situation represents a national
security issue, given the pressure exerted on our
border in the face of the harsh reality on the ground.
The Dominican Republic will tirelessly reaffirm its
concern and willingness to help our neighbouring
country overcome such an unfortunate situation. But
as President Luis Abinader Corona said last year at
the general debate of the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly,
“It is imperative that we state in the strongest and
most emphatic terms possible that the international

20/20

The international community has the responsibility
to ensure that the measures it takes produce the
expected results. It is time to be critical of ourselves
in order to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past in
Haiti. In the chaos of today, we must not allow new
problems to make us forget the old problems that
remain unresolved. The Haitian people demand to live
their lives in peace. They deserve to be able to hope for
a better future, and the Security Council is equipped
with the mechanisms to lead a joint effort by the
international community, the Haitian Government and
the Haitian people to create a road map leading towards
peace and sustainable development. Our history has
demonstrated the continued support of the Dominican
Republic for the Haitian people and the solidarity of
our people remains unwavering. We reaffirm that we
would like to see a prosperous Haiti that can meet all
the needs of its citizens, offer them opportunities for
progress and ensure their welfare in their own country.
Lastly, we must recall that there is not — and
there will never be — a Dominican solution to the
Haitian problem.
The President: I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

22-38554
