UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/32
14 July 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3554th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 July 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1004 (1995). The Council
is deeply concerned about the ongoing forced relocation of tens of
thousands of civilians from the Srebrenica safe area to the Tuzla region by
the Bosnian Serb party. Such a forced relocation is a clear violation of
the human rights of the civilian population. It is especially concerned
about reports of grave mistreatment and killing of innocent civilians. It
is equally concerned about reports that up to 4,000 men and boys have been
forcibly removed by the Bosnian Serb party from the Srebrenica safe area.
It demands that in conformity with internationally recognized standards of
conduct and international law the Bosnian Serb party release them
immediately, respect fully the rights of the civilian population of the
Srebrenica safe area and other persons protected under international
humanitarian law, and permit access by the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
"The Security Council again condemns the unacceptable practice of
’ethnic cleansing’ and reaffirms that those who have committed or have
ordered the commission of such acts will be held individually responsible
in respect of such acts.
"The Security Council demands that the Bosnian Serb party immediately
allow unimpeded access to the civilian population of the Srebrenica safe
area by international humanitarian organizations and cooperate with any
procedure established by those organizations to determine which civilians
wish to depart the area of Srebrenica. It further demands that the Bosnian
Serb party respect fully the rights of those civilians who wish to remain
in the safe area and cooperate with efforts to ensure that civilians who
wish to depart are allowed to do so with their families in an orderly, safe
way in conformity with international law.
"The Security Council demands that both sides allow the unhindered
movement of humanitarian relief and cooperate with efforts by international
95-20996 (E)

140795

/...

S/PRST/1995/32
English
Page 2

organizations and agencies and concerned Governments to provide food,
medicine, facilities, and housing to the displaced.
"The Security Council reiterates its demand that the Bosnian Serb
forces immediately and unconditionally release unharmed all detained
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and that the
parties respect fully the safety of all UNPROFOR personnel and ensure their
complete freedom of movement.
"The Security Council pays tribute to all the personnel of UNPROFOR,
and of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, especially those
deployed in the area of Srebrenica. It notes that the presence and bravery
of the troops has undoubtedly saved the lives of many civilians in the
Srebrenica area."

-----
