11.
Urges all States to refrain from any action which directly or
indi~tly could jeopardize the implementation of the Peace Accords,
especially from providing any form of direct or indirect military
assistance to the National Union, or any other support to the National
Union inconsistent with the peace process;

Decision

At its 3277th meeting, on 15 September 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representatives of Angola, Egypt, Nigeria and Portugal to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation in Angola: further report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission II (UNAVEM m
(S/26434 and Add. I)" 14

12.
Expresses its readiness to consider the imposition of
measures under the Charter of the United Nations, including a
mandatory embargo on the sale or supply to the National Union of arms
and related materiel and other military assistance, to prevent it from
pursuing its military actions, unless by 15 September 1993 the
Secretary-General has reported that an effective cease-fire has been
cslablishcd and 1hat agreement has been reached on the full implemen1ation of the Peace Accords and relevant Security Council resolutions;

Resolution 864 (1993)
., 15 Sepletnber 1993

The Security Council,

13.
Recognizes the legitimate rights of the Government of
Angola, and in this regard welcomes the provision of assistance to the
Government in support of the democratic process;

Reaffirming its resolutions 696 (1991) of30 May 1991, 747 (1992)
of24 March 1992, 785 (1992) of30 October 1992, 793 (1992) of30
November 1992, 804 (1993) of29 January 1993, 811 (1993) of 12
March 1993,823 (1993)of30 April 1993, 834 (1993)of l June 1993
and 851 (1993) of 15 July 1993,

. 14.
Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General to
implement the emergency humanitarian assistance plan;
0

15.

Takes note of statements by the National Union that it will
cooperate in ensuring the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all Angolans and demands that it act accordingly;

Having considered the further report of the Secretary-General of 13
and 14 September 1993,19
Expressing grave concern at the continuing deterioration of the
political and militmy situation, and noting with consternation the further
deterioration of an already grave humanitarian situation,

Calls upon all Member States, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organiz.ations to respond swiftly and generously to
the Secretary-General's appeal in implementation of the abovementioned plan and to accord or increase humanitarian relief assistance
to Angola, and encourages the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue to coordinate the provision of humanitarian
assistance;

16.

Deeply concemed that, despite its previous resolutions and the
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, the peace talks remain suspended and a cease-fire has not been
established,

17.
Demands that the National Union continue to extend its
cooperation in ensuring the immediate evacuation of foreign nationals
and their family members from Huambo and other locations which it
has occupied;

Welcoming the joint statement issued in Lisbon on 10 September
1993 by the rq,rcacntatives ofPortugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America,20 the three observer States to the Angolan
peace process,

l_ 8.
Reiterates its stro11g COt1de11111ation of the attack by National
Umon forces on 27 May 1993 on a train carrying civilians, and
raffinns that such criminal attacks are clear violations of international
humanitarian law;

Welcoming also and supporting to that end the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative aimed at the earliest
resolution of the Angolan crisis through negotiations, and stressing the
importance it attaches thereto,

1~.
Reiterates its appeal to both parties strictly to abide by
apphcablc· rules of international humanitarian law, including to
guarantee unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population in need, and commends in particular the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to establish agreed
humanitarian relief corridors;

Welcoming farther the efforts of the Ad Hoe Committee on
Southern Africa of the Organiz.ation of African Unity and of heads of
State of neighbouring countries to facilitate the resumption of the peace
process in Angola,
Emphasizing the importance of a continued and effective United
Nations presence in Angola with a view to fostering the peace process
and advancing the full implementation of the Peace Accords for
Angola,

20.
Also reiterates its appeal to both parties to take all necessary
measures to ensure the secunty and safety of personnel of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission II, as well as of the personnel
involved in humanitarian relief operations;

Reaffirming its commitment to preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of Angola,

Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it as soon as the
~ Wll!'8°.ts, and in a~y ca:ie before 15 September 1993, a report
on the Situation tn Angola wtth hts recommendation for the further role
of the United Nations in the peace process and, in the meantime, to
keep the Council regularly informed of developments;
21.

A
l. Welcomathe further report of the Secretary-General of 13 and 14
September 1993, and decides to extend the existing mandate of the

22.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit as soon as
poaible the budgetary implications of bringing the Mission up to its full
strength as mandated in resolution 696 ( 1991 );
23.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted u11a11imo11sly at the 3254tl, meeting.

59

19

Ibid., documents S/26434 and Add. I.

10

Ibid., document S/26488.

United Nations Angola Verification Mission II for a period of three
months, until 15 December 1993;

involved in humanitarian relief operations, and strictly to abide by
applicable rules of international humanitarian law;

2. Reiterates its readiness to consider taking action promptly, at any
time within the period of the mandate authorized by the present
resolution, on the recommendation of the Secretary-General, to expand
substantially the United Nations presence in Angola in the event of
significant progress in the peace process;

16.
Demands that the National Union proceed immediately to
the release of all foreign citizens held against their will and to abstain
from any action which might cause damage to foreign property;

3. Reaffirms the importance of the functions of good offices and
mediation by the Mission and the Special Representative, with the goal
of restoring a cease-fire and reinstating the peace process for the full
implementation of the Peace Accords for Angola;

Strongly condemning the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola and holding its leadership responsible for not having
taken the necessary measures to comply with the demands made by the
Security Council in its previous resolutions,

4. Welcom~the continued disposition of the Government of Angola
to reach a peaceful settlement of the conflict in conformity with the
Peace Accords and relevant resolutions of the Security Council;

Determined to ensure respect for its resolutions and the full
implementation of the Peace Accords for Angola,

B

Urging all States to refrain from providing any form of direct or
indirect assistance, support or encouragement to the National Union,

5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimate rights of the Government of Angola and in this regard welcomes the provision of assistance
to the Government in support of the democratic process;

Determining that, as a result of the National Union's military actions,
the situation in Angola constitutes a threat to international peace and
security,

6. Reiterates once again its demand that the National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola accept unreservedly the results of the
democratic elections of 30 September 1992 and abide fully by the
Peace Accords;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,

17.
Decides that the provisions set forth in paragraphs 19 to 25
below shall come into force ten days after the date of adoption of the
present resolution unless the Secretary-General notifies the Council that
an effective cease-fire has been established and that agreement has been
reached on the implementation of the Peace Accords and relevant
Security Council resolutions;

1. Condemns the National Union for continuing military actions,
which are resulting in increased suffering for the civilian population of
Angola and damage to the Angolan economy, and again demands that
it immediately cease such actions;

8. Also condemns the repeated attempts by the National Union to
~ additional territory and its failure to withdraw its troops from the

18.
Decides also that if, at any time after the submission of the
above-mentioned report of the Secretary-General, the Secretary-General
reports to the Council that the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola has broken the cease-fire or ceased to participate
constructively in the implementation of the Peace Accords and the
relevant Council resolutions, the provisions set forth in paragraphs 19
to 25 below shall come into force immediately;

locations which it has occupied since the resumption of the hostilities,
and demands once again that it immediately do so and agree without
delay to return its troops to United Nations-monitored areas as a
transitional measure pending full implementation of the Peace Accords;
9. Reaffirms that such occupation is a grave violation of the Peace
Accords and is incompatible with the goal of peace through agreements
and reconciliation;

19.
Decides.farther, with a view to prohibiting all sale or supply
to the National Union of arms and related materiel and military
assistance, as well as petroleum and petroleum products, that all States
shall prevent the sale or supply, by their nationals or from their
territories or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related
materiel of all types, including weapons and ammunition, military
vehicles and equipment and spare parts for the afore-mentioned, as well
as of petroleum and petroleum products, whether or not originating in
their territory, to the territory of Angola other than through named
points of entiy on a list to be supplied by the Government of Angola to
the Secretary-Ocneral, who shall promptly notify the Member States of
the United Nations;

10.
Stresses once again the fundamental need to re-initiate
without delay the peace talks under United Nations auspices with a
view to the immediate establishment of a cease-fire throughout the
countiy and the full implementation of the Peace Accords and Security
Council resolutions;
1 l.
Takes note of statements by the National Union that it is
prepared to resume peace negotiations and demands that it act
accordingly;
12.
Welcomes the further steps taken by the Secretary-General
to implement the emergency humanitarian assistance plan;
13.
Strongly condemns the repeated attacks carried out by the
National Union against United Nations personnel working to provide
humanitarian assistance and reaffirms that such attacks are clear
violations of international humanitarian law;

20.
Calls upon all States, and all international organizations, to
act strictly in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or
imposed by any international agreement or any contract entered into or
any license or permit granted prior to the date of adoption of the present
resolution;

14.
Takes note of statements by the National Union that it will
cooperate in ensuring the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all Angolans and demands that it act accordingly;

21.
Calls upon States to bring proceedings against persons and
entities violating the measures imposed by the present resolution and to
impose appropriate penalties;

15.
Reiterates its appeal to both parties to take all necessary
measures to ensure the security and safety of personnel of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission II as well as of the personnel

22.
Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its
provisional rules of procedure, a committee of the Security Council
consisting of all the members of the Council to undertake the following
60

tasks and to report on its work to the Council with its observations and

Decisions

recommendations:
(a)

To examine the reports submitted pursuant to paragraph 24

At its 3302nd meeting, on 1 November 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representative of Angola to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Angola: further report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission II (UNA VEM II) (S/26644)". 21

below,
(b)
To seek from all States further information regarding the
action taken by them with a view to effectively implementing the
measures imposed by paragraph 19 above;

(c)
To consider information brought to its attention by States
concerning violations of the measures imposed by paragraph 19 and to
recommend appropriate measures in response thereto;

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 22
"The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-

(d)
To make periodic reports to the Council on information
submitted to it regarding alleged violations of the measures imposed by
paragraph 19, identifying where possible persons or entities, including
vessels, reported to be engaged in such violations;

General of27 October 199323 submitted in response to paragraph 28
of resolution 864 (1993). It notes the exploratory talks in Lusaka
under the auspices of the United Nations, to which both the
Government of Angola and the National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola (UNITA) have sent delegations. It affirms
its complete support for the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in their efforts aimed at the earliest resolution of the
Angolan crisis through negotiations within the framework of the
Peace Accords for Angola and Security Council resolutions. It calls
upon the Angolan parties to cooperate fully with the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative to this end.

(e)
To promulgate guidelines that may be necessary to facilitate
the implementation of the measures imposed by paragraph 19;

23.
Calls upon all States to cooperate fully with the committee
established by paragraph 22 above in the fulfilment of its tasks,
including supplying such information as may be sought by the
committee in pursuance of the present resolution;

"The Council notes recent actions taken by both parties, including
the lessening of hostilities, and considers it essential that the two
parties take the necessary steps to resume direct negotiations towards
a peaceful settlement and agree without delay on the modalities for
an effective cease-fire in accordance with Council resolutions.

24.
Requests all States to report to the Secretary-General by 15
October 1993 on the measures they have adopted in order to meet the
obligations set out in paragraph 19 above;

25.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary
assistance to the committee established by paragraph 22 above and to
make the necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for this purpose;

"The Council notes UNITA's communique of6 October referred
to in paragraph 11 of the report of the Secretary-General. It expresses
its concern that the Secretary-General has reported that not enough
progress has yet been made towards the full implementation of the
Peace Accords and relevant Council resolutions. It demands that
UNITA take the necessary steps to comply with its previous
resolutions. It expresses its readiness to consider the immediate
imposition of further measures under the Charter of the United
Nations, including, inter alia, trade measures against UNITA and
restrictions on the travel of UNITA personnel, at any time that it
observes that UNITA is not cooperating in good faith to make the
cease-fire effective and implement the Peace Accords and relevant
Council resolutions, or upon a report from the Secretary-General to
that effect.

26.
Expresses its readiness to consider the imposition of further
measures under the Charter of the United Nations, including, inter alia,
trade measures against the National Union for the Total Independence
of Angola and restrictions on the travel of its personnel, unless by 1
November 1993 the Secretary-General has reported that an effective
ceasc-fire has been established and that agreement has been reached on
the full implementation of the Peace Accords for Angola and relevant
Security Council resolutions;
C

27. Expresses also its readiness to review the measures in the
present resolution if the Secretary-General reports to the Council that
an effective cease-fire has been established and that substantial progress
has been achieved towards the full implementation of the Peace
Accords for Angola and relevant Council resolutions;

"The Council expresses its grave concern at the serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Angola. It is encouraged,
however, by the Secretary-General's report that the United Nations
system, working with humanitarian agencies, has now been able
significantly to increase the rate of delivery of relief aid to all parts of
the country. It welcomes the resumption of humanitarian relief
deliveries to the cities of Cuito and Huambo. It calls upon the parties
to cooperate fully in ensuring the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to all Angolans throughout the country, to take all
necessary measures to ensure the security and safety of United
Nations and other personnel involved in humanitarian relief

28.
Requeststlie Secretary-General to submit to it as soon as the
situation warrants, and in any case in good time before 1 November
1993 and again before 15 December 1993, a report on the situation in
Angola and the implementation of the present resolution, with his
recommendation for the further role of the United Nations in the peace
process and, in the meantime, to keep the Council regularly informed
of developments;
29.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

21
See Official Records oftl,e Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1993.

Adopted unanimously at the 327711, meeting.

22
23

S/26677.

Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1993,
document S/26644.
61
