A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/139
1 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.1)]
53/139. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 article 7 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,3 and its resolution
39/46 of 10 December 1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and all its
subsequent relevant resolutions,
Recalling that the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna in 1993, firmly declared that
efforts to eradicate torture should, first and foremost, be concentrated on prevention and called for the early
adoption of an optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, which is intended to establish a preventive system of regular visits to places of
detention,4

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

4

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 61.

99-77047

/...

A/RES/53/139
Page 2

Urging all Governments to promote the speedy and full implementation of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,5 in particular,
the section relating to freedom from torture, in which it is stated that States should abrogate legislation
leading to impunity for those responsible for grave violations of human rights, such as torture, and prosecute
such violations, thereby providing a firm basis for the rule of law,6
Recalling its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts of
torture took place in various countries, recognized the need to provide assistance to the victims in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Recalling also the recommendation in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action that high
priority should be given to providing the necessary resources to assist victims of torture and effective
remedies for their physical, psychological and social rehabilitation, inter alia, through additional
contributions to the Fund,7
Noting with satisfaction the existence of a considerable international network of centres for the
rehabilitation of torture victims, which plays an important role in providing assistance to victims of torture,
and the collaboration of the Fund with the centres,
Mindful of the proclamation by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/149 of 12 December 1997 of
26 June as United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture,
1. Welcomes the report of the Committee against Torture,8 submitted in accordance with article 24 of
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and
authorizes the Secretary-General to extend the spring sessions of the Committee by one additional week;
2.

Notes with appreciation that one hundred and six States have become parties to the Convention;

3. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention as a matter of
priority;
4. Invites all States ratifying or acceding to the Convention and those States that are parties to the
Convention and that have not yet done so to consider joining the States parties that have already made the
declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention and to consider the possibility of
withdrawing their reservations to article 20;
5. Urges all States parties to notify the Secretary-General of their acceptance of the amendments to
articles 17 and 18 of the Convention as soon as possible;
6. Urges States parties to comply strictly with their obligations under the Convention, including their
obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of the Convention, in view of the high number of

5

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

6

Ibid., sect. II, paras. 54-61.

7

Ibid., para. 59.

8

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/53/44).
/...

A/RES/53/139
Page 3

reports not submitted, and invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective when submitting reports
to the Committee;
7. Commends the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for the support
given to States in the preparation of national reports for submission to the Committee;
8. Urges States parties to take fully into account the conclusions and recommendations made by the
Committee after its consideration of their reports;
9. Takes note of the efforts made by the inter-sessional open-ended working group of the Commission
on Human Rights on the elaboration of a draft optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which is intended to establish a preventive system of
regular visits to places of detention, and urges the Commission to complete as soon as possible a final text for
submission to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, for consideration and
adoption;
10. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report presented orally by the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights on the question of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, describing the overall trends and developments with regard to his mandate;
11. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and to assist the Special Rapporteur in the
performance of his task, in particular by supplying all necessary information requested by him, to react
appropriately and expeditiously to his urgent appeals and to give serious consideration to his requests to visit
their countries and to the follow-up to his recommendations;
12. Approves the methods of work employed by the Special Rapporteur, in particular as regards urgent
appeals, reiterates his need to be able to respond effectively to credible and reliable information that comes
before him, invites him to continue to seek the views and comments of all concerned, in particular Member
States, in the elaboration of his report, and expresses its appreciation for the discreet and independent way in
which he continues to carry out his work;
13. Stresses the need for regular exchanges of views between the Committee, the Special Rapporteur
and other relevant United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuance of cooperation with
relevant United Nations programmes, notably the programme on crime prevention and criminal justice, with a
view to enhancing further their effectiveness and cooperation on issues relating to torture, inter alia, by
improving their coordination;
14. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that
have already contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture;
15. Appeals to all Governments, organizations and individuals to respond favourably to requests for
contributions to the Fund, if possible on a regular basis and annually before the meeting of the Board of
Trustees of the Fund, preferably by the end of February, and if possible also with a substantial increase in the
level of contributions, so that consideration may be given to the increasing demand for assistance;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to all Governments the appeals of the General
Assembly for contributions to the Fund;

/...

A/RES/53/139
Page 4

17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to include the Fund on an annual basis among the
programmes for which funds are pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities;
18. Expresses its appreciation to the Board of Trustees of the Fund for the work it has accomplished;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the Board of Trustees of the Fund in its appeal for
contributions and its efforts to make better known the existence of the Fund and the financial means currently
available to it, as well as in its assessment of the global need for international funding of rehabilitation
services for torture victims and, in this effort, to make use of all existing possibilities, including the
preparation, production and dissemination of information materials;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of adequate staff and facilities for the
bodies and mechanisms that combat torture and assist victims of torture, commensurate with the strong
support expressed by Member States for combating torture and assisting victims of torture;
21. Invites donor and recipient countries to consider including in their bilateral programmes and
projects relating to the training of armed forces, security forces, prison and police personnel, as well as
health-care personnel, matters relating to the protection of human rights and the prevention of torture and to
keep in mind a gender perspective;
22. Calls upon all Governments, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to commemorate, on 26 June, United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of
Torture;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-fifth
session and to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a report on the status of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and a report on the
operations of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture;
24. Decides to consider the reports of the Secretary-General, including the report on the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, the report of the Committee against Torture and the interim report of
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the question of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment at its fifty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
