Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General of
31 October 1991 on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission 11,275

effect. He brui so infonned President José Eduardo dos Santos,
President of the People's Republic of Angola, and Mr. Jonas
Savimbi, President of the National Union for the Total Independence for Angola. He requested the President of the
Security Council to convey this information to the members of
the Council.

Having considered the further report of the SecretaryGeneral of3 and 20 March 1992 on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission 11,276

In a letter dated 7 February 1992, the President of the
Security Council infonned the Secretary-General as follows: 274

1. Approves the further report of the Secretary-General
of 3 and 20 March 1992 on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission 11 276 and the recommendations contained
therein conceming the operationaJ plan for United Nations
observation of the elections and the enlargement of the
Mission;

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter
dated 6 February 1992273 conceming the appointment of
Miss Margaret Joan Anstee as your Special Representative
for Angola and Chief of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission II has been brought to the attention
of the members of the Council, who welcome your decision."

2. Calls upon the Angolan parties to cooperate fully with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-GeneraJ for Angola
and with the Mission, including in the discharge of its expanded
mandate;

At its 3062nd meeting, on 24 March 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Angola and Portugal to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"Further report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission II (S/23671 and Add.1)". 3

3. Underlines the necessity recalled in paragraph 18 of
the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ for the United Nations
electoraJ mission to have the explicit agreement of the two
parties to the Peace Accords for Angola;

4. Decides to enlarge the mandate of the Mission to
include the mission provided for in paragraph 22 of the report
of the Secretary-General for the remainder of its cxisting
mandate period;

Resolution 747 (1992)

or 24 March 1992

5. Urges the Angolan parties to comply scrupulously with
the provisions of the Accords and with the agreed deadline~;
and to this end, to proceed without delay with the demohilization of their troops, formation of a unified national anncd
force, effective operation of joint police monitoring units,
extension of the central administration and other major tasks;

The Security Council,
Recalling itsresolution 696 (1991) of30 May 1991 bywhich
it decided to entrust a new mandate to the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission II as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in line with the Peace Accords for Angola,

6. Calls upon the Angolan authorities and parties to
finalize political, Iegal, organizational and budgetary preparations for free and fair multi-party elections to be held in
September 1992 and to make available as soon as possihle ail
available resources for the electoral process;

Welcoming the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General
to implement fully the mandate entrusted to the Mission,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made so far by the
Government of the People's Republic of Angola and the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola to
maintain the cease-fire and ex.pressing concem over the delays
and gaps in the completion of some major tasks arising from
the Accords,

7. Encourages ail States to contribute voluntarily and
requests the United Nations programmes and specialized
agencies to provide the assistance and support necessary t<>
prepare for free and fair multi-party elections in Angola:

8. Urges the parties to establish as soon as possible a
precise timetable for the electoral process in Angola so that
elections can take place at the date fixed and requests the
Secretary-General to extend his cooperation to this end;

Stressing again the importance it attaches to the fulfilment
by the parties in good faith of ail obligations contained in the
Accords,
Welcoming the appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Special Representative for Angola who will be in charge of ail
current and projected activities of the United Nations in
connection with the Accords and will also be the Chief of the
Mission,

9. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council infonned of developments and to submit a further
report to the Council within three months of the adoption of
the present resolution.
Adopted unanimously al the 3062nd
meeting.

85
