United Nations

A/RES/66/94

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 January 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2011
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/66/471)]

66/94. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-fourth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with

_______________
1

11-46446

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17).

*1146446*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/94

other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Model Law on Public
Procurement 2 and the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency: The Judicial Perspective; 3
3.
Takes note with interest of the progress made by the Commission in its
work on the preparation of legal standards on transparency in treaty-based investorState arbitration, online dispute resolution for cross-border electronic transactions
and electronic commerce, in particular at the colloquium held in February 2011, the
interpretation and application of selected concepts of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency 4
relating to centre of main interests, and a draft text on the registration of security
rights in movable assets; 5
4.
Welcomes the decisions of the Commission to prepare a guide to
enactment of the Model Law on Public Procurement, in as efficient and practical a
manner as possible, and a study on possible future work of the Commission in the
area of public-private partnerships and privately financed infrastructure projects, to
undertake work in the field of electronic transferable records, to prepare, in
cooperation with the World Bank, draft principles on effective secured transactions
regimes, within existing resources and without utilizing working group resources,
and to include microfinance as an item for the future work of the Commission and
to further consider that matter at its next session, in 2012; 6
5.
Notes with appreciation the decision of the Commission to commend the
use of the 2010 revision of the Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees, published by
the International Chamber of Commerce, as appropriate, in transactions involving
demand guarantees; 7
6.
Also notes with appreciation the progress made in the ongoing project of
the Commission on monitoring the implementation of the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done in New York on
10 June 1958, 8 and the decision of the Commission to request the Secretariat to
pursue its efforts towards the preparation of a guide on the Convention; 9
7.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and

_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III and annex I.
Ibid., chap. IV.
4
UNCITRAL Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency with Guide to Enactment (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.99.V.3), part one.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17),
chaps. V-IX.
6
Ibid., chap. III, paras. 181–187, 190 and 191; chap. VIII, para. 228; and chaps. IX and X.
7
Ibid., chap. XI.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17), chap. XII.
3

2

A/RES/66/94

regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their legal
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Notes with appreciation the significant progress in the Commission’s
8.
coordination and cooperation activities in the field of security interests and in
particular the approval by the Commission of a paper prepared jointly by the
Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference on Private International Law and the
secretariats of the Commission and the International Institute for the Unification of
Private Law, with the assistance of outside experts, entitled “Comparison and
analysis of major features of international instruments relating to secured
transactions”, 10 as well as the request that it be given the widest possible
dissemination, including as a United Nations sales publication, with proper
recognition of the contribution of the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference
on Private International Law and the secretariat of the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law; 11
9.
Notes the agreement of the Commission that a coordinated approach to
the matter of the law applicable to the proprietary effects of assignments of
receivables is in the interest of all States and its request to the Secretariat to
cooperate closely with the European Commission with a view to ensuring a
coordinated approach to the matter, taking into account the approach followed in the
United Nations Convention on the Assignment of Receivables in International
Trade 12 and the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions; 13
10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Takes note with interest of the comprehensive approach to technical
cooperation and assistance, based on the strategic framework for technical
assistance suggested by the Secretariat to promote universal adoption of the texts of
the Commission and to disseminate information on recently adopted texts; 14

_______________
10

See A/CN.9/720.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17),
paras. 278-283.
12
Resolution 56/81, annex.
13
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.V.12.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17), chap. XIII.
11

3

A/RES/66/94

(d) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(e) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the
Commission, in the light of the relevance and importance of the work and
programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the national
and international levels and for the implementation of the United Nations
development agenda, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals;
11. Calls upon Member States, non-member States, observer organizations
and the Secretariat to apply the rules of procedure and methods of work of the
Commission, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session, 15 with a view to
ensuring the high quality of the work of the Commission and international
acceptability of its instruments, and in this regard recalls its previous resolutions
related to this matter;
12. Welcomes the decision by the Commission to establish, subject to the
relevant rules and regulations of the United Nations and the internal approval
process in the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, a Regional Centre for Asia
and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea, as a novel yet important first step for the
Commission in reaching out and providing technical assistance to developing
countries in the region, it being understood that the establishment of a regional
presence would have to rely entirely on extrabudgetary resources, including but not
limited to voluntary contributions from States, expresses its appreciation to the
Government of the Republic of Korea for its generous contribution to the pilot
project, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed
of developments regarding the establishment of such regional centres, including the
Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific in the Republic of Korea and, in particular,
their funding and budgetary situation; 16
13. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the trust fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that
are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and

_______________
15
16

4

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17), paras. 262–270.

A/RES/66/94

capacities in the field of international trade law in those countries to facilitate the
development of international trade and the promotion of foreign investment;
14. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General;
15. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards on international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
16. Welcomes, in this regard, the panel discussion on the role of the
Commission in the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
societies, held during the forty-fourth session of the Commission, and takes note of
the particular relevance of the instruments and resources of the Commission for
creating an environment of sustainable economic activity conducive to post-conflict
reconstruction and preventing societies from sliding back into conflict;
17. Takes note of the views expressed by the Commission at the end of the
panel discussion that, owing to a lack of sufficient resources, innovative ways need
to be found for the early engagement of the instruments and resources of the
Commission in post-conflict recovery operations of the United Nations and other
donors, and that awareness needs to be increased of the fact that the Commission
deals also with the basic building blocks for commercial activity and thus makes a
real and immediate contribution in societies emerging from conflict; 17
18. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
General Assembly resolutions on documentation-related matters, 18 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission; 19
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the meetings of the Commission, including committees of the whole established
by the Commission for the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation
of normative texts, and encourages the Commission to discuss the matter at its next
session, on the basis of a report to be prepared by the Secretariat; 20

_______________
17

Ibid., paras. 318 and 319.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
19
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
20
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/66/17), para. 333.
18

5

A/RES/66/94

20. Reaffirms the need to ensure the broadest possible participation in
meetings of the Commission, and in this connection notes the existing rationale for
the historical alternating pattern of sites for meetings of the Commission, that is, the
proportionate distribution of travel costs among delegations, the global influence
and presence of the Commission and the needs of developing countries, many of
which do not have representation in Vienna, also notes the agreement of the
Commission that every effort should be made to identify alternatives to abolishing
the alternating pattern of meetings that would achieve a similar result, and in this
respect encourages Member States, jointly with the Secretariat, to continue to
review current working practices to achieve increased efficiency, and with a view to
identifying budgetary savings; 21
21. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
22. Welcomes the preparation of digests of case law relating to the texts of
the Commission, such as a digest of case law relating to the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, 22 a digest of case law
relating to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Model Law
on International Commercial Arbitration, 23 and a digest of case law relating to the
Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency, with the aim of assisting in the
dissemination of information on those texts and promoting their use, enactment and
uniform interpretation.
82nd plenary meeting
9 December 2011

_______________
21

Ibid., chap. XXI.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
23
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17), annex I; and
ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/61/17), annex I.
22

6
