S/PV.8569

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8569th meeting

Tuesday, 9 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Puerschel
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Power
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Linkages between international terrorism and organized crime
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/537)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-20999 (E)
*1920999*

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Security Council, to His Excellency Mr. Mansour
Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of Kuwait, and his
entire team, for their service in the presidency of the
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for
all the members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Alotaibi and the whole
Kuwaiti team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of France
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would also like
to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome
to the new Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Nicolas de Rivière.
We very much look forward to working closely with
him in the coming months.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Linkages between international terrorism and
organized crime
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/537)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Panama, the Philippines,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
2/62

09/07/2019

Fedotov, Executive Director, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive
Director, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, International
Consultant, United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. João
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/537, which contains the text
of a letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Allow me to begin by thanking the
Security Council for its continued attention to the
threats to international peace and security posed by
terrorism and organized crime.
While their objectives may differ, criminals and
terrorists share the need to operate in the shadows,
exploiting gaps in criminal-justice response in and
between countries and regions. Terrorist tactics can be
employed by organized criminal groups while terrorists
raise funds through criminal activities. Human
trafficking for sexual exploitation, child soldiers and
forced labour can be used not only to generate revenue
but to strike fear and recruit new fighters.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
profited a great deal from the illegal trade in oil,
trafficking in cultural property and kidnapping for
ransom. In the Sahel and the Sahara, smugglers and
traffickers are paying dues to gain the right of passage
to areas controlled by terrorists. We have also seen
piracy and organized crime flourish on the high seas,
including outside the jurisdiction of any single State
and beyond the capacities of many countries to patrol.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Abu Sayyaf kidnaps seafarers in the waters around the
Philippines, the Taliban benefits from the drug trade
across the Indian Ocean, Al-Shabaab supports piracy
and finances its operations with the trade in Somalia
of charcoal through the Gulf of Oman, and Al-Qaida
supplies its forces around the Arabian peninsula by sea.
Furthermore, expanding terrorist and criminal activities
online represent a clear transnational challenge to all
Member States.
To strengthen responses going forward, I should
like to highlight the following priorities.
First is the effective implementation of international
commitments,
including
the
conventions
on
transnational organized crime, corruption and drugs,
as well as the global instruments against terrorism
and the United Nations standards and norms on crime
prevention and criminal justice. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
in particular, and specifically its three protocols,
address the issues of illicit firearms, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling. These agreements enjoy near
universal acceptance and should be better used to
promote coherence between domestic anti-crime and
anti-terrorism legislation and relevant national and
international instruments.
Secondly, much more resources must be channelled
into providing technical assistance in order to build up
specialized expertise and capacities. Those include
training for law enforcement agents, coastguard
personnel, border and airport officials, prosecutors,
judges, prison officers and other relevant officials.
Thirdly, we need to reinforce investment
in mechanisms for inter-agency, regional and
international cooperation, including informationand intelligence-sharing. The United Nations clearly
has a role to play in encouraging and enabling such
networked responses. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) global Networking the
Networks initiative is enhancing the efforts of law
enforcement bodies to cooperate at the local, regional
and global levels. In West Africa alone, we promote
the Sahel Judicial Platform, the West African Network
of Central Authorities and Prosecutors, and the Asset
Recovery Interagency Network. Similar networks are
operational in Central Asia, West and Central Asia and
other regions.
UNODC also works with universities and other
institutions to advance knowledge about the linkages

S/PV. 8569

between organized crime and terrorism under the
Education for Justice initiative. We are supporting
national law enforcement agencies in collaborating
on cross-border investigations and in identifying
and intercepting illicit movements of goods through
our Container Control Programme and Airport
Communication Programme. UNODC is also helping
to protect the world’s busiest shipping routes from
exploitation by criminals and terrorists through our
Global Maritime Crime Programme.
Fourthly and finally, the international community
can do more to mainstream integrated action against
terrorism and crime across the pillars of the United
Nations work. United Nations-wide coordination is
key, and UNODC is working closely with such partners
as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and UN-WOMEN.
In response to the Security Council’s resolutions,
UNODC has stepped up its efforts to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. Among
other work, UNODC is helping to identify and protect
child-trafficking victims recruited by armed extremist
groups in the Niger, and supporting United Nations
police in strengthening detection and reporting on
human trafficking.
Prisons also present another potential link between
crime and terrorism. UNODC promotes good prison
management, in line with the Nelson Mandela Rules,
which can help in dealing with high-risk prisoners and
in preventing radicalization and recruitment. More
broadly, combating corruption and illicit financial
roles is crucial to strengthening responses to these
transnational threats. Furthermore, as criminals
and terrorists exploit new technologies, UNODC is
providing specialized law enforcement mentoring and
helping to bring offenders to justice through our Global
Programme on Cybercrime.
Illicit firearms can be used as a source of funding
for terrorists and organized criminal groups and to
carry out terrorist acts. UNODC is supporting Member
States in tackling firearms trafficking and we are
looking to develop a joint project with UNOCT and
CTED to address the terrorism-armed crime nexus.
The connections between terrorism and organized
crime are complex and shifting. More research is

19-209993/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

needed. As the Security Council has repeatedly
recognized, addressing the linkages between
transnational organized crime and terrorism requires
the international community to work together to close
gaps in criminal justice responses and to deny criminals
and terrorists any safe haven. UNODC stands ready, as
always, to support the Council’s efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: Allow me to begin by commending
Peru for its efforts over the past year to enhance the
Council’s consideration of the challenges involved
in addressing the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime and to assist Member States in
identifying solutions. Those efforts have included an
Arria Formula meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, a thematic
open briefing and a special meeting highlighting
regional specificities. They have also been reflected in
the renewed impetus given to this issue on the Council’s
agenda. The Council has continued to build upon the
terrorism financing-related provisions of its resolution
1373 (2001), notably through its adoption of resolutions
2195 (2014) and, recently, 2462 (2019).
The territorial losses sustained by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant have certainly contributed
to the group’s efforts to access funds through a wide
range of criminal activities, including drug trafficking,
weapons sales, kidnapping and extorsion. Other groups,
including Al-Qaida and its affiliates, have sought
similar financing avenues.
I wish to reiterate the determination of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to strengthen our understanding of Member
States’ approaches and responses to the links between
terrorism and organized crime. Over the past year,
CTED has actively contributed to a number of
international conferences, workshops and expert
meetings focusing on those links, including at the
Council of Europe, the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Eurasian Group on Combating Moneylaundering and Financing of Terrorism and the Asia/
Pacific Group on Money-laundering. I also welcome
the close partnership developed in this area between
CTED, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
4/62

09/07/2019

Research Institute, which has proven extremely fruitful
in terms of the delivery of capacity-building assistance,
the issuance of dedicated reports and policy guidance
tools. In its work on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), including within the framework
of the aforementioned events, CTED has also become
aware of a number of academic and research initiatives
on this issue.
I commend the contribution of the research and
academic community, and I am particularly pleased to
be here today with Ms. Tamara Makarenko, who is one
of the pioneers of research in this area.
Within the framework of the country assessment
visits conducted on behalf of the CTC, CTED continues
to engage with national authorities on their perception
of the links between terrorism and organized crime, as
well as on identified cases in which such links have
been detected.
We have identified a number of relevant State
practices, including the creation of joint investigative
units and prosecution authorities to handle both
organized crime and terrorism. However, we continue
to note a significant disconnect between the level of
concern expressed by policymakers, the implementation
of legal frameworks addressing both terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and the actual level
of investigation and prosecution of cases involving
criminal and terrorist groups alike.
While I recognize that the links can take different
forms, depending on the geographic, political and
economic contexts, there are some specific areas
that we could explore in greater depth, both to better
understand the link and to address them in a more
effective way.
First, in its recently adopted addendum to the
Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters, the
Committee recalls the need to intensify and accelerate
the timely exchange of financial intelligence, including
with a view to effectively identifying potential linkages
between terrorism and organized crime.
Secondly, the role of financial intelligence units
should be strengthened. Financial intelligence units
play a central role in States’ anti-money-laundering
and counter-financing of terrorism efforts, but remain
generally under-used in the context of counter-terrorism.
Thirdly, the understanding of criminal and terrorist
activities achieved by intelligence services is not always
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

reflected at the investigative and prosecutorial levels,
where agencies responsible for countering terrorism
and those responsible for countering organized crime
too often tend to operate in silos. Inter-institutional
barriers to information-sharing, including between
and among local and national authorities, should
be overcome.
Fourthly, Member States should also conduct
terrorism-financing national risk assessments, which
provide an opportunity to detect, and respond to, active
or passive interactions between terrorist and criminal
groups. The participation of the private sector and
civil society in such exercises can greatly facilitate the
development of policy responses.
Lastly, links between terrorism and organized
crime may develop in prison settings, thereby increasing
the possibility of radicalization or the development of
connections that will enable terrorists to gain access to
criminal networks. It is therefore essential that States
increase the capacity of the relevant practitioners to
detect and deter such links.
I look forward to hearing more about Member
States’ approaches and experiences in all those
areas. Events such as today’s open debate enable us
to reaffirm our joint commitment to combating all
forms of support for terrorist groups and individuals,
as well as to promoting regional and international
cooperation through the dissemination of relevant tools
and practices. Rest assured that CTED will continue to
contribute actively to those efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Makarenko.
Ms. Makarenko: I would like to begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for providing me this opportunity
to speak to the Security Council today. My intention
is to summarize my 25 years of interest and academic
research on the crime-terrorism nexus, while drawing
particular attention to the dimension of logistical
support, along with the question of financing, which
often comes up with great frequency.
Although my initial model on the crime-terror nexus
was first published in 2003, based on the findings of an
in-depth assessment of hundreds of groups worldwide,
over the years the model has been refined to encapsulate
new developments in both terrorism and organized
crime. In seeking to understand the complexities of

S/PV. 8569

the relationship between terrorism and organized
crime, I would like to begin by saying that this is not
a new phenomenon; it has a solid historical academic
foundation dating back at least to the 1980s, from which
it has evolved into a multifaceted and dynamic concern
to, and for, the international community.
The linkages that exist between terrorism
and organized crime are not independent security
threats per say; rather, the ties that develop between
terrorism and organized crime exacerbate the security
environment. That is most obviously done through
changes in financial operations, as we already heard,
and logistics. As such, or effort to develop an accurate
understanding of how, why and when linkages between
terrorism and crime develop should be viewed as an
essential component of our counter-terrorism and
anti-crime strategies. In other words, the nexus is but
one tool in our international security toolkit, but a tool
that has become central to helping us focus where our
limited national, regional and international security
and development resources should be directed. Where
linkages between terrorism and organized crime exist,
a range of peripheral and facilitating crimes are also
present. They manifest themselves in various ways
and, through an increasing number of cases, reveal
that links between terrorism and organized crime have
global salience, regional nuances and local proclivities.
A holistic approach to the nexus between terrorism
and organized crime helps uncover how different types
of linkages facilitate access to specialized skill sets
and tactics needed for both terrorism and organized
crime groups to reach their objectives. How that plays
out, however, depends upon the specific nature of that
interaction. At its most basic level, the nexus is either
transactional or organizational. A transactional nexus
generally refers to the coming together of a terrorist
and criminal group to fulfil specific operational
requirements. That coming together takes place either
through an alliance or the appropriation of tactics
learned over time, or acquired through the integration
of criminals into terrorist groups. The organizational
nexus, on the other hand, occurs when both terrorists
and criminal activities occupy the same space and
time. In that manifestation we see the emergence of
something called the hybrid group and, in extreme cases,
the rise of a de facto black hole — an ungoverned and
ungovernable territory where terrorism and organized
crime collide, collude and conspire.

19-209995/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Each of those five nexus points has specific
implications for the logistics capabilities of a terrorist
group or cell. Alliances, for example, are often the focus
of basic debates on the linkages between terrorism and
crime. That relationship between two independent
bodies fulfils a number of immediate requirements,
such as access to specialized knowledge — money
-laundering, for instance — access to specialized
services, such as counterfeiting; operational support;
access to smuggling networks; and financial support, as
we have heard. Although there are numerous historical
cases of alliances, in particular in the provision of
counterfeit documents and access to arms and weapons,
the crux of the alliance has itself evolved, in particular
in parts of the world where counter-terrorism efforts
are relatively efficient.
Perhaps more common in the alliance today are
cases where terrorist groups or cells have effectively
appropriated or integrated criminal capacity and
know-how into their organizations. For larger, more
structured groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, there is considerable evidence that their
logistics departments — if I can use that name — learn
the value and necessity of being able to engage in illicit
activities to support their operations. That includes
everything from establishing smuggling operations to
selling illicit goods to having in-house counterfeiting
expertise. For smaller, more independent terrorist
cells, that has taken the form of recruiting criminals.
Over the past several years, for example, we know
that prisons have acted as incubators for integration.
Direct networking between terrorists and criminals
has enabled the transfer of criminal skills through
recruitment, ostensibly providing cells with access
to criminal networks that provide weapons, forge
documentation and provide other logistical support
infrastructure, such as safe houses, and knowledge of
local and national police weaknesses.
Alliances’ appropriation of tactics and integration
are types of linkages between terrorism and organized
crime that are relatively straightforward to identify,
because they do not require analytical judgements
to be made on intangible characteristics, such as
group motivation and strategic priorities. It is more
difficult to draw decisive conclusions about hybrid
entities; however, as they exist today, hybrid entities
are themselves very important to look at. Although
the emergence of a hybrid entity depends upon several
factors, what I would like to highlight today is that
6/62

09/07/2019

that type of group — one that equally displays the
characteristics of organized crime and terrorism — has
developed a sophisticated operational structure that is
upheld by its ability to navigate the licit/illicit divide as
a means of securing a robust logistic framework. Hybrid
groups truly have the organizational infrastructure of
organized crime, with the retained tactical expertise
of terrorism.
From years of conducting ongoing analysis of the
crime-terror nexus, there is no doubt that linkages
between organized crime and terrorism exist. That is
regardless of the fact that that relationship may reveal
itself in different ways. Today one of our greatest
concerns should be that expanded linkages could
increase our vulnerability to terrorism by groups with
enhanced criminal capabilities. If we take the flip
side of that, expanded links could also increase our
vulnerability to criminal groups with a heightened
propensity towards the use of indiscriminate violence.
We are undoubtedly challenged by security threats
that arise in ungoverned territories, but it is the less
predictable threats emanating from the rising profile of
small-time criminals turned terrorists, or local criminal
enterprises fuelling terrorist cells, that we need to focus
more attention on. That is inherently more difficult to
counter, and implies that even low-level criminality can
no longer be the sole domain of local law enforcement.
We are navigating a complex security environment
where terrorism and organized crime are no longer
mutually exclusive, but can be interdependent and
sophisticated enough to learn from the successes and
failures of groups and cells that came before them.
Understanding the evolving proclivities of the linkages
is a tool that will inevitably help our national
authorities and associated international organizations
adjust how they engage in counter-terrorism and
anti-crime initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Makarenko for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Peru.
I would like to express my appreciation for
the informative briefings on the linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime provided
by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Michèle
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Tamara
Makarenko, international consultant.
Since 2001, the Security Council has observed
with concern the close linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime and stressed the need
to promote coordination of initiatives at all levels in
order to strengthen the international response to this
serious problem, which is a threat to international
peace and security. Throughout its participation as a
non-permanent member of the Council and at the helm
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Peru has led
through an inclusive process actions aimed at deepening
the understanding of the linkages between the two
phenomena with a view to identifying, preventing and
dismantling them.
In addition to the Arria Formula meeting we had
in 2018, we also supported the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/9 in May 2018, which
encouraged States, among other things, to continue to
investigate to better understand the nature and scope
of those linkages. We also held an open meeting on
counter-terrorism in October 2018 (see S/PV.8364) and
a special joint meeting between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities , which considered this problem from various
perspectives. In that context, Peru proposed a thematic
discussion in the context of Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations, which the Council is currently
negotiating with a view to strengthening States’
capacities and promoting more effective cooperation at
the national and international levels in response to the
linkages between organized crime and terrorism.
We believe that this effort, like all action aimed
at combating terrorism, must be coherent with
international law, international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.
Specifically, it is crucial to address the relationship
between organized crime and terrorism beyond the idea
of financing to identify and dismantle the dynamics
of logistical support, including through such crimes
as the trafficking of drugs, weapons, persons and
natural resources.
In that regard, the future draft resolution will seek
to address those issues and urge States to strengthen
border controls and contribute more information both

S/PV. 8569

at the national and the international levels. However,
we recognize that the two phenomena correspond to
different motivations and have separate legal frameworks
so they cannot be automatically linked. We recall that
my country has suffered from the manifestations of
the linkages between national terrorism and organized
crime, in particular drug trafficking.
We trust that today’s meeting will provide
an opportunity for the Security Council and the
membership as a whole to share their assessments and
experiences with regard to this topic and contribute to
the negotiations under way. In particular, it is important
to understand the manifestations of the linkages in
their respective different regions, ways of identifying
and dismantling them, and ways of improving the
international community’s efforts in that regard,
especially with the support of the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.
We hope that we can count on the support of all
Member States to join efforts with a view to preventing
and combating the linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this open debate
on the linkages between international terrorism and
organized crime. By placing this issue at the heart of its
priorities in the Security Council, Peru is demonstrating
once again its ongoing commitment to promoting
activities aimed at countering those two scourges.
The briefings by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, international
consultant — whom I commend for her relevant
comments — provide our Council with insight into the
scope and complexity of the phenomena. I also welcome
the presence of the new Permanent Representative of
France, Mr. Nicolas de Rivière. I assure him of my
delegation’s resolve to work closely with him. I think
I also reflect the mindset of other members of the
Security Council.
In adopting resolution 2195 (2014), the Security
Council made its first call for the strengthening

19-209997/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

international cooperation by securing borders
and the prosecution of illegal networks in order
to prevent terrorist organizations from benefiting
from transnational organized crime. Since then, the
convergence of views among Council members with
regard to the concerns raised by counter-terrorism
has been evident, in particular in the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9 and resolution
2462 (2019). The exacerbation of these two phenomena,
which has been particularly acute in West Africa,
shows that, despite their different natures and modes of
operation, they feed on each other when the conditions
are right and are a serious threat to international peace
and security.
The resources derived in particular from drug and
human trafficking, the illegal arms trade, fraudulent
medicines and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources greatly fuel the cross-border criminal
networks and increase their ranks. Cross-border
criminal networks and terrorist groups take advantage
of the permissive security environment created by the
difficulties faced by some States in performing their
sovereign functions throughout their territories in order
to develop various forms of interaction.
Understanding the underlying causes and the
complex dynamics of those interactions seems to be a
necessary prerequisite, as reaffirmed by the presidential
statement adopted in 2018. It invites us to promote
research in order to better understand the nature and
the scope of the linkages between terrorist groups and
criminal organizations. My country therefore thinks
that States and regional organizations must take all the
necessary measures to reverse the trend towards the
expansion and gradual hybridization of their criminal
activities. That approach naturally falls under the
primary responsibility of States, which are responsible
for investing in security tools in order to generate
national human and logistical capacities to control land,
sea and air borders, whose porous nature is exploited by
criminal networks and terrorist groups.
It is therefore necessary to ensure that there is
coordination and complementarity among national
institutions that deal with security, intelligence, justice
and financing to optimize their activities. Furthermore,
in order to track and dismantle criminal networks
States must bring national legislation in line with
international legal standards and instruments to combat
terrorism and its sources of funding. States must
strengthen the capacity of their judicial institutions
8/62

09/07/2019

to enable them to effectively carry out the necessary
investigations and prosecutions. However, national
border control strategies can be effective only if they are
well integrated into the legal and security mechanisms
put in place within the framework of subregional and
regional cooperation.
While the links between transnational criminal
networks and terrorist groups are undeniably a collective
concern, the repercussions of these phenomena are more
pronounced in the regions of the world that do not have
sufficient human, financial and logistical resources to
cope with criminal gangs, which very often employ
asymmetrical methods. That is the case in West Africa.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the United Nations to
maintain its support for the States and organizations
of the region with a view to helping them build their
capacity to combat these phenomena, particularly
with respect to the gathering of information on legal
and security matters. In that regard, the Economic
Community of West African States Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and Implementation Plan to fight terrorism and
related criminal acts in West Africa deserves support,
as does the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of
security cooperation and the operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the region,
which advocate a holistic approach to dealing with
transnational threats.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire remains more
convinced than ever that the links between crossborder criminal networks and terrorist groups pose
serious threats to international peace and security. That
is why our joint efforts should integrate the need to
resolutely achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
so as to enable our populations to finally live decent
lives and stop our regions from being the fertile ground
in which transnational criminal networks and terrorist
groups take root.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for its excellent leadership of the Council for
the month of June. I would also like to congratulate
Peru on its assumption of the presidency for this month
and wish it every success.
I also welcome the new Permanent Representative
of France, Mr. Nicolas de Rivière, and to wish him
every success. He has our support and cooperation.
We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for the idea
of holding an open debate on combating terrorism and
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

organized crime. We thank Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ms. Makarenko for their useful contributions to
our discussion.
The Security Council has already highlighted
the close link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, illegal trafficking in drugs, arms
and persons, and money-laundering in resolution
1373 (2001). Our delegation has always supported and
continues to support the resolve to raise this issue in the
Security Council and to maintain its expert assessment
of the matter.
Terrorists and organized criminals increase their
potential by pooling resources and knowledge, making
it more difficult for law enforcement and intelligence
bodies to combat them. Furthermore, terrorism and
organized criminals are constantly shifting and
looking at new ways of working. They adjust to new
circumstances and change their motivations and tactics.
We are particularly concerned by the radicalization
of members of organized criminal groups and their
transition to terrorism. We need to pay special attention
to that when we organize our work on how to combat
terrorism ideology.
At the same time, the international community has
developed a number of mechanisms and instruments
for international cooperation in the area of criminal
proceedings, such as extradition, mutual legal assistance
or transfer of criminal proceedings, the transfer of the
convicted, the freezing and confiscation of assets and
law enforcement cooperation. Anyone who is involved
in terrorist activities, including their funding, must
be brought to account. In that regard, we call on all
States to fulfil their international obligations, including
on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute,
as contained in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
We support the strengthening of interaction and
coordination among the specialized entities of the
Secretariat and regional organizations in countering
the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. The
specialized technical cooperation programmes of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Office on Drugs
and Crime are very good examples of such work. We see
potential in the development by regional organizations
of security policies and strategies and in the creation of
more effective cooperation and assistance mechanisms
to fight terrorism and organized crime.

S/PV. 8569

The examples of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida show that the intensity of terrorist
activity is directly dependent on the level of its funding.
A sufficient material basis enables terrorists to prepare
and conduct terrorist acts, recruit new members
and actively counteract the work of law enforcement
agencies. The terrorist presence in Syria and Iraq
would be suppressed much faster if terrorists did not
receive large-scale and sustained supplies of weapons
and ammunition. We underscore that illegal trafficking
in small arms and light weapons is a serious crime.
We believe that it is important to scale up our efforts
in countering drug trafficking. In a number of States
where the situation is already difficult, circumstances
are aggravated by the continued merging of drug
trafficking and the terrorist underground, inter alia,
to launder criminal proceeds. Human trafficking also
remains a serious challenge in various parts of the
world, and its proceeds frequently end up in the hands
of terrorists. We consider it necessary to continue to
study the interaction between terrorist organizations
and international crime. The potential of criminal
groups makes it much easier for terrorists to conduct
subversive activities globally. We therefore think that it
is a very good idea and appropriate that Peru prepare a
relevant draft resolution on this issue.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): As this
is my first statement at an open meeting of the Security
Council since Peru assumed the presidency for this
month, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President. I
also congratulate Kuwait on its successful presidency of
the Council in June. I also welcome the new Permanent
Representative of France to the Council.
This is likely to be my last speech in the Security
Council as Permanent Representative of China. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to extend my
respect to all my colleagues. It has been an honour to
have worked so long with the Council, which has yielded
a profound friendship with all of its members. I thank
Council members for their support and assistance to me.
I would also like to express my hope that in future the
Security Council can build on its current momentum to
better maintain international peace and security.
China welcomes this open debate convened by
Peru. We thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate

19-209999/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Makarenko.
At present, there is mutual collusion and infiltration
between terrorism and organized crime. Terrorist
organizations using organized crime for financing
and organized criminal groups resorting to extreme
measures or committing terrorist activities, all of
which poses a serious threat to international peace and
security. The international community must strengthen
its results-based cooperation in that area, exchange
intelligence and information, share success stories
and take concerted action so as to effectively fight
terrorism and organized crime and jointly maintain
international peace and security. I would like to stress
the following points.
First, it is important to adhere to a unified counterterrorism standard while respecting the primary
responsibilities of Member States and the essential
coordinating role of the United Nations. Terrorism is the
public enemy of humankind. Counter-terrorism must
not be subject to double standards, much less selective
approaches. Instead, counter-terrorism must follow the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned.
Countries must strictly implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the resolutions
of the Council and the General Assembly, abiding by
and implementing international law on combating
organized crime. Tangible measures must be taken to
counter collusion and infiltration between terrorist
organizations and organized crime in terms of
personnel, financing, equipment and incitement to
hatred. A comprehensive approach must be taken to
eradicate the root causes of terrorism and organized
crime and prevent their proliferation.
Secondly, it is imperative to strengthen international
and regional cooperation to create synergy, so as to
effectively fight terrorism and organized crime. As
international terrorism, transnational organized crime
and other global security issues become ever more
interlinked and diversified, any weakness on the part
of a single country could trigger a large number of
external threats, give rise to a series of risks and create
a safe haven for terrorists and organized crime.
The international community must actively support
regional and subregional organizations in their important
roles and in conducting effective regional cooperation.
10/62

09/07/2019

China supports closer coordination between United
Nations agencies on the one hand, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
regional organizations on the other hand so as to make
the most of their respective strengths and expertise. We
also applaud the series of regional counter-terrorism
meetings hosted by UNOCT and countries of the region.
Thirdly, it is important to strengthen Member
States’ capacity-building in a targeted manner so as to
address the most prominent challenges. In both counterterrorism and the fight against organized crime,
the international community must effectively assist
Member States, especially developing countries, in
areas such as border control, customs, drug enforcement
and the judiciary. We must also proceed on the basis of
the specific security situations and distinctive cultures
and history of various areas in order to effectively
combat the financing of terrorism by means of crossborder arms and drug trafficking and the illicit trade
in natural resources, combat Internet-based terrorist
and illegal activities by terrorist forces and organized
criminal gangs, and sever the links between terrorism
and organized crime.
It is also important to abide by international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions to
take measures aimed at deradicalization in order to
strengthen prevention and to prevent the perpetrators
of organized crime from resorting to extremist or
terrorist measures.
Like many other countries, China has also
been a victim of terrorism and faces the ongoing
threats of terrorism and extremism. China has taken
decisive measures to carry out counter-terrorism
and deradicalization efforts by legal means and has
effectively contained the high incidence of terrorist
activities at various locations and guaranteed the basic
right to development and life of peoples of all ethnicities.
China’s counterterrorism and deradicalization
campaign is part and parcel of the global fight against
terrorism. It is fully consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations in fighting terrorism
and protecting basic human rights. China has been
rigorously implementing all United Nations counterterrorism resolutions and actively participating in
global and regional counter-terrorism cooperation.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

As a State party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, China has
been taking a range of measures, including legislation,
law-enforcement and judicial measures, actively
implementing its obligations under the Convention and
advancing international cooperation in relevant areas.
We support the counter-terrorism efforts of developing
countries and will continue to conduct bilateral
and multilateral exchanges in cooperation with all
Member States, especially developing countries, on
counter-terrorism and the combat against transnational
organized crime. We will do our utmost to provide
material assistance and assistance in capacity-building
to the countries concerned in a joint endeavour aimed
at maintaining regional and global peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We had thought
that we would still be able to count on the presence
of the representative of China for the next meeting
of the Council, but since he has announced that this
will probably be his last, I should like to take this
opportunity to express to Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu
our special appreciation and deep recognition for his
extraordinary efforts and the work that he has done in
the Council during his tenure here. I should like to add
that it has been a privilege to work with him on the
many important issues on the international agenda. I
believe that I speak also for the other members of the
Council in wishing every success to the Ambassador in
his new responsibilities and, once again, I extend my
gratitude to him.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening by
the presidency of this interesting debate, organized by
the Permanent Mission of Peru on an issue that clearly
requires the attention of the Council.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Kuwait on its presidency and to welcome the new
Ambassador of France, Nicolas de Rivière. We wish
also to express our appreciation to today’s briefers
for the arduous efforts they are making in countering
terrorism and for having enriched this meeting by their
contributions, based on their practical experience.
The link between terrorist groups and transnational
and national organized crime has been recognized and
proved by the Council as a threat to international peace
and security. The interconnection of these two great
evils takes a high toll in human lives, brings political
destabilization and undermines social and economic

S/PV. 8569

progress. It is therefore undeniable that the outcomes
of the clear relationship between such criminal groups
must be combated and prevented. Prevention plays a
very important rule in this struggle, since by relying on
measures to that end States can strengthen their response
systems in order to improve their effectiveness. We
must therefore strengthen public-private partnerships,
international cooperation and relationships with both
subregional and regional agencies, whose technical and
logistical support are of considerable value.
Terrorist groups resort to crimes such as abduction,
trafficking in arms and drugs and trafficking in
persons, among the others mentioned today, in order
to finance their illicit activities. States must therefore
strengthen the prosecution and criminalization of
money-laundering and corruption, with the support
of the judiciary, national financial analysis units and
regional financial intelligence groups.
The Dominican Republic attaches priority to
prevention along with the dismantling of the ties between
terrorists and drug traffickers. Drug trafficking, from
production all the way through the illicit consumption
of illegal substances, is a heinous cancer that is eating
away at the well-being and progress of our peoples.
On 7 June last, the Permanent Missions of the
Dominican Republic, the United Kingdom, France, the
United States, Peru, Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, along with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, organized
an Arria Formula meeting on the issue of transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking in the Caribbean
region as a threat to international stability. This made
it possible for Council members to debate the complex
dimensions of these problems, including current trends
and modalities, as well as the efforts of parties to
combat these phenomena.
We would highlight here the importance of
closely cooperating with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL in analysing and
exchanging the relevant information in order to help
identify the criminal ties between terrorists and other
criminal groups.
Finally, putting an end to terrorism and organized
crime is a fight we must all undertake. It is for that
reason that we commend the time and effort put in by
the Permanent Mission of Peru to bring to light the ties
between terrorism and organized crime. As Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to

19-2099911/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

09/07/2019

resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
it held educational meetings on this important issue and
is leading the current negotiations on a draft resolution
on the same topic.

process of radicalization occurred mainly within our
prisons, which has led us to reconsider our analysis
of both the radicalization processes, but also of our
prison systems.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu on his last day in the Council
for his wise opinions. It has been an honour to be his
colleague. He is a very intelligent and interesting person
and I wish him every success in his future endeavours.

In addition, it is also important to understand the
close links among several types of organized crime
and how terrorist movements benefit from them. We
note that there is an important link between trafficking
in human beings and terrorism. That link exists not
only in the financing of terrorist movements, but also
through sexual exploitation as a terrorist tactic. Those
practices have been used by Da’esh, Boko Haram and
other terrorist movements.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate, and we thank all the briefers for
their informative presentations.
I also welcome our new French colleague,
Mr. Nicolas de Rivière. In addition, I congratulate
Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu on his new functions and
thank him for his exemplary cooperation over the
several months we have spent together on the Council.
Although several Security Council resolutions have
already expressed the Council’s concern about the links
between terrorism and organized crime, those links
need to be further identified and addressed. They may
include financial assistance to terrorist movements,
logistical assistance or even the formation of an ad hoc
coalition. We also note that the dividing line between
terrorism and organized crime, both transnational
and domestic, can be very blurry. While terrorist
movements often finance their operations through
criminal activities, criminal organizations sometimes
adopt methods similar to terrorist movements to
achieve their ends.
The links between terrorism and organized crime
varies greatly by region. Multilateral actions to combat
terrorism and organized crime must take those different
realities into account and our measures must be adapted
to different regional contexts.
Unfortunately, Europe has also seen many violent
terrorist attacks on its territory in recent years. Belgium
has not been spared, having been attacked in March
2016. Most of the terrorists who participated in these
recent attacks had a criminal history, often involving
petty crime. These individuals were radicalized
and joined terrorist groups with a speed that greatly
outpaced us and through a process that differed from
the radicalization processes we have known until now.
They were deliberately targeted by Da’esh through
a rhetoric of redemption for their past crimes. This
12/62

In addition, terrorist movements continue to exploit
arms trafficking both to finance their operations and to
supply themselves with weapons. They focus on small
arms and light weapons, which allow them to pursue
their dangerous and violent objectives, leaving many
innocent victims in their wake. We strongly condemn
the illicit transfer of weapons to terrorist movements.
We welcome the draft resolution initiated by the
Peruvian mission, which not only seeks to understand the
complexity of the links between criminal organizations
and terrorist movements but also proposes concrete
measures. We reiterate the importance we attach to the
fact that no measure taken in the context of the fight
against terrorism and organized crime should hinder the
work of humanitarian organizations, whose activities
are neutral and impartial. Respect for international
humanitarian law and the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions remains
paramount everywhere and in all circumstances.
We also note the importance of strengthening the
capacities of States in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime, and welcome the important role played
in that connection by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
We once again thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. You can count on our cooperation
in the drafting of this new resolution.
Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Let me take this
opportunity to join others in bidding farewell to our
colleague, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu and thanking him
for his work on the Security Council. We wish him all
the best and every success in his future endeavours.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

(spoke in French)
I would also like, on behalf of the entire Permanent
Mission of Germany to the United Nations, to warmly
welcome our new colleague, French Ambassador
Nicolas de Rivière, as our neighbour on the Security
Council. We are truly gratified to be able to continue
our very close collaboration with him and the entire
French team here in New York.
(spoke in English)
We commend the Peruvian presidency for
keeping this important topic on the agenda of the
Council and its subsidiary bodies. We thank all the
briefers for sharing their insights with us today, with
special thanks to Ms. Tamara Makarenko for her
eye-opening contribution.
We share the notion that the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime need to be studied and
monitored by the competent authorities — first, at the
level of Member States; secondly, at the level of regional
organizations; and thirdly, here at the United Nations.
On all three levels, it is critical that our political
decisions be based on facts. The global phenomenon
of terrorism threatens the livelihoods and well-being of
civilians worldwide.

S/PV. 8569

sight of the specificities of each case. This topic does
not lend itself to generalizations.
Against this background, the role of the United
Nations should be that of a facilitator of information
and an amplifier of scientific findings developed
foremost by Member States, regional organizations and
civil society actors. In the fight against terrorism and
organized crime, the work of INTERPOL, EUROPOL
and State law enforcement are key. Some member States
may cooperate; sometimes only one member State will
take the lead. Again, generalizations are not helpful.
We are committed to relentlessly pursuing terrorists,
just as we are committed to preventing radicalization
and violent extremism. That requires comprehensive
efforts following a whole-of-society approach. And
it requires strong international cooperation. Within
the United Nations, three principles are of particular
importance to us.
First, I would like to recall the special attention
that women and children need and deserve as victims
of trafficking in persons. Regardless of who the
perpetrators are, the victims should be our focus.
They need our protection and our efforts to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

However, terrorists do this in very different ways
and modi operandi. The threat is very different among
different countries and regions. Looking, for example,
at Europe in past decades, we saw very different forms
of terrorism. Separatists in Northern Ireland or the
Basque country had little in common with radical
pseudo-communist armed groups like the Red Army
Faction in Germany, Action directe in France, the
Brigate Rosse in Italy or, if we look at more recent
examples, right-wing terrorism.

Secondly, I would like to recall that Germany
has been at the forefront of fostering a discussion
on the unintended effects of counter-terrorism
measures on impartial and neutral — in short,
principled — humanitarian action. That is a very
important topic for us. We strongly advocate the use
of the language in recently adopted resolution 2462
(2019) as a benchmark in that regard. We have been
advocating the use only of targeted sanctions for a long
time. We will continue to do so during the ongoing
negotiations on a Security Council draft resolution
regarding today’s topic.

When we look at Europe today, terrorist activities
are not characterized by strong organized crime
involvement. With the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, we saw a State-like terrorist group
use methods usually employed by organized crime
syndicates, including trafficking in persons. Some
members of the Taliban in Afghanistan are connected
to cross-border drug smuggling. But those examples
might be too particular to call it a trend. They could
very well be a singular phenomenon when we look at the
specific organization and the vast territory controlled
by these groups. But we need to be careful not to lose

Thirdly, Germany is active within the group of
friends on targeted sanctions. We are convinced that
we need to respect international standards of due
process and human rights when countering terrorism.
It is only with fairness and transparency that we will
we be able to prevent people from falling into the
trap of extremists and their terrorist propaganda. For
Governments, behaving within the law is paramount.
It is not only our moral duty, it is the most effective
way to counter the lies of terrorists. They try to
depict democratic Governments as the enemy and as
illegitimate and inhumane. We need to show that we

19-2099913/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

are the contrary — fair and just — but also determined
to stop terrorists and to hunt down those who have
committed acts of terrorism.
Let me conclude by thanking you
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.

again,

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate Kuwait, Ambassador Alotaibi and his
team for a very successful presidency. I would also
like to wish you all the best, Mr. President, in your
endeavours this month.
Allow me also to warmly welcome Ambassador
Nicolas de Rivière and thank Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu
for the very fruitful cooperation and wish them good
luck in their new assignments.
I would now like to thank our briefers their
informative briefings and their work aimed at
addressing the nexus between organized crime and
terrorism. I would also like to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and for Peru’s efforts in bringing
this issue into the spotlight.
The briefings highlight the significance of
further study of the nature, scope and dynamics of
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
It is clear that, without a comprehensive approach and
enhanced cooperation by stakeholders at every level,
we will not be able to effectively prevent and counter
the threats they pose. Let me focus on a few measures
that could be taken in that regard, while ensuring that
the ones already being taken by States comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.
First, with regard to collecting, analysing and
exchanging information, we believe that further
development and standardization of research and
analytical capabilities by the relevant bodies is needed,
including the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and its Global Research
Network. Greater information-sharing is also needed,
both between local communities and non-governmental
actors, including non-governmental organizations
and the private sector, and the Government, within
regional frameworks, such as Eurojust and EUROPOL,
and global ones, such as INTERPOL. Of particular
importance is developing appropriate frameworks
to prevent the financing of terrorism. The European
14/62

09/07/2019

Union’s recent legislation and the combining of the
Financial Intelligence Unit Network with EUROPOL’s
products and services are examples of good practices in
that regard. Such practices could be followed, as should
the standards of the Financial Action Task Force. We
call on all Member States to strengthen informationand intelligence-sharing at both the national and
international levels.
Secondly, with respect to capacity-building and
cooperation, developing inter-institutional cooperation
and providing the training and tools to build
capabilities to identify, prevent and disrupt the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime are of crucial
importance. We should also pay special attention to law
enforcement, intelligence, financial intelligence units,
border customs and, in some cases, military personnel.
Cooperation by States with relevant bodies focused on
countering terrorism and organized crime, including
CTED, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNODC,
could also be beneficial in that regard. Therefore,
we encourage States to continue dialogue, hostcountry visits and follow-up on the recommendations
they receive.
Finally, with regard to addressing the root causes,
we consider developing cooperation and empowerment
to be vital — in particular for local communities — in
building awareness of the impact of illegal activities,
including through media, while ensuring the inclusion
of the perspectives of different members of society and
launching initiatives to offer rehabilitation, reintegration
and employment to build resilience. In that endeavour
it is crucial to ensure coordination among stakeholders,
including donors, to maximize outcomes and avoid the
duplication of activities.
We must not only implement relevant international
instruments and Security Council resolutions, but also
constantly consider ways of adapting and refining our
responses to terrorism and organized crime and their
linkages. That is why we welcome the development
by the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and the Global Counterterrorism
Forum of a policy toolkit on that topic. We also commend
Peru’s initiatives concerning the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime, including the Council’s
draft resolution that is being negotiated. We would
like to reiterate Poland’s support for, and cooperation
on, those efforts. We express our hope for the swift
adoption and implementation of the draft resolution.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate Kuwait and its delegation for
their presidency of the Security Council in June. I wish
you every success, Mr. President, during your country’s
presidency in July.
I would also like to thank the Ambassador of China
for his outstanding contribution to the Council’s work
in recent months and years. Lastly, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and colleagues for welcoming me to
the Council.
I should like to thank Peru for convening today’s
open debate. I also thank our briefers — Yury Fedotov,
Michèle Coninsx and Tamara Makarenko — for
their briefings.
France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Since last year’s Arria Formula meeting, we have
had several opportunities to hear various regional
perspectives and to share experiences and good practices
in this area, which France welcomes. I will therefore
limit myself to making two observations today.
The first is the undeniable overlap between
criminal and terrorist groups, the nature and scope of
which vary from one region of the world to another.
In Europe, very few cases of verified cooperation
between transnational criminal networks and terrorist
groups have been reported in recent years. However,
the attacks in Paris in November 2015 and Brussels
in March 2016 demonstrated the existence of links
between terrorism and, in particular, petty crime, as the
Permanent Representative of Belgium just said.
Elsewhere in the world, especially in the Sahel
and Afghanistan — that is to say in regions in which
the State’s authority is challenged by terrorist and
criminal groups responsible for sustaining high
levels of violence — links can be stronger and lead to
more active cooperation and, at times, even to hybrid
phenomena whereby terrorism and organized crime
are merged into a single security threat. In that regard,
groups such as Al-Qaida and Da’esh often recruit from
the same populations and encourage their supporters
to commit crimes to finance their own activities.
Criminal and terrorist groups frequently use similar
means of communication to carry out their activities, in
particular by using the Internet to access the Dark Web.
We must therefore remain focused on the evolution
of the threat in order to adapt our response as effectively

S/PV. 8569

as possible. Recent reports, including the World Atlas
of Illicit Flows, published in September 2018, have
shown accordingly that environmental crime, in the
broad sense of the term, has become the primary source
of funding for certain non-State armed groups and
terrorist organizations. We must take that development
into account, as has been done by the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.
That brings me to my second observation, which
concerns the response to be provided at the national,
regional and international levels. In that regard, France
is fully committed to combating terrorism in all its
forms, as well as the fight against organized crime. As
an example, France is leading and supporting several
initiatives, including, in particular, its effort together
with Germany to combat trafficking in small arms and
light weapons in the Western Balkans, given that such
illicit trafficking is responsible for sustaining high
levels of violence and corruption and can facilitate the
commission of terrorist acts by individuals in Europe
and elsewhere.
As President of the Group of Seven, France has also
launched a multipartite initiative to combat trafficking
in drugs, small arms and light weapons, human
trafficking and the illegal trafficking of migrants
in the Sahel, which fuel instability and corruption,
endanger the rule of law and peace efforts, provide
fertile ground for terrorist organizations and contribute
to the deterioration of the humanitarian situation. The
initiative is aimed at providing the technical assistance
to the countries of the Sahel region that they require.
Moreover, the multidimensional nature of the fight
against terrorism and the types of trafficking potentially
capable of fuelling it also demands an integrated
regional response, linking development and security
and taking intraregional dynamics into account. The
support of subregional and regional organizations, such
as the Group of Five for the Sahel and the European
Union — to name but two — is crucial to developing an
effective regional response to such phenomena, which
know no borders.
In conclusion, the United Nations has a unique
role to play in improving our understanding of the
links between terrorism and organized crime so as
to encourage international cooperation and build the
capacity of States that request it. Resolution 2462
(2019), adopted in March, clearly identifies the risks
posed by the links between terrorist financing and

19-2099915/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

organized crime in various regions of the world and calls
on States, in close cooperation with relevant regional
organizations and the United Nations, to redouble
their efforts to address them. We must ensure that it is
fully implemented. France will continue to support all
initiatives enabling us to move forward in this area, in
particular with regard to the draft resolution proposed
by the Peruvian presidency.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. You may rest assured of the support of the
State of Kuwait for you and your team.
I also want to congratulate Ambassador Nicolas
de Rivière of France on his appointment as Permanent
Representative of his country. I wish him every success
in his new tasks. I further wish every success to our
colleague Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu of China and thank
him for his valuable contributions to the work of the
Security Council. I commend him for representing his
country in the way he has.
I thank you, Mr. President, for today’s open debate
and the concept note (S/2019/537, annex). I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Tamara Makarenko for their valuable briefings.
I would like to focus in my statement on the
following points.
First of all, with respect to the links between
international terrorism and organized crime, despite
the international community’s success in combating
terrorism and terrorist groups throughout the world this
phenomenon remains a threat to international peace and
security. The working methods of the terrorist groups
are evolving and their area of operations is expanding
and becoming more diversified. Terrorist groups
are financing their operations through transnational
organized crime in certain regions, including by
trafficking in drugs, arms, humans and migrants,
illegal trafficking in natural resources and kidnapping
for ransom. They use the proceeds of such activities to
fund their terrorist activities.
The phenomenon of terrorism is linked to
transnational organized crime regardless of the
differences in methodologies and goals. They both
16/62

09/07/2019

constitute a threat to international peace and security
and represent a major challenge to affected States,
which might lead to conflict aggravation in affected
regions. Terrorist groups which benefit from organized
crime might contribute to complicating efforts of
preventing and settling conflicts. In its resolutions 1373
(2001), 2195 (2014), 2322 (2016), 2368 (2017) and 2462
(2019), the Security Council has emphasized the link
between terrorism and organized crime.
Consequently, it is impossible to counter
the linkage between international terrorism and
organized crime or to disrupt the activities of those
terrorist groups without international cooperation and
concerted efforts at the regional and international
levels, while combating corruption, money-laundering
and illegal financial flows and establishing regional
and international strategies.. In that regard, Member
States must join the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the protocols
thereto, the 2003 United Nations Convention against
Corruption, the relevant international conventions and
protocols on combating terrorism and all other relevant
international instruments. We call on Member States to
do the following.
First, they must strengthen national, subregional,
regional and international efforts to counter the links
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime at the global level.
Secondly, they must promote cooperation and
strategies to prevent terrorists from reaping the benefits
of organized crime. It is necessary to strengthen the
capacities of States to ensure border security against
terrorists and their collaborators, while also making
them accountable.
Thirdly, we must strengthen national and
regional legislation so as to be able to collect, analyse
and exchange information, in particular on the
implementation of laws and intelligence-gathering.
Fourthly, it is also important to foster the role played
by the private sector as well as to enhance cooperation
between the private and public sectors to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from organized crime.
On the efforts of the United Nations, the Security
Council has recognized that there is a close link between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as has been
expressed in many of its resolutions underscoring the
importance of the United Nations Convention against
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, as well
as strengthening international cooperation, securing
borders, exchanging information and continuous
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and other relevant United Nations
bodies, as well as the INTERPOL, especially in terms
of providing technical support and capacity-building of
Member States to address the link between terrorism
and transnational organized crime. In that regard, we
stress the importance of implementing the relevant
Council resolutions. We also welcome Peru’s initiative
on presenting a draft resolution pertaining to the link
between terrorism and organized crime.
Kuwait has recognized the serious dangers to
international peace and security flowing from the
link between international terrorism and organized
crime. We have adopted a law on combating moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism that includes
a number of preventive measures. Kuwait has also
acceded to a number of international conventions on
combating organized crime and on anti-terrorism.
During 2017, the State of Kuwait presided over the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force. We aim to adopt and implement the Task Force’s
40 recommendations and promote joint efforts to
identify the issues of money-laundering and terrorism
financing at the regional level, as well exchanging
experiences and promoting solutions in that regard.
In conclusion, we emphasize that organized crime
can be eradicated only if we follow a persistent and
inclusive approach based on the effective participation of
all States and regional and international organizations.
We also commend the role played by UNODC in
capacity-building on behalf of Member States.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like
to begin by congratulating Peru on its presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank
the briefers for their insightful views on the subject.
We welcome the opportunity afforded by this open
debate to further deliberate on the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime, including transnational
organized crime.
We are pleased by the continued evolution of
attention to the subject, including its consideration
in various Security Council resolutions, such as
resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2462 (2019). Based on my

S/PV. 8569

country’s experience, South Africa has always held
the view that the link between transnational organized
crime and international terrorism is context specific.
However, we support Peru’s call in its draft resolution
on the topic, which is currently under negotiation, for
a comprehensive, up-to-date study of the interlinkages
of those threats to be conducted by the United Nations.
As Peru has proposed, the study should take place
with the contributions of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the other entities mentioned in the draft resolution.
We are of the view that a study of that nature and its
concluding report would provide Member States with a
solid basis for further refining our responses to those
complex challenges, based on a common understanding
of their global threat profile. We firmly believe that the
study would also provide a comprehensive picture of
the deficiencies that exist in dealing with those threats.
While we feel it is important to expand our understanding
of those challenges, we are nevertheless acutely aware
of their severity and the adverse impact they have on
States’ resources intended to maintain peace, security
and stability and pursue socioeconomic development.
Those involved in transnational organized crime
and acts of terrorism appear to be resilient, strategic
and adept in executing their operations globally,
including targeting areas with weak law enforcement,
endemic corruption and a lack of resources to detect
their activities. The ubiquity of the threats of terrorism
and organized crime, including transnational organized
crime, therefore necessarily demands a collaborative,
multilateral response from us. In that regard, we
applaud the One United Nations approach to address
those common challenges.
As I conclude my remarks, allow me to offer
some general observations on how we might jointly
be able to improve our common efforts to address
international terrorism and organized crime and their
complex interlinkages.
First, we believe that it is greatly important that our
efforts to understand those complex challenges be rooted
in engaging with the local communities and individuals
in the affected areas, whose first-hand perspectives and
understanding of the conditions that perpetuate crime
and terrorism are absolutely invaluable in ultimately
understanding and addressing the threats.

19-2099917/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, it is equally important that counterterrorism and deradicalization programmes be
community-led and -driven and representative of the
population that is affected by those challenges. Ideally,
they should also incorporate religious and community
leadership in challenging the poisonous ideologies and
narratives and in offering alternatives.
Those views are guided, of course, by certain
fundamental principles that underpin South Africa’s
approach to counter-terrorism.
First, we firmly believe in the importance of
addressing the socioeconomic conditions that breed
terrorism and organized crime.
Secondly, we are convinced of the importance
of ensuring that international counter-terrorism
efforts be coordinated by the United Nations, as the
most appropriate and representative structure for
coordinating our actions in that regard.
Thirdly, we believe in the critical importance of
ensuring that counter-terror efforts be conducted in
accordance with international human rights law and
humanitarian law and do not result in unnecessary
casualties, which can further deepen resentment and
hatred and, ultimately, perpetuate a cycle of terrorism.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming South
Africa’s steadfast commitment to fighting the
scourge of terrorism and organized crime and its
interlinkages, where they exist, in all their various
forms and manifestations.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Given that this is the first formal meeting
being convened in the Chamber since Peru assumed
the presidency of the Security Council, our delegation
congratulates His Excellency Ambassador MezaCuadra and his entire team. We similarly commend
Kuwait for the outstanding work it carried out during
its presidency in June.
We also warmly welcome Ambassador Nicolas
de Rivière among us. We furthermore pay tribute
to Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu for the constructive
contributions he has always made at the Council and
the very strong ties of friendship and cooperation that
our two delegations have always enjoyed. We wish him
every success in his new functions.
Allow me to commend the Peruvian delegation for
including this most relevant open debate in the agenda
18/62

09/07/2019

of its presidency, as it is a highly important topic within
the Security Council’s efforts to maintain international
peace and security. We are also grateful for the three
illustrative briefings made by Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ms. Makarenko, which help us to contextualize the
existing threats, risks and collective efforts in order to
understand and address the links between international
terrorism and organized crime, especially since the
Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001) and, more
recently, resolution 2195 (2014).
I take this opportunity to reiterate once again, as we
have been doing, that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
categorically and unequivocally condemns organized
crime and terrorism and their consequences. In that
regard, we extend our condolences to, and express our
solidarity with, those in communities throughout the
world who have been the victims of terrorism, either
directly or indirectly.
For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
increasing links between international terrorism and
organized crime — whether by land, sea or air — and
their impact on the sustainable development of countries
are extremely worrisome. Recent reports confirm that
terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, the
Al-Nusra Front, Da’esh and the Taliban, to name but a
few, use international crime and its methods to finance
a greater number of their terrorist activities, benefiting
especially from environmental crime, trafficking in
drugs, weapons and persons, and piracy.
From that perspective, we recognize the need
to sharpen the focus on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism through resolution 2462
(2019), a French initiative co-sponsored by Equatorial
Guinea, in order to ensure that the response to terrorist
threats by the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and States is more effective and efficient.
During a recently held Arria Formula meeting on
this issue, which focused on the Caribbean and was
led by the representative of the Dominican Republic,
we were able to demonstrate that all countries have a
role to play in the prevention and elimination of the
links between organized crime and terrorist groups,
especially in terms of drugs and weapons trafficking,
and the risks posed by such activities to the maintenance
and advancement of sustainable development. In that
regard, in order to identify and obstruct those links
more effectively, we believe it is essential that the
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

international community focus on three areas while
supporting the initiatives of States.
First, we require more in-depth investigation in
collaboration with regional organizations to help us
identify blind spots, safe havens, the main risks and
routes used; strengthen the fight against financial
terrorism; focus our efforts and support on training in
the countries and regions that need it; and ensure that
collective efforts do not result in the strengthening of
one country or region at the expense of others.
Secondly, the levels and volume of weapons
possessed by terrorist and criminal groups, as well as
lone wolves, are a source of great concern to us. For that
reason, with regard to environmental smuggling and
arms trafficking, we believe it is important that States
demonstrate their commitment to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and small arms and
light weapons, as well as to promote and enforce arms
embargoes by ensuring that non-State groups cannot
access them by any other means. Unfortunately, it
is usually only State actors that are monitored and
sanctioned for violating embargoes.
In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes that African countries should firmly
commit to the principles of the Treaty of Pelindaba,
with the total prohibition of direct and indirect
supply or commercialization of mineral resources
from African soil — specifically uranium and
plutonium — for purposes that entail the production,
employment, manufacture or research of weapons of
mass destruction, including military activities.
With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
believe it is essential to eliminate the illegal trafficking
of military equipment, armed unmanned aerial vehicles
and improvised explosive devices to terrorist groups,
armed groups and mercenaries. States must also commit
to interrupting supply lines.
Thirdly, in order to effectively combat terrorism
and transnational crime and the links that unite them,
which are multidimensional issues, developing States
must be able to focus on achieving sustainable and
inclusive development. To do so, they must receive
fair and necessary support, including an opportunity
to participate in the international economy and global
trade, thereby allowing developing States to better
focus their attention on preventing efforts to radicalize
and recruit young people and other vulnerable and
susceptible groups.

S/PV. 8569

Two days ago in Niamey, His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, ratified the African
Continental Free Trade Agreement, an instrument
to strengthen development and sustainable growth in
Africa. Of course, the success of the treaty is closely
linked to an improvement in our ability to control
our own borders so as to prevent the initiative from
effectively failing into the hands of terrorists, criminals,
mercenaries and other non-State actors. Therefore, we
call on the international community to support African
States and the African Union in implementing that
leap forward for Africa, as well as supporting African
efforts and institutions in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime and maintaining peace and security.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the role
played by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and its Executive Directorate; the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban; as
well as their analytical support and monitoring teams
and panels of experts. We also acknowledge their
increasing cooperation and collaboration with other
United Nations entities in support of States, such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Office of Disarmament
Affairs, among others, as well as with regional and
subregional organizations. We encourage the further
strengthening of that cooperation.
Equatorial Guinea can be relied upon to support
this important work as far as possible. In that context,
we commend and support the Peruvian initiative to
submit a draft resolution on this issue.
Mr. Power (United Kingdom): Can I start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
I also congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to join colleagues in welcoming Ambassador
De Rivière to the Security Council and bidding a fond
farewell to Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu. Like others, we
had not realized that today was to be his last appearance
at the Council. I know my Ambassador would want me
to express, on behalf of Her Majesty’s Government, our

19-2099919/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

appreciation for his partnership and his contribution to
the work of the Council.
The United Kingdom believes that the most
important element of the link between organized crime
and terrorism lies not in the groups themselves, but in
the response from Governments. We see that the links
between terrorist groups and criminal activity vary by
region and cover a broad range of relationships, from
the tactical to the strategic, thereby requiring individual
responses in each situation.
The United Kingdom views terrorism primarily as
a criminal enterprise, thereby necessitating a civilian
policing response. It therefore follows that the response
must closely resemble the same means we use to
tackle organized crime. That is why this debate is so
important and the further research that we are calling
for is very much needed. States and the international
community must tackle terrorism and organized crime
by focusing on strengthening policing and investigative
responses, upholding the rule of law and international
human rights law and tackling the conditions that allow
terrorism and organized crime to flourish.
We agree with the representative of South Africa
on the link between organized crime and terrorism
being context-specific. But we know that criminality
can create an enabling environment for terrorist groups
to secure the recruits and resources they need for their
operations, as many speakers have mentioned today,
including the very worrying example of terrorist
recruitment in our prisons. Moreover, when criminal
organizations seek to undermine Governments and
governance, they can affect the resources available to
address terrorism and violent extremism. At the same
time, criminal groups can profit from the instability and
insecurity generated by terrorism and conflict, creating
strong vested interests in fuelling those dynamics and
perpetuating the suffering in such contexts.
With regard to prevention, we believe that we must
adopt a broad approach that can stop the problem at
its source by identifying and supporting those at risk
of engaging in criminality, building the highest levels
of defence and resilience among vulnerable people,
communities, businesses and systems. Addressing
the socioeconomic and governance-related drivers of
criminality are just as vital as relentlessly tackling the
organized criminal networks.
In relation to terrorism, we have also stressed
many times in the Council the importance of a broad
20/62

09/07/2019

preventive approach that strengthens the capacities to
ensure that legal and criminal justice responses are in
full compliance with international law and human rights
obligations. One way to do that has been to support the
preventing and countering violent extremism national
action plans, which foster a coordinated response to
terrorist crimes and in whose development the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and many others have been closely
involved in supporting Member States.
In the United Kingdom our approach is guided by
annual strategic assessments of the threat that serious
organized crime poses to our security and prosperity.
Last year, the United Kingdom also published a
serious organized crime strategy that emphasized the
importance of enhancing our approach across a number
of pillars — not only law enforcement but also in the
upstream prevention space that many representatives
have talked about today. Governments alone cannot
tackle such challenges. Public-private partnerships,
bringing together the private sector, civil society and
Government actors, are critical to ensuring that all
relevant parties are aware of the threats and can access
the necessary resources in order to counter them.
As the Russian and Chinese Ambassadors both said
very strongly, the international community must pool
efforts at an international level in order to maximize
its advantage. Just as criminals can learn from each
other, so too we must learn from the criminal networks
and share our understanding. The United Nations can
play a vital role in that endeavour, bringing together the
expertise and those of us in the international community
who are like-minded in order to adopt such an approach.
We must do so in full respect for all the international
agreements and Security Council resolutions that have
been adopted by this body, including those that fully
implement the relevant human rights standards.
However, we encourage greater coordination in
responding to transnational threats. We recall that this
is a central mandate of the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and the United Kingdom was very pleased to play a
strong role in supporting its creation. We continue to
wish that Office well as it strengthens its ability to
provide concrete and meaningful capacity-building
initiatives and further research and support to the
Council in tackling this problem.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate Peru on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

July. I also congratulate Kuwait on a superb job during
its presidency in June. Let me add my warm welcome
back to New York to Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière.
It is truly excellent to have him with us in the Council
and we wish him every success during his time in New
York. Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu’s distinguished service
at the United Nations, his partnership and constructive
approach on so many issues and his important voice
on the Council will all be missed. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours. Let me thank today’s
briefers and move on to my remarks.
Terrorists and organized criminal groups interact
and cooperate in various ways. They sometimes coexist
in the same territory. They develop ad hoc alliances
based on common interests or even cooperate and merge
as entities. But most interactions between terrorists and
organized criminal groups are ad hoc and opportunistic.
Criminal relationships of convenience define those ties
much more frequently than shared ideologies.
As we have heard, conditions in some parts of
the world, including ungoverned and undergoverned
territories and areas near porous borders, combined
with weak law enforcement, provide opportunities for
terrorists and transnational criminal groups to work
together. As Ms. Makarenko said, it is there that they
collude, collide and conspire. Collectively, we have
a number of tools to strengthen border security and
counter such activity.
Strong border security can prevent such groups
from taking advantage of trafficking routes, human
flows and networks in regions with underpoliced
or porous borders. Cooperation, coordination and
intelligence-sharing among border security agencies
is essential. That is one reason that it is important to
collect and analyse advance passenger information
(API) and passenger name records (PNRs). API and
PNR data can help investigators to identify connections
between individuals associated with terrorists and
organized criminal groups.
Our existing treaties, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and international counter-terrorism instruments and
protocols, provide a useful framework to facilitate
law enforcement cooperation. In the United States
we have used the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime as a legal basis more
than 650 times since 2005 to provide or request
mutual legal assistance, extradition and other forms

S/PV. 8569

of international legal cooperation with 99 countries,
including for crimes that could directly or indirectly
support terrorism, such as migrant smuggling and
money-laundering.
Linkages between terrorists and organized criminal
groups vary by region, as we heard from a number of
other speakers. Revenues generated through various
forms of illicit trafficking, including of arms, have been
used for terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS), for example, has benefited from the illicit
and unregulated purchase of arms. Groups such as
Al-Qaida also engage in a variety of crimes to finance
their activities, ranging from narcotics trafficking to
credit card theft. Kidnapping for ransom and extortion
are also profitable sources of funds for terrorist groups,
including ISIS. In Afghanistan the Taliban profit from
narcotics trafficking and extortion — illicit activities
that support the Taliban insurgency and prolong the
suffering of the Afghan people.
In addition to law enforcement efforts to counter
criminal and terrorist linkages, it is equally important
to engage local communities and non-government
actors, including youth, cultural and educational
leaders, to concurrently address the underlying
conditions conducive to the spread of violent extremism
or transnational organized crime.
We should also develop comprehensive and
integrated strategies to counter potential linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. The United
Nations can strengthen its role in addressing evolving
challenges by enhancing its cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, as well as international
forums such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum
(GCTF). The GCTF is leading several efforts to
address the linkages between transnational organized
crime and terrorism and to bridge the gap between
traditional criminal investigators and those who
handle terrorism cases. That is especially important,
as many home-grown terrorists tend to have prior
criminal backgrounds.
The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations, organizations such as
the Financial Action Task Force, the Group of Seven
and the GCTF, and the European Union and partner
countries around the world to address both transnational
organized crime and terrorism.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to
thank Kuwait for its excellent presidency of the

19-2099921/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Security Council in June and I look forward to Peru’s
presidency. I would also like to welcome our dear
colleague Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière to this family
of the Security Council. I also thank the briefers for
their insightful and informative briefings. I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting this very
important issue forward. Like you, we are Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which all deal with
the issue of terrorists, and the linkage is significant.
I am quite sure that no State Member of the United
Nations is immune to criminality or terrorist activities.
Discussing this important issue is therefore timely.
As we have heard from many members of the
Council today, the security challenges posed by the
linkages between transnational organized crime and
terrorism have continued to evolve and can affect
peace, security and stability whenever and wherever
such activities occur. While transnational organized
crime and terrorism often have a different motivation
and are subject to different legal regimes, they should
not be approached in isolation from each other. It is
also crucial to note that transnational organized crime
has unique characteristics in each region of the world.
Therefore, the discussion and measures to address
the issue should be tailored to the specificity of the
region and in accordance with the applicable rules of
international law. In our region, for instance, linkages
often lie in the financing part — recruitment, crossborder activities, smuggling, inter alia. Against this
backdrop, I wish to make three pertinent points.
First, strengthening legal measures should be one of
the priorities. Strong national legislation to criminalize
terrorism and transnational organized crime is an
effective tool for closing possible legal gaps that may be
misused by both terrorist and organized-crime groups.
It is important to close possible gaps by harmonizing
existing national legal frameworks with such relevant
international legal instruments as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
Secondly, international cooperation is central. The
reality today is that we live in a world where there is
no region or country that remains untouched by the
22/62

09/07/2019

effects and negative influence of cross-border crime or
terrorism, hence the need to work together. This requires
increased information- and intelligence-sharing,
expanding awareness of and capacity-building in law
enforcement and coordinated actions among competent
agencies, including monitoring and enforcement. We
need to explore options to enable efficient and effective
coordination among local, regional and international
efforts. We need to intensify our collective efforts with
all existing mechanisms, in particular those within the
United Nations framework. In this regard, Indonesia
is pleased to host the visit of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on 15 to 17 July 2019.
That leads to my third and last point, which
concerns the importance of sharing of experience
and best practices. We need to learn from each
other’s experiences and best practices, identify what
works and what does not work, and analyse current
developments on these linkages. I would like to thank
Tamara Makarenko for her briefing, which contributed
to an enhanced understanding of the linkages vis-à-vis
recruitment, hybrid organizations and the sophistication
of linkages.
I do believe that we are now looking at the new breed
of what I call a terro-criminal, which I think is another
issue that we need to go into more deeply. We therefore
need to facilitate collaboration so as to strengthen our
shared capacity to address these challenges. We need
to advance regional dialogue and cooperation. An
example of such cooperation from our region is the Bali
Process mechanism, which with its 49 members and
with Indonesia and Australia as Chairs, has discussed
the consequences of people-smuggling, trafficking in
persons and related transnational crimes. In dealing
with people-smuggling and trafficking in persons,
we adhere to the principle of burden-sharing, where
responsibilities are shared among the countries of
origin, transit and destination of irregular migrants. We
believe that this approach can be replicated elsewhere
to counter the continuously evolving challenges.
Neighbours can learn from each other.
The issue of linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime have been on the agenda
of the Security Council for many years. Now what
must be done is to accept reality and the fact that both
represent scourges to humankind. We must take action
in a holistic, comprehensive, multidisciplinary manner
and with absolute conviction and commitment. We
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

need to clean up our act without delay because terrocriminals work in real time.
In conclusion, since I am the last speaker at the
horseshoe-table to take the floor, I would be remiss if
I did not thank our comrade, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu,
for his friendship, collaboration and service to the
promotion of multilateralism and United Nations values
in an honourable and distinguished manner. We have an
old saying in Indonesia: “Old Ambassador-Permanent
Representatives never die; they just fade away and are
promoted to higher places”. We wish him all the best
and bon voyage.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a long list of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes Peru’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and its invitation to
review the issue at hand today.
International terrorism and organized crime are two
phenomena that affect the stability, development and
well-being of our societies. Both are serious and need to
be tackled head-on and effectively. However, while it is
true that both endanger peace and security, it is necessary
to differentiate between them. That is precisely why
there are two different legal frameworks, each with its
own institutional scaffolding. Generalizations about the
scope of the link between international terrorism and
organized crime are therefore neither valid nor timely,
nor are generalizations about the responses required to
prevent, combat and mitigate their effects.
Certainly,
in
specific
contexts,
there
have been links — above all of a financial
nature — between transnational organized crime and
terrorist organizations, which, of course, deserve the
effective attention of the international community. And
it is precisely in that regard, in the methods of financing
terrorism, that we must redouble our efforts to rigorously
analyse their implications and learn more about their

S/PV. 8569

scope. But for all this to happen, in strict compliance
with the mandates conferred by the Member States, it
is essential to strengthen international cooperation in
coordination with the specialized multilateral agencies
of the United Nations. In that context, we endorse the
call of the General Assembly, in its sixth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
to also improve cooperation at the national and
subregional levels and to generate a more timely and
effective response to the links between terrorism and
some forms of transnational organized crime.
We believe that it is necessary for these
considerations to be taken into account by the Security
Council in addressing the issue. It is therefore not
only a question of recognizing local and regional
differences, but also of rigorously analysing whether
we are adequately contextualizing the debate within the
Council’s mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank the President for
organizing today’s important debate. We appreciate
the commitment of the delegation of Peru to the cause
of counter-terrorism. We are grateful to the President
for consistently highlighting the linkages of terrorism
and organized crime in his work in the Security
Council, especially as the Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee. I also thank the briefers for their
informative and insightful inputs.
While it is axiomatic to portray the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime as symbiotic, let us not
forget that terrorism itself is a crime in most national
jurisdictions. This situation has existed at least since
the Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), by
which, for the first time, it required all Member States
to domestically criminalize terrorism and the financing
thereof. In addition, terrorism and organized crime
are both manifestly malicious organisms, drawing
sustenance from the same deadly swamp. At times, they
coexist. At other times, they cooperate. And in some
instances, they converge. As the world becomes more
interconnected, these menacing networks are becoming
increasingly intertwined.
The nature of the relationship between terrorist
and criminal groups may vary according to a variety
of factors. However, both rely on strategic recourse
to unsanctioned and illegitimate use of violence to
undermine governance and development. Both lead

19-2099923/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

to destabilizing established State structures, thereby
undermining and threatening international peace
and security.
Terrorist organizations are increasingly involved
in lucrative criminal activities, such as trading in
natural resources and human trafficking, to raise funds.
Similarly, criminal groups are joining hands with
terrorists and providing services, such as counterfeiting,
illicit financing, arms dealing, drug trafficking and
smuggling terrorists across borders. The activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram, such as extortion, human trafficking,
resource extraction, trade in cultural artefacts and illicit
taxation in areas they control, manifest in myriad ways
the process of the blurring of lines at the intersections
between crime and terror.
In our own region, we have seen the mutation of
Dawood Ibrahim’s criminal syndicate into a terrorist
network known as the D-Company. The D-Company’s
illegitimate economic activities may be little known
outside our region, but for us, activities such as gold
smuggling, the counterfeiting of currency and arms
and drug trafficking from a safe haven that declines
to acknowledge even his existence are a real and
present danger.
The success of collective action to denude ISIL
is a pointer that the Council’s focussed attention can
and does yield results. A similar degree of interest
in addressing the threats posed by proscribed
individuals — such as Dawood Ibrahim and his
D-Company, as well as proscribed entities, including the
so-called Jaish-e-Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
which are listed as affiliates of Al-Qaida under
the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities — will serve all of us well.
Revenues generated by the illicit activities of
terrorist and criminal groups are moved across borders
and exchanged through open networks. That flow of
resources, meant to produce violence and terror, needs
to be stopped by States working together. Collective
inter-State efforts are required, including at the regional
and subregional levels. We also need to sensitize the
private and public enterprises involved in facilitating
legitimate transboundary financial flows. We should
harness their support so that they do not fall prey to
24/62

09/07/2019

malevolent actors in the vein of Osama Bin Laden’s
string of retail honey shops.
Normative efforts at the United Nations need to be
coordinated through collaboration with other forums,
such as the Financial Action Task Force. We believe that
the Task Force is playing a significant role in setting
global standards for preventing and combating moneylaundering and terrorist financing. The United Nations
needs to increase cooperation with such bodies.
With the emergence of new technologies and
uncharted frontiers, our challenges in identifying
new terrorist trends, mapping links between terrorists
and criminal groups, and sharing information more
effectively are growing. The Security Council has
identified, over the years, various aspects of the issue
of addressing terrorist financing. We hope that the draft
resolution under discussion in the Council during the
Peruvian presidency on the linkages between terrorism
and organized crime will advance that cause further.
Finally, our collective commitment to implementing
what we agree upon in the Council will go a long way
in acting as a catalyst in pursuit of our common good.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. Let me also
express my gratitude to the briefers for their insightful
remarks today.
International terrorism and organized crime
are two significant threats facing the international
community. As stated in resolution 2195 (2014), it is our
responsibility to enhance cooperation and strategies to
prevent terrorists from benefiting from transnational
organized crime. The full and strict implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions is essential to
combating terrorism and organized crime. Japan will
continue to synergize its efforts in countering both
terrorism and organized crime so as to contribute to the
peace and stability of its region and the world.
The years 2019 and 2020 are important years for
Japan’s counter-terrorism policy. Two weeks ago we
hosted our first Group of 20 Summit, at which we adopted
a leaders statement on counter-terrorism. Japan will
host further important events, including the 2020 Tokyo
Olympics and Paralympics. The Japanese Government
has tirelessly invested its efforts in strengthening its
counter-terrorism capabilities, including on border
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

control, information-sharing and public-private
partnerships to ensure the safety of everyone involved
in those events. We have also thoroughly implemented
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Our national efforts work hand in hand with global
action to combat terrorism. We have actively engaged
in contributing to the strengthening of the capabilities
of our fellow Member States. There have been far too
many tragic incidents in recent years around the world,
including Sri Lanka, and we remain ready to cooperate
with States in need of assistance in their counterterrorism measures.
Our efforts to combat terrorism must also
synchronize with action against organized crime.
Transnational organized crime is a common threat that
all countries face today. The magnitude and impact of
such crime continues to grow and undermine peace
and security, as well as the rule of law. Combating
transnational organized crime requires not only a
strong commitment and effective law enforcement
domestically, but also robust international cooperation.
In that regard, Japan firmly believes that the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols serve as the universal framework
for such cooperation. The scope of offences covered
by the Convention is broad enough to include global
challenges, such as terrorism and cybercrime. Japan
has started using the Convention as the basis for its
international partnerships and is committed to further
strengthening its cooperation with all Member States.

S/PV. 8569

today’s open debate on the linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful interventions and, through them, their teams,
for their continued engagement on this critical issue.
As the concept note (S/2019/537, annex) from the
Peruvian presidency indicates, the Security Council
has repeated expressed concern over the linkages
between organized crime and terrorism. That concern
is entirely justified, as the linkages continue to both
widen and deepen. Absent a coordinated response
by the international community, we will be less
effective on all fronts. But the response also needs to
be inclusive and gender responsive in order to address
the drivers of insecurity that perpetuate terrorism and
organized crime.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

Canada believes that a key actor in the response
is the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF). The
GCTF is an informal coordinating body that supports
United Nations efforts to advance the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
relevant resolutions. That work helps sustain the
collective international commitment to our obligations
to fight terrorism under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. For example,
the GCTF Nexus between Transnational Organized
Crime and Terrorism Initiative organized four regional
meetings in 2017 and 2018 in Algeria, Albania,
Singapore and Kenya. Those meetings included diverse
representatives from the United Nations, Member
States, international and regional organizations,
international experts, practitioners and academia to
review knowledge and share information about the
regional contexts and variations of this threat. Under
the leadership of the Netherlands, the GCTF developed
non-binding good practices and a related practical
policy toolkit to disrupt that nexus. In our future role
as GCTF co-Chair alongside Morocco, Canada plans
to further strengthen the GCTF’s relationship with the
United Nations, its collaboration with other multilateral
and regional organizations and United Nations States
Members. It is that type of partnership-driven response
that we would also emulate if elected to a term on the
Security Council for the period 2021 to 2022.

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the delegation of Peru for organizing

Opportunities to confront the criminal-terrorist
linkage also flow from work in regional bodies. Canada

Japan will also contribute to collective efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
by hosting the fourteenth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, or Kyoto
Congress, in April 2020. Under the main theme
“Advancing crime prevention, criminal justice and
the rule of law: towards the achievement of the 2030
Agenda”, Japan wishes to discuss and identify practical
measures, including the effective use of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, with the attendance of high-level officials of
Member States to strengthen international cooperation
and technical assistance to prevent and address all
forms of crime that hinder sustainable development.

19-2099925/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

currently chairs the Organization of American States
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism and
provides more than half of its budget. At the recent
meeting of the Committee, which was focused on
building resilience, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and other key United Nations counter-terrorism entities
were invited to share their perspectives.
We see the value of establishing standards, best
practices and measures to improve border, port and
document security, and are encouraging this work
across the Americas. Doing so provides the dual benefit
of making the hemisphere more resistant to the spread
of terrorism, the core mandate of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, while also impeding
transnational organized crime.
(spoke in French)
Another important tool for the international
community is the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
The 40 recommendations of the FATF form the basis
for coordinated global action to counter the abuse of the
financial system by criminals and terrorists. However,
the effectiveness of the FATF framework, as with other
counter-terrorism and organized crime initiatives, lies
in its implementation by Member States. Recognizing
that, Canada provides $55 million for training,
equipment procurement and technical assistance to
build capacity to prevent and respond to terrorist and
criminal activities. For example, Canada has funded
INTERPOL projects to strengthen the ability of frontline border officers to use INTERPOL databases,
such as the INTERPOL database on foreign terrorists.
Moreover, the use by returning foreign terrorist fighters
of the same routes used by migrants renders the latter
even more vulnerable. For that reason, Canada supports
projects that take those specific risks into account and
attempt to address them.
In summary, Canada remains strongly committed
to tackling transnational organized crime and
terrorism. By working together, the United Nations
and Member States cannot only disrupt terrorist groups
and criminal organizations, but also prevent them from
joining forces.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. González (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joins the warm expressions of
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to Peru for
26/62

09/07/2019

holding the presidency of the Security Council. We also
join others in thanking you for organizing this open
debate to share ideas on the matter we are discussing
today. We also express our appreciation for the valuable
briefings that inform our discussion.
Terrorism, as a threat to international peace and
security, as well as transnational organized crime,
which constantly threatens the security of States,
were perceived in the past as differentiated criminal
phenomena that were unrelated to each other. Over
the years, these threats have developed close links,
forming a criminal alliance that can affect any State,
which is why my country considers it of the utmost
importance to create international awareness about
this relationship and its consequences, with a view to
developing responses together to fight them effectively.
Although the nature of terrorism and criminal
organizations vary according to their context, both
phenomena benefit from illicit profit and logistical
support. That implies the generation of complex and
dynamic links that require coordination at the local,
national, subregional, regional and global levels in
accordance with international law. Colombia promotes
an integrated and multidimensional approach to
combating terrorism that acts on the widest possible
levels of cooperation among States, as well as within
the framework of effective coordination among
international organizations.
We must understand that terrorism and transnational
organized crime can manifest in networks and shared
logistical activities that allow for the acquisition of
weapons, ammunition and explosives; the hiding of
assets, including through the use of cryptocurrencies;
the maintenance of constant communication;
guaranteed displacement of their personnel through the
production and use of false documentation and, finally,
the conduct of criminal and terrorist actions in certain
places, hiding in others and escape from the action of the
States in defiance of which they act. With the objective
of containing their ability to act, special emphasis
must be placed on the pursuit of their finances and the
laundering of assets produced by their illicit activities,
as highlighted in resolution 2462 (2019). There, control
of both the international financial system and the
systems for informal funds transfers will allow for a
significant reduction in their financial capacity, which
in turn reduces their ability to act in defiance of States.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

The fight against terrorism requires comprehensive
actions that make it possible to strike at their finances
and economic and logistical support networks. To obtain
effective results against this threat, strong international
cooperation is required, framed in legal structures
informed by the technical capacities of States, and
allowing for the development of joint operations and
the constant exchange of information. We believe in the
need to continue gathering information in order to better
understand the nature and extent of those links, with
the aim of generating more comprehensive measures.
In the contemporary global context, international
conflicts, migratory crises and the growing power of
transnational organized crime all pave the way for
terrorist organizations to diversify their methods,
logistical corridors and sources of funding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): This open debate is of particular relevance
because terrorism is a criminal scourge that continues
to affect us all. The evidence of that, Mr. President, is
in your organization of this open debate.
Due to the geographical position of my country,
the Central American region, and Guatemala in
particular, has been besieged by transnational networks
that generate crime in all its forms, especially drug
trafficking, trafficking in persons, money-laundering
and the indiscriminate and illicit use and trafficking
in arms. Despite the enormous efforts that my
Government is making to strengthen and modernize
the justice sector, thus allocating more resources and
reinforcing the prosecution of crime and the operational
capacities of the Office of the Prosecutor, we are still
victimized by international networks that overwhelm
our capacities, because not only do they possess highcalibre firearms and other tools of violence, their
financial power is inexhaustible, all of which only
increases their criminal behaviour.
We recognize that, when weapons fall into the hands
of criminal organizations, the threat against our civilian
populations looms, despite existing legislation. The
abject behaviour of terrorists takes aim at what is most
important to the human being: one’s integrity and one’s
life. When we see how innocent civilians are attacked
by radical extremists who, in an atrocious and cowardly
way, snatch innocent lives through a perversity taken to

S/PV. 8569

the extreme, we must urgently reflect on joint actions
that would prevent or counteract this scourge.
For that reason, Guatemala reiterates that terrorism
is a global phenomenon that, apart from causing
anxiety, trauma and desolation, must be addressed at
its roots. International terrorism and transnational
organized crime present some similarities, despite
being two different phenomena. While terrorism is
a form of violent struggle that victimizes civilians
indiscriminately in order to grab attention and confuse
and frighten populations, all with political, ideological
or sectarian ends, organized crime is a way of
committing planned crimes in order to profit financially.
Both benefit from the clandestine nature of illicit arms
trafficking, which weakens democratic institutions,
undermines the rule of law and subverts life in society.
Of course, both branch out and sometimes feed off one
other, taking on a symbiotic relationship that causes
anxiety in our peoples. This pernicious link between
the two phenomena is the issue that we must address.
That is why, in our view, there has been some
progress but also some setbacks to strengthening
multilateral mechanisms that promote better
coordination in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime. As members are well aware, one of
those milestones is also a regional achievement, namely,
the adoption of the Inter-American Convention against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and other Related Materials,
ratified by the vast majority of States in our hemisphere.
Its objective is for the countries that produce, export
or import weapons to adopt measures to eradicate its
illicit production and its attendant trafficking.
Although the international community has valuable
legal instruments at its disposal to combat terrorism
and organized crime, the general perception of our
people is that such instruments are insufficient in the
face of the devastating consequences of terrorism and
transnational crime. Therefore, the United Nations, in
general, and the Council, in particular, should combine
efforts for the balanced implementation of the four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and contemplate shared actions to attack
this scourge.
I reiterate that such efforts will be insufficient if
the international community does not achieve more
rigorous control of the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons, as well as their ammunition, since the

19-2099927/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

illicit trade and indiscriminate use of such weapons make
it easier for terrorist networks and organized crime to
acquire them for their own perverse purposes. The Arms
Trade Treaty provides specific regulations to prevent
their misuse, as does the Inter-American Convention.
Let us remember that threats to international peace
and security are largely the cause of the proliferation
and possession of weapons of mass destruction and
light weapons that jeopardize innocent populations
and undermine international peace and security.
Our countries must therefore ensure the correct
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and urge
States to adopt and enforce effective laws that prohibit
the provision of such weapons and the lending of support
of any kind to non-State actors that seek to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery.
Finally, we urge the international community to
redouble efforts to collectively counter transnational
terrorism and organized crime. We believe that the
Council, in accordance with its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, must take
into account the main links between the two scourges
in such a way as to address the root causes in a
comprehensive manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Serra (Italy): I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing this open debate, and all the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We attach the greatest importance to the linkages
between organized criminal groups and terrorists.
Due to its position at the centre of the Mediterranean
Sea, our country is exposed to the consequences of all
forms of trafficking and related crimes committed by
exploiting the flow of persons, drugs, weapons and
financial resources between Africa, the Middle East
and Europe. The actions of organized groups represent
a serious threat that we are addressing in the most
cooperative way, and we commend the efforts and the
comprehensive, collaborative approach of the United
Nations system and international organizations, as
illustrated by this debate.
28/62

09/07/2019

Among the numerous documents provided by
United Nations bodies attesting to the linkages between
these phenomena, let me also highlight the important
contribution provided by the balanced analyses of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
supporting the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.
The considerations included in the Monitoring
Team’s reports highlight an essential point: we need
more information and more evidence-based research,
not to determine if those connections exist — because
we know they do — but to define how and where they
exist and in what ways they impact our societies. In
that context, we support your initiative, Sir, to adopt a
Security Council draft resolution on this subject.
I will focus on the Italian experience in fighting
links between terrorism and criminal groups. The
National Antimafia and Antiterrorism Directorate,
established in 1991, has a mandate to fight organized
crime and, in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014),
to counter terrorism. The Directorate has no direct
or operational investigative power, but is in charge
of coordinating the work of all prosecutor’s offices
in order to share information, avoid overlapping and
provide specific expertise. The positive effects of the
mechanism include more specialized prosecutors, more
effective cooperation with law enforcement, closer
international cooperation and better coordinated use of
information and evidence.
The National Antimafia and Antiterrorism
Directorate and its database have proved to be an
essential tool in addressing the increasingly complex
action of organized criminal groups and terrorist
organizations. At the national level, the Directorate is
a point of reference for the exchange of information
with relevant bodies, including law enforcement,
financial units, the intelligence service and the
specialized private sector. At the international level, the
Directorate established permanent coordination with
foreign prosecutor’s offices, relevant European Union
authorities and international organizations, including
financial intelligence units. It also has a critical role in
supporting joint investigations, providing mutual legal
assistance and facilitating extraditions.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

In the last two years, the Directorate collected
more than one piece of evidence of existing contacts
and, in some cases, operational cooperation between
organized criminal groups and persons belonging to
terrorist groups in Italy and abroad. Part of the evidence
is financial in nature. In some cases, criminal activities
provided a source of illegal funding then diverted to
terrorist operations. In other cases, criminal networks
were exploited to secure the transfer of funds of both
legal and illegal provenance to support terrorists’
needs. In that regard, I recall the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Office of CounterTerrorism and the Guardia di Finanza that will
improve our common action against illegal financial
flows linked to terrorist networks. The international
scope of the contacts and the significance of illegal
financial flows should bolster our commitment to carry
out financial investigations in all cases of suspected
terrorist involvement in criminal actions. This is a
lesson learned that Italy is keen to share alongside the
institutional and operational solutions I just described.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): At the outset, allow me
to thank Peru for providing us a platform to discuss the
important issue of the linkage between international
terrorism and organized crime.
The nexus between international terrorism and
organized crime is, by its nature, complex. What
complicates the matter further is a certain trend towards
the convergence between terrorist groups and organized
criminal networks, to the extent where a single entity
might simultaneously exhibit both criminal and
terrorist characteristics. Organized criminal networks
might use terrorism to produce fear and achieve certain
aims, while terrorist groups might use cybercrime and
trafficking in drugs, weapons, cultural heritage and
even human beings to finance their terrorist activities.
On that point, I would like to praise the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) and, more specifically,
the role played by the Netherlands in launching a policy
toolkit at the fifteenth GCTF Coordinating Committee
Meeting, held in Malaga in March. The toolkit serves
its purpose well by making the complex nexus between
organized crime and terrorism more comprehensible,
on the one hand, and by bringing to light useful best
practices, on the other.

S/PV. 8569

Today’s discussion gives us a necessary platform to
continue stressing the importance of taking seriously
the tackling of terrorist financing. Despite the success
of the global coalition’s military campaign Inherent
Resolve in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham survives as an underground network and
continues to pose a major threat to the security of both
Iraq and Syria through its terrorist cells. It is clear that
they need money to finance their illegal activities — be
they the recruitment of new followers through online
and offline propaganda channels or the need for
equipment and weapons, as well as specific expertise
in explosives such as improvised explosive devices. In
that sense, blocking the financial channels of terrorist
organizations effectively serves to cut off the head of
the snake.
As my final point, I would like to stress the need
to continue working towards finding the right balance
between human rights protection and technology.
It is important to ensure greater transparency of
cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology, as the use
of cryptocurrencies, in general, is on the rise, including
by criminal networks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Permanent Mission of Peru for
having convened today’s open debate on the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, thereby
addressing an important issue that presents serious
emerging challenges to international peace and security.
We thank the briefers for their presentations
and welcome the fact that the Council is once again
focusing its attention on the issue and continuing to
provide a space to analyse the phenomenon. It has held
several meetings on the subject in recent years, which
have led to concrete results, including resolutions
2195 (2014), 2331 (2016) and 2370 (2017) and various
presidential statements.
One of the main features of the rapid evolution
of terrorism in recent years has been its progressive
and strong link with activities related to transnational
organized crime, which is essentially reflected in the
way in which its operatives acquire resources to fund
their illicit activities. Similarly, the line between the
criminal and political motives underlying terrorismrelated crimes is becoming increasingly blurred.

19-2099929/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

The issue is of particular relevance to our region
because of the serious consequences of organized
crime in our countries. In Latin America, in particular
in South America, the terrorist threat stems, to a large
extent, from organized crime groups. Drug-trafficking
groups have resorted to terrorist tactics to protect their
economic interests and show strength through violence.
Factors such as high levels of corruption, the lack of
resources in the security sector and permeable borders,
among others, facilitate the financing of terrorism
and organized crime, which are mutually reinforcing,
in particular in vulnerable areas. Organized crime
undermines the rule of law, erodes international
security and, ultimately, violates human rights, all of
which are unacceptable. The United Nations system,
especially the Security Council, must take preventive
action, which is why today’s debate is so important.
Major transnational terrorist groups engage in a
range of criminal activities to fund their operational
needs, propaganda, recruitment and training. For
example, the self-proclaimed Islamic State uses various
formats for organized crime, such as trade in natural
resources and trafficking in persons and cultural goods.
The nexus between crime and terrorism is clear; the
response must therefore be forceful and multisectoral.
Cooperation in border areas and information-sharing
among the various Government agencies, such as
intelligence services and the police, as well as with
international organizations, are indispensable in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime. In that
context, we laud the close cooperation between the
Security Council and INTERPOL and call for that
body to continue cooperating with the Council and
other relevant entities. The role of international and
regional bodies in promoting cooperation and providing
technical assistance is crucial.
Chile attaches great importance to the full and
effective implementation of the 40 recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force on money-laundering
and terrorist financing, which are recognized as the
global standard in that area. We understand that moneylaundering continues to facilitate the commission
of organized crime activities because of the need for
criminal groups to conceal the illicit origin of funds.
Lastly, our country is committed to implementing
Security Council resolutions and sanctions against
transnational terrorist groups. Their effective
implementation helps to combat organized crime
30/62

09/07/2019

by providing a holistic preventive framework that
includes curbing the export of arms and the diversion
of financing for illicit purposes, as well as ensuring
adequate control of migration flows.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): I speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Norway. We commend our colleagues
from Peru for including this matter on the Security
Council’s agenda. Both terrorism and organized crime
threaten international peace and security.
Networks such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida continue to depend on
external financing to run their organizations, recruit
fighters, buy weapons, spread propaganda and move
across borders. That financing must be cut off. In order
to identify and stop illicit financial flows to terrorist
organizations and criminal networks, we must disrupt
the links between organized crime and terrorism. We
must combine measures targeting the profits from crime
with measures targeting financial flows to terrorists.
Terrorist groups and organized-crime networks
often flourish where governance and State presence are
weak. In such spaces, terrorist and organized criminal
networks both use similar approaches to develop and
run illicit economies. They seek to develop and exploit
territories that are beyond the reach of law-enforcement
agencies, where they can safely recruit members and
raise funds.
The traditional sources of the financing of illicit
activity have typically included drug trafficking and
kidnapping for ransom. Examples of newer sources
include the illicit exploitation and taxation of gold, oil
and other natural resources. Both terrorist organizations
and criminal networks use violence, illicit sources
of revenue and political ideology to achieve social,
financial and political goals.
International cooperation is crucial in combating
those developments. We need effective coordination.
United Nations Headquarters in New York and the
United Nations offices in Vienna must work more
effectively together, including by making the best
possible use of their existing presence in the field. As
we strive to disrupt illicit financial flows and terrorist
financing, we must also make sure that our efforts do
not create barriers for legitimate flows and financial
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

inclusion. To that end and to find the best solutions, we
need cross-sectoral cooperation among humanitarian,
financial and counter-terrorism experts.
We welcome the 2018 addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles to prevent violent extremism and
radicalization in prisons. We also welcome The Hague
Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational
Organized Crime and Terrorism, developed by the
Global Counterterrorism Forum. We must address the
role that prisons play in dealing with terrorists and
violent extremist offenders, as well as with those at risk
of being radicalized while in prison. ISIL in particular
has consciously targeted people with a criminal past to
offer them a narrative for joining terrorist groups.
Policies addressing terrorism and organized
crime should be part of a broader strategy to reduce
vulnerability. We must strengthen security-sector
reform and the rule of law. We encourage the expansion
and development of initiatives to deal more effectively
with the nexus between terrorism and organized crime.
The aspects of those global security challenges are
closely connected. They must be addressed both within
the security pillar and as part of advancing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Only then will
we be able to truly disrupt the link between terrorism
and organized crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also start by
congratulating Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and for convening today’s open debate
on this all-important topic. I also thank the briefers for
their insightful presentations this morning.
The nexus between terrorism and transnational
organized crime is complex and varies across different
contexts. We know that criminal and terrorist outfits
have cooperated to facilitate one another’s activities
despite their divergent objectives.
In our view, there are four major areas of confluence
between organized crime and terrorism. First, there is
the increasing cooperation between them, especially
for the acquisition of arms, ammunition and explosive
materials. Secondly, terrorist outfits increasingly rely
on organized crime as a financing tool. Thirdly, terrorist
groups recruit criminals, in particular marginalized
youth, to advance their goals. And. fourthly, organized

S/PV. 8569

crime flourishes in areas outside Government control
and under the patronage of terrorist outfits.
Pakistan is one of the principal victims of terrorism,
and, as such, its resolve to eliminating this scourge is
clear and unwavering. Proceeds from the narco-trade,
kidnapping for ransom, extortion, the smuggling of
natural resources and human trafficking are some of
the key sources of financing for terrorist organizations
in my region. Located next to the epicentre of the
world’s drug problem, Pakistan also remains one of the
most affected transit States for illicit drug trafficking.
With limited resources, our law-enforcement agencies
continue to make record drug seizures every year — a
tangible manifestation of our consistent and dedicated
efforts to protect not only our own country but also the
rest of the world from this scourge.
We share the goal of the international community
to address the global drug problem through appropriate
national, bilateral, regional and international measures.
At the regional and global levels, Pakistan has
remained constructively engaged with various counternarcotics-related forums and initiatives. Pakistan is
an active participant in the regional programme for
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). We
are cooperating with Iran and Afghanistan under the
UNODC-sponsored triangular initiative. Under the
quartet initiative, we are collaborating with Russia,
Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to combat drug
trafficking. We have strengthened cooperation with the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, which is a useful forum for the coordination of
regional anti-drug efforts at the operational level.
My country believes that only through collective
regional and international efforts can we choke off the
various sources that support terrorist outfits through
organized crime. We believe that an effective strategy
to achieve those goals must take into account the
following five points.
First, in order to ensure that our responses
are evidence-based, the international community
should allocate proper resources to better understand
the correlation between terrorism financing and
transnational organized crime.
Secondly, there are instances, including in
our region, where there is a nexus linking drug
production, instability and the lack of alternative
economic opportunities. It is important to re-establish

19-2099931/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Government control over territories used for drug
production and to promote development to provide
alternative livelihoods.
Thirdly, in dealing with the world drug problem,
it is important to focus on reducing both the supply
of and the demand for narcotic drugs through a wellintegrated, comprehensive and balanced approach.
Fourthly, effective border controls are a prerequisite
for clamping down on transnational organized crime
and terrorism.
Lastly, strategies need to be tailored to the specific
challenges presented by specific regional dynamics
and conditions. It is vital to build the capacities and
capabilities of States facing those challenges. That is
where the United Nations can play an effective role.
Pakistan will continue to play its role to sever the
vicious link between terrorism and organized crime
in our region. That is critical for our own people as
well as for our neighbourhood and, indeed, the rest of
the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s open debate and also thank all of
today’s briefers.
The link between terrorist groups and transnational,
serious and organized crime presents a complex and
evolving threat to international security. There are
many examples of international terrorist groups using
sophisticated criminal activities to enhance and fund
their operations and evade detection, in particular
through kidnapping for ransom, money-laundering,
drug trafficking, encryption and cybercrime.
We know that transnational, serious and organized
crime and terrorist groups are involved in moneylaundering, drug-trafficking and people-smuggling
activities, which span multiple countries. Those illicit
activities have helped produce hundreds of millions of
dollars to fund and perpetuate international terrorism
and crime. There is an urgent need to enhance
international cooperation and strategies to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from such activities.
Australia recognizes the importance of a
coordinated global response to the transnational nature
of those threats. Australia welcomes the collaboration
between the United Nations and other relevant bodies
32/62

09/07/2019

such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF)
to address those issues. The GCTF’s The Hague
Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational
Organized Crime and Terrorism notes that the nexus
between transnational organized crime and terrorism
exists in many forms and manifestations, exacerbating
the threat to international peace and security.
In recognition of the linkages across multiple
security issues, the creation of Australia’s Home
Affairs portfolio in December 2017 brought together
national security policy areas, including terrorism
and transnational, serious and organized crime. The
creation of that body has enabled agencies to work
closely with partners domestically and internationally
and to share information more quickly, enhancing our
ability to address terrorist threats.
A strong counter-terrorism financing regime is
critical to disrupting any links between terrorism and
organized crime. Australia is pleased to host the next
No Money for Terror ministerial conference on counterterrorism financing, to be held in November. It will be
a further opportunity to strengthen the global response
against terrorist financing. The annual South-East
Asian regional Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit is
another example of multilateral cooperation focused on
understanding and responding to terrorism financing and
significant financial threats. It harnesses the collective
capability of the region’s financial-intelligence units
to develop actionable strategies to combat terrorism
financing and serious crime. The next regional Summit
will be held in Manila, also in November.
Recognizing the need for a comprehensive response
to the threat of terrorism, Australia is also strongly
advocating for a broad range of counter-terrorism
initiatives, including the recent leaders’ statement made
at the Group of Twenty Summit in Osaka on preventing
the exploitation of the Internet for terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism.
Transnational, serious and organized crime is a
complex phenomenon. Australia has committed to a
nationally integrated approach involving our health,
education, social policy, security and law-enforcement
agencies, as well as to working closely with international
partners, academia and industry to address all aspects
of transnational crime to help prevent it from being
used to support terrorism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate Peru’s timely convening of this debate
on an important topic that undoubtedly merits our
in-depth consideration.
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
There has been much discussion on the connection
between terrorism and organized crime, and, although
there are clear differences in their processes and
objectives, there is a growing convergence between the
two phenomena, whose cooperation — reflected above
all in terrorism’s use of organized crime to obtain
financing and logistical support — has helped them to
achieve their respective goals.
Due to the transnational, flexible, adaptable and
recovery traits of organized crime, it is well placed to
interact with terrorism, thereby reinforcing itself and
increasing its dangerousness. Terrorist organizations,
for their part, have evolved from airtight groups that
are very separate from other types of crime due to their
ideology into decentralized networks with multiple
connections to organized crime or, at least, common
crime. In fact, 20 per cent of the terrorists convicted in
Spain linked to Da’esh or Al-Qaida had previously been
imprisoned for other crimes.
In Spain, especially after the terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001 in New York and 11 March 2004
in Madrid, the security forces began to detect the first
signs of that nexus. The explosives used in the Madrid
attacks, for example, were bought from criminals
involved in drug trafficking. The analysis of subsequent
attacks worldwide confirmed that trend, and Spain
came to the conclusion that it was necessary to adapt
the response of our intelligence and police services,
with two main objectives.
First, we needed to link investigations into terrorism
and organized crime; by not doing that, we would run
the risk of ignoring crucial aspects of the threat.
Secondly, we needed to share intelligence related
to both phenomena and interpret it in a more open
and creative way in order to facilitate new methods of
prevention, research and analysis.
In that regard, the Intelligence Centre for CounterTerrorism and Organized Crime was established in
Spain in 2014, which entailed the integration of two
pre-existing bodies: the Intelligence Centre against
Organized Crime and the National Anti-Terrorism

S/PV. 8569

Coordination Center. That was a pioneering step in
terms of the architecture of the intelligence services,
based on the structure of the so-called fusion centres,
which broke with the traditional organic separation
of the fight against both phenomena by broadening
the scope of knowledge and intelligence, increasing
coordination, improving response and, at the same time,
facilitating a more efficient use of available resources,
while avoiding duplication.
The establishment of the Intelligence Centre led to
the interconnection of the relevant databases, which has
made it possible to detect commonalities in 14 per cent
of investigations. Such commonalities, mainly between
individuals linked to terrorist organizations and related
to drug trafficking and money-laundering, have served
to pave the way for fresh avenues of investigation with
an innovative and more effective strategic approach.
With that same philosophy, the new national
strategy against organized crime and serious crime,
adopted in January, establishes as one of its 10 focal
points the response to the link between organized crime
and terrorism, including the following actions.
First, the activities of the aforementioned
Intelligence Center against Terrorism and Organized
Crime must be stepped up, in both the preparation of
strategic intelligence and the effective coordination
of investigations.
Secondly, the work of the police units dedicated
to the combat against those two phenomena must
be promoted by fostering the creation of joint
investigation teams.
Thirdly, databases on organized crime and terrorism
must be improved so as to enhance the early detection
of possible links between criminal and terrorist groups
and their possible targets and interconnections.
Lastly, information exchanges at the international
level must be pursued.
In short, Spain believes that the existence of
connections between terrorism and organized crime
constitutes a threat that should not be underestimated
and that requires specific measures to ensure better
coordination in police investigations into both
phenomena and greater exchange of intelligence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

19-2099933/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina thanks Peru for convening
this open debate on the links between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. We also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, Ms. Michèle Coninsx; and the
International Consultant, Ms. Tamara Makarenko, for
their valuable briefings this morning.
Although Argentina recognizes the existence of
a nexus between terrorism and traditional organized
crime, we would be remiss if we did not reiterate the
need to bear in mind that both phenomena are governed
by different legal frameworks at the international level
and that their specificities must be respected.
Terrorism undermines the values and principles
of States, democracy and freedoms, which is why
the fight against terrorism requires an integrated
and collaborative approach. Argentina reiterates its
commitment to addressing the terrorist threat in all
its forms and manifestations, within the framework
of international law, international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international
refugee law, as well as the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Argentina has also worked seriously in recent years
to strengthen our national capacities in the fight against
transnational crime, organized crime, drug trafficking
and trafficking in persons by preventing the illicit
movement of persons, goods, weapons and resources,
which directly contributes to increased regional and
global security against the scourge of terrorism.
At the regional level, the Republic of Argentina
supports initiatives in the areas of training and the
exchange of information, and best practices within the
framework of the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States. We
contributed to the establishment of that Committee
in 1998, and we chaired it in 2018. Furthermore, on
19 July, Buenos Aires will host the second Western
Hemisphere counter-terrorism ministerial conference,
25 years after the terrorist attack on the headquarters
of the Argentine Israelite Mutual Association. We hope
that there will be a high level of participation from the
countries of the region.
At the national level, the Ministry of Justice
of Argentina is carrying out training for judges,
34/62

09/07/2019

prosecutors and other public officials on property
investigations within the context of the crimes of moneylaundering, terrorism financing and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Argentina has sought
to make progress in a balanced implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
For example, under pillar I, we have strengthened our
legislation on rights and guarantees to protect victims
of terrorism and other related crimes so as to provide
them with advice, assistance, legal representation,
protection and access to justice.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of increasing data collection on transnational organized
crime and stepping up the analysis of the current
situation as a starting point for an assessment of the
current scenario and the development of specific
strategies to address that issue at the regional level,
always in respect of the existing legal frameworks and
the specific competencies of the various bodies, in
accordance with the Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country’s presidency of the Security Council
during the month of July and for such a pertinent choice
of theme: the important issue of the linkages between
international terrorism and transnational organized
crime. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Kuwait on its successful presidency
in June.
I thank Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Assistant SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, International
Consultant, for their enlightening briefings.
There is no doubt that linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime exist, nor are they
new. Terrorist and transnational organized crime
networks have often worked together, acting as service
providers for one another. They coordinate closely to
carry out their heinous and illegal operations, sparing
no continent or country. These linkages have been
accentuated over the course of this decade, which has
seen a resurgence of terrorist acts, along with a rise in
cross-border criminal activities, thereby threatening
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

the peace, stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and societies.
The flow of foreign terrorist fighters to hotbeds of
tension, particularly in Iraq and Syria, has seen these
two networks further unite in order to facilitate the travel
of foreign terrorist fighters, with the help of traffickers
and smugglers. In addition, terrorist networks have used
transnational organized crime networks to finance their
activities through kidnapping-for-ransom operations,
trafficking in drugs, weapons, cultural property and
persons and illegal immigration activities, inter alia.
This has been highlighted in a number of reports of
United Nations bodies, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and noted in resolutions
including 1373 (2001) and 2368 (2017), as well as in
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9.
The military defeat of Da’esh triggered the return,
transit and resettlement of foreign terrorist fighters,
which intensified the global terrorist threat on the one
hand and bolstered the linkage between terrorist and
transnational organized crime networks on the other. It
is therefore extremely important to consider their next
destination. Returning foreign terrorist fighters are
heading towards North Africa and the Sahel, among
other regions. This is likely to put significant pressure
on peace and security in Africa, especially the SahelMaghreb area, as they look for hotbeds of tension and
institutional fragility — essentially a State vacuum,
where they can settle, proliferate and sow the seeds of
terror and fear throughout the continent.
This new reality has reinforced the existence of
linkages between cross-border crime, armed groups,
separatist movements, terrorist groups and traffickers
of all kinds in Africa. In addition, drug and arms
traffickers have joined the ranks of terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida and its branch in the Islamic Maghreb
and entities affiliated with Da’esh. All of these criminal
networks are interlinked and fuel one another further
as they become more global, thereby increasing their
capacity to destabilize and undermine the territorial
integrity of States. This is undoubtedly a threat to peace
and security not only in Africa, especially in the SahelMaghreb area, but throughout the entire world. This is
a source of concern for my country and one to which
the international community must pay more attention.
This new situation further complicates efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
It requires us to strengthen border security and the

S/PV. 8569

exchange of information, consolidate international,
regional and subregional cooperation and implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the international conventions and protocols on counterterrorism, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. The United Nations has a central role to
play, especially with regard to capacity-building.
The Kingdom of Morocco is well aware of the
linkages between terrorism and transnational organized
crime, especially the trafficking of drugs, weapons and
human beings, hostage-taking and the kidnapping of
tourists, humanitarian workers and even United Nations
officials. It was one of the first States to alert the
international community to these dangerous linkages.
We therefore call for vigilance and a combination of
subregional, regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
We also call on the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb
to take concerted action to stem the already perceptible
adverse effects of such terrorist and criminal activities.
Morocco has developed its own national strategy
based on security governance, upgrading our legal
framework, the fight against social instability and
religious-sector reform in order to combat these
scourges. We have also invested in international efforts,
both within the United Nations and its specialized
bodies and in international counter-terrorism initiatives
and forums, including the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, which we co-chair with the Netherlands and,
from September, Canada.
Finally, Morocco remains willing to share its
expertise and know-how in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We will stand
shoulder to shoulder with our African brothers,
both bilaterally and through triangular cooperation
with the United Nations in the context of SouthSouth cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Ms. Buner (Turkey): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Permanent Mission of Peru to
the United Nations for convening this open debate.
We would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable remarks.

19-2099935/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Turkey aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, and
I would like to make the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Transnational threats, in particular terrorism and
organized crime, are no doubt among the main security
challenges that we face today. It is deeply alarming
that the global threat of terrorism is expanding both
geographically and in terms of tactics, despite the
increasing resources and means devoted to fighting it.
New technologies and opportunities are revealing
themselves to terrorist organizations. As terrorists
use new and more sophisticated methods, adapt their
tactics and modus operandi to changing circumstances,
countering terrorism is becoming more complex.
Furthermore, the expansion of the area in which
terrorists operate is connected to the financing and
financial support they receive. Therefore, terrorist
groups are becoming increasingly involved in lucrative
criminal activities, and criminal groups are helping
terrorist organizations by providing services.
This growing overlap between terrorism and
organized crime requires greater attention from the
international community. We cannot prevent and
counter current and future threats in isolation. We need
international and regional cooperation among us, as well
as with civil society and the private sector. Operational
and timely intelligence-sharing, cooperation among law
enforcement agencies and formal judicial cooperation
are also of vital importance.
Moreover, we can effectively address these
interlinked challenges only in a comprehensive and
cross-dimensional manner, while fully respecting the
principles of the United Nations, in particular those in
the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The United Nations is naturally positioned at the centre
of our common efforts on counter-terrorism. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides
the backbone for both national and international work
to be done in this area. We support the instrumental
role played by all United Nations agencies and bodies
in this regard.
We believe that technical assistance is another
crucial aspect of our efforts. We applaud the work done
by United Nations entities, especially the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to improve the capacity
of States requesting support. For its part, Turkey has
36/62

09/07/2019

contributed to the capacity-building activities by
providing training to the officials of other Governments
based on their needs, by making financial contributions
to UNODC-led programmes and by hosting high-level
international meetings. We will continue to support
such activities.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that, as a country that
has a long and painful experience in the fight against
terrorism and continues to face an imminent threat
from several terrorist organizations, Turkey firmly
believes that the international community must stand
united, show mutual solidarity and cooperate against
terrorism without making any distinction between
terrorist organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today’s meeting on such an important
issue. I also thank all the briefers for their valuable
contributions. For the sake of brevity, my oral
intervention will be shorter than the written statement,
which will be circulated. I would like to make a few
points, if I may.
First of all, the Addendum to the Madrid Guiding
Principles, adopted in December 2018, calls upon
all of us to continue to conduct research and collect
information to enhance our knowledge and better
understanding of the nature and scope of the links
that may exist between terrorism and transnational
organized crime.
In that regard, the European Union strives to
achieve a multidisciplinary, multi-agency integrated
approach to effectively tackling crime, including
terrorism, while ensuring that all measures taken
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
various law enforcement and other agencies in both
fields need to work together, to share information and
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

intelligence and to coordinate efforts at all levels in
order to effectively respond to the challenges posed in
both areas.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the important
role played by Eurojust, which contributes to improving
judicial cooperation in the fight against serious crime,
including terrorism, and the role of the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol),
which supports the member States in preventing and
combating all forms of serious international and
organized crime and terrorism. Europol prepares a
terrorism situation and trend report every year. In the
most recent report, which has just been published,
Europol noted that there were a number of investigations
in the EU member States that demonstrated that issues
of money-laundering, human trafficking and migrant
smuggling and terrorism financing are interlinked.
In the EU, legislation to prevent and combat moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism is designed
to prevent the financial market from being misused for
those purposes. The legislation deals with both issues
together. It is imperative that we cut off the access of
criminals to capital by fighting money-laundering
effectively in order to successfully disincentivize
terrorism and organized crime. That legislation has
been amended recently with the aim of increasing
transparency about who beneficially owns companies
and trusts so as to prevent money-laundering and
terrorist financing via opaque structures; improve the
work of financial intelligence units with better access to
information through centralized bank account registers;
tackle terrorist financing risks linked to the anonymous
use of virtual currencies and of pre-paid instruments;
and improve cooperation and exchange of information
between anti-money-laundering supervisors and the
European Central Bank, among many other important
goals that we are pursuing at the European level.
The EU Action Plan on Drugs 2017-2020 also
provides a strengthened response to the newly emerging
health and security challenges in the area of illicit drug
use and trafficking. While maintaining and updating
the core policy areas and cross-cutting themes of our
previous strategy, the new action plan identifies new
priority areas for action, including evidence gathering
on the potential connection between drug trafficking
and the financing of terrorist groups, organized crime,
migrant smuggling or trafficking in human beings. We
are currently working very hard on all those areas.

S/PV. 8569

In conclusion, we consider that it is useful to
increase efforts to better understand further linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. For those
reasons and many others, we welcome this debate
and the opportunity that it provides to share and
highlight experiences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening this open debate on the critical
subject of links between terrorism and organized
crime, since both of them are today destabilizing
regional and global security. I join other delegations in
thanking Mr. Yury Fedotov, Under-Secretary-General,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and Ms. Makarenko for
their insightful briefings.
Today international terrorism has gained a more
sinister character, moving from isolated acts to
large-scale terrorist aggression across Europe, Asia
and Africa. The activities of terrorist groups are
undermining security far beyond the conflict zones
of North Africa and the Middle East and resulting in
forced migration to Europe on an unprecedented scale.
My delegation is alarmed that terrorists are benefiting
from transnational organized crime. That compels us
to take action to prevent terrorists from raising funds
through a variety of means.
Kazakhstan is a party to all the major international
conventions and instruments against terrorism and is
also guided by the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We propose that the Strategy
and other current United Nations instruments should
be made legally binding through relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Last year, the third phase of the Joint Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia
was launched in the region together with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, the Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT)
and CTED. Kazakhstan is proud to be the first donor to
the third phase of the regional project, allocating 10 per
cent of its overall budget.

19-2099937/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

09/07/2019

International terrorism cannot be defeated
without a coordinated response. In September 2018,
Kazakhstan therefore launched the code of conduct
towards achieving a world free of terrorism, a concise
document with 10 provisions that reflects existing
conventions and legal instruments and calling for
our better cooperation, joint actions and coordinated
efforts to fight terrorism. More than 80 like-minded
Member States have already signed it and coalesced to
honour commitments to implement the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and other instruments.

exchange of information, practical experience and joint
measures in countering terrorism and organized crime.

Based on our recent experience in the Council, we
can say that we have found no proof of a direct link
between terrorism and organized crime in our region
of Central Asia. At the same time, we have some cases
where we observe a close connection between the
United Nations-listed terrorist organizations and drug
traffickers operating on the territory of Afghanistan.

To conclude, Kazakhstan is ready to work hand
in hand with others to improve and intensify mutually
beneficial cooperation to mobilize all possible efforts
to counter international terrorism and organized crime
regionally and globally.

In the light of the continuing opium cultivation
on the territory of Afghanistan, the role of regional
and international organizations such as INTERPOL,
UNODC and its Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for combating the illicit
trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances
and their precursors are becoming even more relevant.
We call on States Members of the United Nations to
enhance cooperation with the regional organizations.

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate. We also thank the briefers for their
important contributions.

Prompt and decisive action calls for political will
and collaboration at the regional and national levels to
counter terrorism and tackle organized crime. A lack
of educational and employment opportunities creates
fertile ground for radicalism and leads to the spread of
terrorist ideology among vulnerable groups, primarily
the youth. We need to address factors that trigger
negative global trends, instability, armed conflicts in
many regions of the world and refugee flows, together
with the unresolved problems of poverty and disparities
in development, all of which further derail progress and
impede the full effectiveness of our interventions.
Our law enforcement agencies cooperate closely
with the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth
of Independent States, the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Offices of UNODC, the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe and the European Union
in strengthening regional cooperation, including the
38/62

In the current circumstances, we need to
relentlessly search for ways to improve, strengthen
and unite our efforts. We should make better use of
the enormous potential of OCT, CTED, UNODC and
relevant regional structures to share experiences and
best practices, train personnel and develop effective
tools for practical cooperation. Capacity-building is
key to success.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.

The Netherlands aligns itself fully with the statement
that was just made on behalf of the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to highlight
three issues: research and information-sharing, local
engagement and international cooperation.
First, the need for more research on the nexus
between terrorism and organized crime has already
been highlighted. Whether it is about the environments
where terrorists and criminals meet, their recruitment
strategies or the link with human trafficking, we simply
do not know enough yet. But we should not only do
more research; we should also do better research
through enhanced information-sharing. That requires
identifying the right stakeholders from Government,
civil society and academia to facilitate their interaction.
It requires developing legislation to stimulate
inter-agency and public-private information-sharing, in
line with human rights obligations, and it requires the
training of officials to use new sources of data and new
methods of data collection and analysis. The Security
Council can encourage Member States to engage in
such actions to enhance our understanding, because
only by understanding the nexus better can we better
address it.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, on local engagement, it is clear that one
nexus does not exist. In different regions and countries,
the relationship between terrorists and criminals takes
different shapes. However, it is at the local level where
the nexus manifests itself most clearly and where
actions to address the nexus have the most direct
effect. Building trust between national and local actors
strengthens dialogue and cooperation. Such dialogue
and cooperation help Governments address drivers of
terrorism and organized crime at the local level, like
unemployment and a lack of access to basic services.
The United Nations continues to play a key role in
assisting Member States, especially those with limited
resources, in capacity-building at the local level to
tackle the nexus.
Thirdly, with respect to international cooperation,
in 2018 the Kingdom of the Netherlands presented a
set of good practices on the nexus between terrorism
and organized crime to the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum (GCTF). In March of this year, we launched a
policy toolkit to operationalize those good practices,
and I am glad that they have been mentioned by many
before me in their statements. Both the good practices
and the toolkit were developed in close cooperation
with the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute and are publicly available on
the GCTF website. International cooperation between
the United Nations and organizations like the GCTF is
crucial for the United Nations and its Member States
to stay ahead of the curve of international terrorism
and organized crime. The United Nations cannot and
should not go at it alone.
In conclusion, sometimes people with the worst
pasts create the best future. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant recruited criminals for its caliphate
with that slogan. The caliphate may have fallen, but
our debate today shows us that the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime is more alive than ever.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains committed to
supporting the United Nations and its Member States
in countering the scourge of terrorism and organized
crime, as well as in overcoming the worst pasts and
creating the truly best future for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): The links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism have been
recognized by the General Assembly in the United

S/PV. 8569

Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, among others. The Security
Council has also acknowledged that complex nexus
by adopting relevant resolutions, including resolution
1373 (2001). Enhancing cooperation with relevant
actors at all levels and strengthening the capacities
of law enforcement and counter-terrorism agencies is
indispensable for our ability to effectively prevent and
combat the numerous forms of transnational organized
crimes that are linked with international terrorism.
A particularly cruel crime is modern slavery and
human trafficking. Worldwide, over 40 million people
live in conditions of slavery, the majority of whom are
women and girls. An estimated $150 billion in revenue
are generated every year by forced labour alone. A
recent report of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Committee highlights how human trafficking has
increasingly become a tool for terrorist groups.
Human trafficking can be both a tactic of terrorism
and a source of terrorism financing. It can be used to
spread terror, intimidate populations, institutionalize
sexual slavery and incentivize recruitment, and it can
be used as a source of revenue — for instance, when
captives are sold in open markets or online auctions
and used as an instrument to secure ransom or
rescue payments.
The Council has recognized that human trafficking
can constitute a war crime and has listed human
traffickers under the Libya sanctions regime. We
continue to support a more consistent practice in that
regard and encourage further discussions within the
Council, including on a possible thematic sanctions
regime. We further applaud the adoption of resolution
2331 (2016), which calls upon Member States to
increase cooperation among law enforcement and
regulatory actors, as well as with the private sector, to
help identify and detect suspicious financial activity
related to trafficking in persons that finances terrorism.
Responding to that call, Liechtenstein, together
with Australia and the Netherlands, and with secretariat
support from United Nations University, launched a
financial sector commission against modern slavery
and human trafficking, also known as the Liechtenstein
initiative. The commission consists of stakeholders
from retail banks, hedge funds, global regulators,
institutional investors, survivors, United Nations
agencies and the anti-slavery movement. It has been
designing measures in the areas of sustainability and

19-2099939/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

innovation, responsible lending and investment, as
well as compliance and regulation to equip the global
financial sector in addressing modern slavery and
human trafficking. We thank the Government of the
Netherlands for hosting the fourth and last thematic
consultation of the financial sector commission at the
end of June on topics including sanctions, financial
sector cooperation and responsible business, which will
further inform our response to modern slavery.
The final product of the commission will be
presented in the margins of the high-level week,
on 27 September in New York. The effective
implementation of the measures identified by the
commission will be essential in contributing to the
fight against modern slavery and human trafficking,
including when committed by terrorist groups. The
United Nations, and the Council in particular, in
addition to other international organizations, bodies
and entities, will be crucial platforms to that end.
Curtailing the link between international terrorism
and organized crime also means addressing corruption
in all its forms. Both petty and large-scale corruption
hinder millions of people every day from fully enjoying
their human rights in areas such as health care, social
services and justice. They deprive young people of
economic opportunities, fuel irregular migration, offer
fertile ground for crimes and foment the grievances and
conflicts that give rise to terrorist groups.
With its comprehensive approach, the United
Nations Convention against Corruption provides a
legal basis to address corruption in its many facets.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime further calls upon States parties to
adopt legislative, administrative or other effective
measures to promote integrity and prevent, detect and
punish the corruption of public officials.
Liechtenstein is committed to fully implementing
relevant conventions and promoting the rule of law
at the national and international levels, as contained
in Sustainable Development Goal 16. We cannot
underline enough that the achievement of peaceful,
just and inclusive societies depends on the successful
eradication of corruption.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): Terrorism continues to be
one of the greatest challenges to international peace
40/62

09/07/2019

and security, human life and dignity. As evidenced
by practical and academic studies, there exists a
context-specific connection between terrorism and
organized crime.
At the level of pragmatic collaboration, terrorists
raise funds through illicit drug trafficking, the illicit
trade in natural and environmental resources and
money-laundering, and obtain logistical support from
trafficking in firearms, whereas organized crime
weakens State capacity and governance and contributes
to increasing the space within which terrorists operate.
At a higher level of convergence, both groups are
increasingly recruiting from the same groups of people
and have even begun to merge in terms of personnel,
resources and logistical and operational activities.
That worrying trend cannot be overlooked and the
international community should develop a sustained
and comprehensive approach to preventing and fighting
the scourge of terrorism and organized crime. In this
regard, we welcome the initiative of Peru to convene
this open debate and wish to stress the following points.
First, the nexus between international terrorism
and organized crime has been acknowledged with
concern by the Security Council in several resolutions,
most notably resolution 2195 (2014). The United
Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, as well as other relevant
international agreements, have also set the standard for
international cooperation to combat organized crime.
In that respect, it is essential that Member States’
obligations under Council resolutions and relevant
conventions be implemented in a comprehensive
and innovative manner. In some cases, the resources
allocated to fighting organized crime remain modest
in comparison with those allocated to fighting
terrorism. Given this combined threat, it is high time
that efforts were stepped up to raise awareness and
apply technologies in collecting and comparing data
on the two phenomena with the aim of monitoring and
severing their interactions.
Secondly, we stress the importance of Member
States strengthening their capacity to secure their
borders against and investigate and prosecute terrorists
and transnational organized criminals working with
them. We would like to emphasize that one of the most
effective means of fighting this combined threat should
involve addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism
and criminal activities. We should strive to address
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

poverty, social inequality and discrimination and
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. At the same time, we cannot
overemphasize the need for exchange of information
and intelligence and the sharing of experiences and best
practices among law and border enforcement agencies.
Any effort to combat international terrorism and
transnational organized crime must be in accordance
with the principles of international law, as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-interference in domestic affairs.
Thirdly, at the United Nations level, we call on
the Security Council, the General Assembly and
relevant United Nations agencies to further strengthen
inter-agency cooperation in leading international
efforts. The assistance provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
capacity-building and training is an important resource
for Member States to draw on.
Viet Nam condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of their motivation, whenever
and by whomsoever committed. We have spared no effort
in bringing our laws and policies into conformity with
the relevant obligations under Council resolutions and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its applicable Protocols. We have
been working closely with international agencies, such
as INTERPOL and UNODC, in countering terrorist
financing and money-laundering. In the framework of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
we have taken commendable measures to implement the
ASEAN Convention Against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, adopted in 2015, and
the ASEAN Comprehensive Plan of Action on CounterTerrorism of 2017.
To conclude, let me reiterate our commitment
to working closely with the United Nations counterterrorism bodies and international and regional
partners to address the combined threat of terrorism and
organized crime to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Peru on assuming
the Council presidency for the month of July. I also

S/PV. 8569

express my appreciation for Kuwait’s presidency of the
Council over the past month.
My country appreciates your selection, Sir, of
the important topic of linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime for today’s open
debate. I also express my appreciation for all the
valuable briefings that we heard at the beginning of
today’s meeting.
Egypt has always called for the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to addressing the phenomenon
of terrorism, its driving forces, impact and interlinkages
in order to find the most effective solutions to tackle
this dangerous criminal phenomenon. The relationship
between terrorism and organized crime is well
established at the conceptual and theoretical levels.
This is made clear in General Assembly resolution
55/25 of 2000, which concerns the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
acknowledges that relationship in many of its provisions.
Practical experience has also shown in more than one
case the interlinking interests between terrorist groups
and transnational organized crime networks.
Egypt has the honour to currently chair the African
Union for the year 2019. In this connection, allow me
to share Egypt’s view of the security situation on the
ground in the Sahel and its impact on consolidating the
linkage between the terrorist groups in that region and
transnational organized crime networks. Egypt will
also share its recommendations and suggestions on how
to address this illegitimate union between terrorism
and organized crime, of which there are many examples
in various regions of our world.
The African Sahel region has long suffered
from the activities of transnational organized crime
groups, be they connected to drugs or arms or human
traffickers. Increasing terrorist activity is a result of
weak law enforcement agencies in many of the States
concerned, and the large area in which these groups
have proliferated. The deteriorating security situation
in sisterly Libya exacerbated the situation as huge
quantities of weapons became available, in addition
to the large number of mercenaries who enhanced the
capabilities of these criminal groups in the region to
confront the law enforcement agencies of the States
concerned. Terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram in the
West or terrorist groups affiliated with Da’esh in the
Sahel, took advantage of the fragile security situation
to share mutual benefits in that region with organized

19-2099941/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

09/07/2019

crime groups. The outcome has been deplorable. Day
in and day out, we have seen incidents of abduction,
violence, the targeting of civilians, particularly
women, the fuelling of intercommunal fighting within
the States of the region, trafficking in humans and
illegal migration.

Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate today. The International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and share
our experience in connection with persons deprived of
their liberty.

Egypt believes that the best way to address
the activities of terrorist groups in these hotbeds,
where they are able to collaborate more easily with
transnational organized crime networks, as is the case
in the Sahel, is through the support of the international
community to the authorities of these States and their
capabilities, as well as their national institutions, along
with strengthening their law enforcement agencies.
Egypt therefore provided, for example, technical
support to the sisterly countries of the Sahel by offering
them 1,000 training grants in the military sphere, as
well as capacity-building programmes in various
fields, through the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for
Development. The training courses cover the areas of
security, law enforcement and justice.

In 2018 alone, the ICRC visited more than 1 million
persons in places of detention. In our activities we come
across programmes whose aim is to prevent or eradicate
violent extremism and we see policies described as
prevention of radicalization and deradicalization.

In addition, Egypt recently opened the SahelSaharan Anti-Terrorism Centre. We greatly hope that
the Centre will contribute to the capacity-building
of institutions in the Sahel-Saharan countries and
strengthen the pillars of the nation States in the region,
restricting the space for the activities of terrorist
groups and transnational organized groups. We call
on the international community and our partners to
cooperate with us in that regard, since cooperation will
benefit not only our dear African continent but also our
northern neighbours in Europe, which also suffer the
repercussions of organized crime and the activities of
terrorist groups in the Sahel.
In conclusion, I have given just a few realistic
examples. Egypt and many sisterly African countries
have also suffered from the linkage between terrorist
and organized crime groups. We have shared our
views and practical suggestions on addressing this
phenomenon by strengthening the pillars of the nation
State and building the capacities of national institutions.
We believe that this is crucial in order to fill the gaps
exploited by organized crime groups and affiliated
terrorist groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Committee of
the Red and Cross.
42/62

Some measures targeting detainees accused or
convicted of offences related to terrorism can have
harmful consequences not only for the detainees
themselves but also for the wider detained population
and society as a whole. Such measures include
placing detainees assessed as radicalized or at risk
of becoming radicalized in isolation; grouping them
together in special wings or placing them under strict
regimes; reducing access to services and rehabilitation
programmes; or submitting them to frequent or
repeated transfers. The potential consequences of such
measures contradict the aim of protecting the public
from acts of a violent nature. Today I will highlight five
key safeguards that, when included in policies, can help
to counter or prevent violent extremism or to prevent
radicalization in places of detention.
First, we should respect the rule of law and treat
detainees humanely. Respect for the law and the dignity
and protection of the physical and psychological
integrity of detainees are the basis of any successful
programme in detention. Moreover, they are imperative.
Secondly, making an individualized risk and
needs assessment and coupling it with a tailor-made
response and follow-up would help to minimize the
stigmatization of some groups of detainees.
Thirdly, we must ensure that restrictions are legally
based, necessary and proportionate. All detainees have
the right to essential services and goods such as daily
access to the open air, water, food, sanitation facilities,
health care and meaningful human interaction,
including contact with the family.
Fourthly, we should put in place high-quality,
trained, supported and supervised detention staff.
Fifthly, we must ensure good order and security
in detention for all detainees, not just specific groups.
To have a positive impact and avoid discrimination,
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

material or financial support must benefit the whole
detention system. That also applies to any external
interventions, such as bilateral and intergovernmental
cooperation initiatives.
Above all, detainees must be treated humanely.
Inhumane conditions and treatment contradict State
obligations and are counterproductive to preventing
radicalization and violent extremism. The ICRC stands
ready to work with States to ensure humane treatment
and conditions for all detainees.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): The linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime are well
established in the Philippines. The Abu Sayyaf Group,
the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, the Maute
Group and Ansar al Khalifa, which have all declared
allegiance to the Islamic State, fund their operations
through criminal activities, mostly drug trafficking,
kidnapping, extortion and arms smuggling. They
initially cooperated with criminal organizations but
have since developed their own criminal networks,
which operate under the false rubric of freedom
struggles, covering themselves with the mantle of
victims of human rights and of religious conscience
violations whenever the State moves against them to
protect its citizens.
The Marawi siege of 2017 illustrates the symbiotic
relationship between terrorism and the illegal drug
trade. With drug money, terrorists gathered a motley
assortment of well-armed extremists, criminals,
mercenaries and foreign terrorist fighters to take control
of Marawi. Narco-politicians supported the local
terrorist groups with personnel, funds and firearms,
which helped to sustain the siege that followed the
Government’s counteroffensive. Intensive military and
law enforcement operations allowed us to recapture
Marawi in six months, which was less than the six years
it took to recapture Raqqa.
Beyond law enforcement and military operations,
a comprehensive approach is needed to address the
linkages between terrorist organizations and organized
crime. On the political level, the Philippines now has
the Bangsamoro Organic Law, which gives autonomy to
Muslim Mindanao and is intended to end the decadeslong conflict in that region, which has been used by
the Abu Sayyaf and local terrorist groups as a freedom
struggle. It was anything but that. We are also amending

S/PV. 8569

our Human Security Act to make it more responsive to
such linkages.
Drug trafficking offers a profitable illicit revenue
stream. The drug trade weakens social resistance and
corrupts a political response. It is known that local
terrorist group members are both narcotics distributors
or dealers and consumers. Shabu is frequently used for
recruitment and the shabu trade is primarily run by
organized criminal groups, illustrating the cooperation
between terrorist groups and local and transnational
criminal organizations. They learned the lesson of the
opium trade, whereby Britain subdued a once-proud
continent-sized country to its will. Our anti-drug
operations therefore target the trade.
Since money is the main driver of such linkages,
identifying and curtailing the sources of finance and
tracking its flow are essential. Financial intelligence
units, law enforcement agencies, the prosecution service
and local Government units must work together, share
information with one another and raise awareness. The
public sector, as appropriate, must also work closely
with the private sector. Intelligence gathering can be
more effective if agencies focus not only on terrorist
acts per se but more on the means that enable them.
At the subregional level, we conduct joint maritime
patrols with Malaysia and Indonesia over our tri-border
region of the southern Philippines, eastern Malaysia
and Sulawesi to strengthen border controls, especially
in the light of the Abu Sayyaf Group’s trademark
transnational kidnap-for-ransom operations, which
took the life of the Netherlander Ewald Horn.
At the regional level, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Comprehensive Plan of Action on
Counter-Terrorism provides for the establishment
of computerized shared databases on terrorist
organizations and their associations, as well as
transnational organized crime groups with possible
links to terrorist organizations, with a view to
developing a joint risk and threat assessment.
Here at the United Nations and at the international
level, more exchanges of best practices and capacitybuilding are needed for law enforcement and financial
intelligence units. We recall that elements of the United
Nations counter-terrorism group came to us three weeks
before Marawi fell to warn us that the defeated Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the Middle East would
attempt to revive its caliphate in South-East Asia.

19-2099943/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Our counter-terrorism efforts are anchored in
respecting human rights, because a State’s first,
foremost and overriding responsibility is to protect
the law-abiding against the lawless and the innocent
against those threatening their safety and well-being.
To that responsibility, the President of the Philippines
has made an iron, unwavering and total commitment,
and he will not be deterred by criticism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to extend our warm congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank
Kuwait for its presidency of the Council last month. We
commend you, Sir, for having chosen such an important
topic for discussion today.
The Sudan is a vast country bordered by seven
countries. Those borders are long and difficult to
control. For that reason, we are particularly mindful
of the need to combat terrorist groups trying to take
advantage of open and difficult-to-control borders. The
fight against terrorism and organized crime is therefore
a top priority for my country and all its institutions,
as well as a fundamental fulcrum of our coordination
and cooperation with neighbouring countries and the
international community.
The Sudan has ratified all international conventions
concerning the fight against terrorism and organized
crime, in addition to the relevant African and Arab
regional conventions. My country is playing an active
role in the context of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to combat terrorism and organized
crime. The Sudan believes that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is one of the most
important international legal frameworks aimed at
guiding national laws and legislation coherently and
harmoniously in the area of counter-terrorism, which
has had a positive impact in curbing the activities of
extremist elements and groups and reducing the spread
of terrorism and organized crime.
The danger of terrorism lies in the challenge posed
by the growing nexus between organized crime and
terrorism. Their great structural similarity has led
some to consider terrorism as a form of organized
crime, especially given that the actions of organized
crime groups and terrorist groups sometimes overlap to
the point of forming close alliances among them. There
44/62

09/07/2019

is therefore an urgent need to understand and address
the evolving links between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, as well as the extent to which those
links differ across various regions and contexts.
In order to combat organized crime in the context
of its links to terrorism, we need to implement costeffective and innovative measures to combat global
criminal and terrorist networks, based on the promotion
of bilateral and collective cooperation and coordination
among States. Urgent measures must also be taken
to prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, while recognizing that international
cooperation and any steps taken to prevent and combat
terrorism must be in line with our obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant international conventions and
protocols, in particular human rights law, refugee law
and international humanitarian law.
Tackling poverty, achieving balanced development,
supporting
reconstruction
and
advancement
programmes in developing countries, especially
African countries, and promoting North-South dialogue
all form a comprehensive approach to addressing the
dangers and manifestations of terrorism through efforts
to create a fair and balanced international order.
Our national efforts to combat terrorism and
organized crime within the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy require
technical support in building our capabilities and
enabling international mechanisms to fully play
their role on the basis of cooperation and mutual
respect, without undermining national ownership and
sovereignty. That requires a collective effort on the part
of States and civil society organizations, as well as the
media and research centres that identify and monitor a
variety of related phenomena, provide deep analysis and
lead efforts to improve awareness and understanding.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the United
Nations, including its relevant institutions and donor
States, will continue to provide capacity-building to
States, where necessary and appropriate, in order to
assist them in addressing the threat posed by terrorism,
which benefits from transnational organized crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Ms. Benítez Lima (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings delivered and
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

commend Peru for having taken the initiative to convene
today’s open debate on a hugely important topic that
is particularly relevant at a time when we are seeing
the proliferation of threats that did not previously exist,
exposing us to new risks and vulnerabilities.
Activities related to organized crime, such as drug
trafficking, illegal arms trafficking, money-laundering,
human trafficking, corruption and cybercrime, among
others, all contribute to the proliferation of domestic
crime, intensify its effects, damage the economic,
social and cultural development of the State, destroy
its social cohesion, damage its international image and
even threaten the stability of its democratic institutions.
Organized crime and terrorist acts are among
the obstacles that Uruguay could face in the 20142030 period. Our national strategy to combat moneylaundering, terrorism financing and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction for the period 20172020 highlights that among the illicit cases of moneylaundering and terrorism financing perpetrated within,
in connection with or from Uruguay, the most relevant
were those related to the trafficking of narcotic and
psychotropic drugs. It also indicates that international
criminal organizations, particularly those dedicated
primarily to drug trafficking, constitute a threat to our
country. Although they have not managed to establish
permanent bases within our territory, they have local
partners responsible for domestic distribution and
collaboration across multiple logistical and support
aspects. Moreover, owing to the nature of our borders
and geographical location, Uruguay is attractive as a
transit country.

S/PV. 8569

terrorism and the nexus between them, it is necessary to
have in place effective police and judicial systems, with
updated legislation and inter-institutional coordination
within the State. For that reason, various national actors
are engaged in addressing and tackling the various
threats through a multidimensional approach with a
view to providing a multisectoral response.
In terms of legislation, in recent years Uruguay has
been incorporating new standards into its legislation
that allow us to confront the evolution of threats. Several
laws have been adopted regarding the prevention and
control of money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism, the latest being Law 19,749, of 15 May 2019,
and its regulatory decree 136/2019, of 16 May 2019. In
another area, in 2013 Uruguay enacted Law 19,172, on
State control and regulation regarding the importation,
production, acquisition, stockpiling, commercialization
and distribution of marijuana and its derivatives. The
law states that, through State intervention, it will seek
to tackle the devastating health, social and economic
consequences of the problematic use of psychoactive
substances, as well as to reduce the incidence of drug
trafficking and organized crime. It stipulates measures
aimed at controlling and regulating psychoactive
cannabis and its derivatives, as well as providing
education, raising awareness and preventing the health
risks of cannabis use in society, particularly with regard
to the development of addictions.

With regard to terrorism and its financing, at
the time of carrying out the evaluation reflected in
the aforementioned national strategy, no terrorist
organizations acting locally were identified and we did
not find that the Uruguayan financial system had been
used to carry out financial transfers linked to terrorist
organizations acting abroad. The main threat identified
was that posed by terrorist organizations that had been
able to operate in other countries of the region.

For its part, Law 19,513, of 2017, on combating
drug trafficking and transboundary organized
crime, established the Commission to Combat Drug
Trafficking and Transboundary Organized Crime as
well as the Security Committee for Border Crossings,
and it also includes criminal provisions. Also in 2017,
Uruguay adopted a national counter-terrorism strategy
that established the National Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Centre with the aim of improving the
country’s response capacity within the context of
respecting the rule of law and human rights. The
strategy pursues four main objectives, namely, to
prevent, protect, evaluate and respond, thereby seeking
to implement solutions with a comprehensive approach.

Over the past few years, Uruguay has been
preparing to tackle these scourges, which corrode
peace and the social welfare of the population and have
a destructive potential to affect a country’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity, development and resources, thereby
undermining its future. We are aware that in order
to effectively prevent and combat organized crime,

Given the transnational nature of organized crime
and terrorism, we cannot limit ourselves to national
actions but should instead encourage and strengthen
bilateral, regional and international cooperation. In
that regard, Uruguay maintains its firm commitment
to cooperating with other actors in the international
community in the fight against both of these scourges

19-2099945/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

and their pernicious links. Our actions carried out
at the national level reflect that commitment. We
appreciate the recommendations that were made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
during its most recent visit to Montevideo, on 16 and
17 March 2017.
Our country continues to work to overcome its
vulnerabilities and is grateful for the support for those
efforts to adapt to the new demands of the international
context, within the framework of respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, including
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
achievements of the Cuban revolution and our country’s
commitment to preventing and confronting terrorism,
as well as preventing and combating the various
manifestations of transnational organized crime that
may contribute to terrorism financing, have succeeded
in making Cuba an unappealing place for such activity.
The nature and scope of the terrorism-crime nexus,
which has been recognized by the Council and may
serve as a source of funding or logistical support for
terrorism, varies according to context. In the case of
Cuba, that nexus does not bear a significant reflection
as in other countries and regions around the world.
Our country — for decades a victim of
State-sponsored terrorism from abroad — condemns
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all forms
and manifestations, whatever their motivation. The
revolutionary Government of Cuba has reiterated that
it has never allowed, or will it ever allow, its national
territory to be used for the realization, planning
or financing of acts of terrorism against any other
State, without exception. As proof of that stance,
Cuba has committed to 18 international conventions
on terrorism. We have put into effect legislative,
institutional, administrative and other measures to
prevent and punish all terrorist acts and activities. We
have developed a specific criminal standard to address
criminal acts of a terrorist nature — Law 93 against
acts of terrorism — as well as criminal legislation
that criminalizes offences of money-laundering and
terrorism financing.
Cuba’s determination and institutional capacity to
prevent money-laundering and terrorism financing has
46/62

09/07/2019

been recognized by the Financial Action Task Force
of Latin America (GAFILAT) on several occasions.
The Mutual Evaluation Report of the Republic of
Cuba, which was carried out within the framework of
GAFILAT, points out that the general risk of moneylaundering in the country is low. It also highlighted
the inter-institutional coordination and cooperation
existing at all levels in Cuba and the updated legal
framework to combat this scourge. As a result, it has
been recognized at the international level that the
work of our country is “substantially effective” in
the areas of supervision, people and legal structures,
confiscation, investigation and prosecution of terrorist
financing, financial sanctions and preventive measures
of terrorism financing.
With regard to the various manifestations of
organized crime, Cuba has also adopted a firm,
principled position and a zero-tolerance policy,
particularly in relation to the production, consumption
and trafficking of drugs as well as human trafficking,
preventing and sanctioning all those illegal activities
in accordance with our national legislation and thereby
preventing, through the adopted measures I mentioned,
the financing of terrorism.
Cuba works hard to avoid its national territory
being used as a site for the storage, stockpiling, transit
or destination of illicit drugs, implementing a strategy
of prevention and combating the illegal use and
trafficking of drugs, while strengthening the level of
coordination among our national institutions with the
active participation of communities and civil society
organizations. As a result of those efforts, in 2018 Cuba
seized 2,438 kilograms of drugs, the majority of which
were seized at maritime ports as part of international
drug trafficking operations and were not destined for
our island. Two attempts to introduce drugs into the
country by speedboat were uncovered and thwarted,
resulting in four people being detained. Two other
operations were neutralized within our national waters,
with a further four foreign drug traffickers being
captured. We also neutralized 49 operations organized
by criminal networks attempting to introduce drugs
across our airspace border.
In respect of trafficking in persons, Cuba has in
place a national action plan for the prevention and
tackling of trafficking in persons and the protection of
victims for the period 2017 to 2020. The incidence of that
scourge in our country is very low thanks to our social
achievements and citizen security, equal opportunities,
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

policies and programmes aimed at the empowerment
of women, as well as the political will and prioritized
level of care from the State and the Cuban Government
in preventing and tackling this scourge in all of its
manifestations with a view to protecting the victims.
We reject in the most absolute terms our being
included in the worst category in the 2019 Trafficking
in Persons Report of the United States Department of
State. It is well known that that unilateral report, without
any legitimacy or international recognition, aims to
fulfil an objective of political manipulation as a weapon
to apply pressure against other States and, devoid of
respect, consideration or any attachment to international
efforts to combat trafficking in persons. It deliberately
disregards the exemplary and comprehensive work
carried out by Cuba in the prevention and tackling
of, and the response to, that scourge. It ignores our
country’s zero-tolerance policy on human trafficking
and hides the outcomes of the exchanges that took place
between both countries for five consecutive years to
share information and cooperate on those issues.
As has been shown, the defamatory campaigns
against Cuba, which have uncontrollably superimposed
each other, serve to justify the hostility of the current
Government of the United States against Cuba and the
ever-increasing unilateral measures of blockade and
economic coercion aimed at deteriorating the standards
of living of our people, limiting financial flows into
the country, hindering supplies, undermining our
production processes and damaging our social services.
All of that forms part of the relentless economic war
that has been imposed on us over the past 60 years.
The fight against the scourge of terrorism and
organized crime must take place in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. The Security
Council must not undermine the mandate, functions
and prerogatives of other organs in the United Nations
system, which have the capacity to provide effective
and coordinated responses to those scourges. In order
to prevent and combat terrorism and organized crime
in all its forms and manifestations, the Council should
first and foremost fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security by addressing the
root causes of conflicts. The Council must promote
international assistance and cooperation for the creation
and strengthening of national capacities for States that
request it, as well as the exchange of experiences in the

S/PV. 8569

fight against terrorism and organized crime, based on
mutual respect.
We firmly reject the double standards, political
selectivity and unilateral acts of certain States in
seeking to corroborate conduct and draw up politically
motivated lists that run contrary to international law,
as well as in waving the banner of a supposed fight
against terrorism and organized crime to commit acts
of aggression, undermine national sovereignty and
interfere in the internal affairs of other States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important debate and for your continued leadership
in strengthening our understanding of the linkages
between international terrorism and organized crime,
both of which, as we have just heard, have grown
substantially in scale and threat over the past 20 years.
I am here because my country, Ireland, believes that
debates such as this matter and can make a difference.
A vitally important step in countering the twin threats
that I have spoken of is to better understand the nature
and scope of the links that exist between them. We must
do more to deepen our understanding together here at
the United Nations, in our Governments and across
civil society.
I would like to draw from your useful concept note
(S/2019/537, annex), Sir, and make four brief points.
First, it seems like a truism but it is a fact that fuelling
both terrorism and organized crime are the complex
and evolving global systems of money-laundering
and terrorist financing. We believe that we have no
hope of addressing that issue individually or in silos.
A coordinated approach is key to effectively tackling
it. Ireland’s own response brings together a range of
Government departments and agencies, including the
Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish police, our Criminal
Assets Bureau and Irish Revenue Commissioners. But
we know we need more. The Security Council must
play its own part. We were pleased to co-sponsor
the French-led resolution 2462 (2019), setting out a
comprehensive approach to combating the financing of
terrorism. As ever, the challenge now is to move from
rhetoric to implementation.
Secondly, we know that organized crime groups
and terrorist organizations are increasingly recruiting

19-2099947/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

from the same pool of largely marginalized and often
vulnerable people. Prisons are particularly fertile
grounds for recruiting. Petty criminals and members
of organized criminal groups are often radicalized.
We believe that police training and the meaningful
involvement of women and youth are crucial in
combating that.
Thirdly, multilateral engagement and collaboration
are a sine qua non for effectively countering those
threats. My country, Ireland, sees a central role for the
United Nations in leading the coordinated and inclusive
response of Member States, guided by the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe that we ought
to make a concerted effort to increase the visibility and
effectiveness of United Nations activities on counterterrorism.
As a candidate for a seat on the Security Council
for the term 2021-2022, we believe two things — first,
that this is indeed a threat to our collective peace and
security; and secondly, that the Council not only can
but must play a role in understanding and combating
the links between terrorism and organized crime.
As an active member of the European Union (EU),
we want to acknowledge the important work undertaken
by the European Union Judicial Cooperation Unit in
improving judicial cooperation in countering organized
crime and terrorism. We also greatly value the work
of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency and
Europol and the support that they offer in facilitating
information-sharing among EU member States.
Fourthly and finally, we strongly believe that
counter-terrorism measures, especially cross-border
information-sharing, should never undermine our
obligations under international law, including human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Civil
society plays a crucial role, and we encourage further
efforts to strengthen that partnership. Put simply,
building and maintaining trust between public, private
and non-governmental organizations is the bedrock
upon which we must take this fight forward.
The Security Council, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations system
as a whole possess a wide variety of tools to combat
these threats. Our job is to ensure that we put them to
use. My country, Ireland, reiterates our unwavering
commitment to engaging actively with partners here
at the United Nations, and hopefully with the support
48/62

09/07/2019

of this Chamber as a Security Council member in the
future, we will work actively to address the threats. We
believe that we owe at least that to the countless victims.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.
Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate.
Terrorism and organized crime remains one of
the most complex and challenging global issues of our
time. Our ability to respond to and comprehensively
address those issues is growing deeper and becoming
more difficult. Terrorism transcends race, religion
and nationality. Combating terrorism therefore
requires a multifaceted approach, from direct action
in dismantling networks, cells and financing webs
to preventing extremist ideologies from spreading,
including by monitoring hate speech both offline
and in the digital space. Open debates such as this
would help us to better understand this multifaceted
phenomenon and learn from each other in order to gear
our collective actions to detect, counter, intercept and
prevent horrifying crimes.
The Maldives strongly condemns all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Terrorism is an atrocious act that takes
the lives of innocent people, destroys societies, forces
people to move from their homes and sets back decades
of development. Terrorism is a transnational threat
that requires international and coordinated action.
As members of the international community, each of
us has a responsibility to collaborate more closely,
study its root causes and work to prevent violent and
extremist ideologies from taking a foothold in our
respective countries.
In recent years, we have witnessed a growing
dependency between international terrorism and
organized crime, whereby individuals are moving
between their identities as terrorists and criminals.
Their blurring functions are making it harder for law
enforcement officials to apprehend and prosecute them.
As nations, we must understand those linkages and not
only strengthen our national frameworks but also ensure
that those frameworks function as they are supposed
to. We must also ensure the full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Maldives
enacted the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the
Prevention of Money-laundering and Financing of
Terrorism Act in 2015. The regulation issued in 2015 by
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

the Maldives Monetary Authority, the country’s central
bank, under the Prevention of Money-laundering and
Financing of Terrorism Act provides clear guidance
to the banking sector and other financial institutions.
Participating in terrorist activities or supporting such
activities is a criminal offence in the Maldives.
I am pleased to report that the Government of
the newly elected President Solih has accelerated
efforts in countering terrorism and radicalization as a
priority. Work is currently being carried out to amend
anti-terrorism legislation in order to better address
contemporary threats. During his first month in
office, President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih established
the Presidential Commission on Corruption and
Asset Recovery. The purpose of the Commission is
to investigate cases of misuse of Government funds,
money-laundering, corruption and abuse of power
within State institutions between January 2012 and
17 November 2018.
My country ratified the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime in 2013 and
its supplementary Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children in 2016, which led to the formulation
of a national action plan on anti-human trafficking.
More recently, in February, a new anti-trafficking
coordinating body was established to better coordinate
anti-trafficking efforts.
The National Counter-Terrorism Centre of the
Maldives (NCTC) provides a common platform for
facilitating information- and-intelligence sharing
and for synchronizing inter-agency activities in our
efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism. The
Maldives aims to tackle the phenomenon of violent
extremism through a whole-of-society approach.
In collaboration with inter-agency partners and
community stakeholders, the NCTC has undertaken
various programmes to enable the community to resist
radicalizing ideologies and empower communities,
especially women and youth and their leaders. It is
the deep conviction of my Government that, if we are
to prevent and counter terrorism, the most feasible
strategy is through community-based programmes. We
must undertake a multi-stakeholder approach to tackle
global terrorism, extremism and organized crime.
The Maldives reiterates its commitment to upholding
its obligation to combat terrorism. As we continue to
strengthen the frameworks and countermeasures to

S/PV. 8569

tackle the fight against terrorism and organized crimes
at home, we will continue to ensure that our efforts are
part of a comprehensive regional and global approach.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to begin
by thanking the Peruvian presidency of the Security
Council for putting the issue of linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime on the
agenda of the Council. It has been over four years since
the Council discussed this topic (see S/PV.7351) and
adopted resolution 2195 (2014). Let me also thank all
three briefers from this morning.
The timing for this debate could therefore hardly
be more appropriate given that the means and threats
of terrorism are becoming increasingly complex, and
the same holds true for organized crime. With greater
involvement of new technologies, the interlinkages are
more difficult to uncover and fight.
I also wish to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Head of Delegation of the
European Union (EU) and would like to make some
observations and comments in my national capacity.
Terrorism and crime have often been treated as
different phenomena because of the different motivations
behind them. However, the growing convergence of
organized crime and terror groups over the past several
decades is a global trend threatening the security
interests of many States worldwide. This phenomenon is
not new. Indeed, it is an established fact that organized
crime groups and terrorist groups often operate in
similar ways, carrying out the same types of criminal
activities and sharing organizational characteristics.
Commonalties include the transnational character,
the financing through the commission of criminal/
illegal activities, and the ability to instil fear. This
blurring of the traditional lines of distinction between
terrorism and other forms of serious organized crime
calls for a fine-tuning by States of policies designed
to prevent and combat the activities of terrorist and
organized-crime groups so as to optimize their impact
and provide maximum security to citizens, while
respecting the rule of law, human rights and democracy.
We believe that regional cooperation is one of the
most effective ways of coping with this pressing and
demanding issue. Pursuant to a proposal by Slovenia,
the EU supported the development of the Western

19-2099949/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Balkan Counter-Terrorism initiative into the Integrative
Internal Security Governance concept, which includes
other prominent areas of internal security cooperation,
namely, prevention of violent extremism and the
fight against terrorism, the fight against serious and
organized crime, and border security. Its policy goals
aim to strengthen intelligence-led policing, improving
regional instruments and bolstering operational
cooperation between the EU and the Western Balkans.
In 2017, Interior Ministers of the region, together
with international and EU partners, launched the
implementation process, appointing a support group
to implement the new policy. The structure brought
together existing capacities and expertise of regional
cooperation mechanisms and is hosted by the regional
office of the Geneva Centre for Security Sector
Governance, in Ljubljana, my capital.
Today’s debate has clearly shown once again the
serious threat that interconnections between organized
crime and terrorism pose to international peace and
security. Legislation and law enforcement almost
always seem to be a step behind, which should be
reason enough for all States to stay vigilant, update
their legislation accordingly and in a timely manner,
and most of all invest in international cooperation.
We have implemented a variety of these policy
choices in recent decades at the subregional, regional
and international levels and working with the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. If we
truly want to fight both of these threats, we simply have
to comply with the rules we have already established
and cooperate. No State or Government can fight these
threats alone. Terrorism and organized crime know no
boundaries. Neither should we in fighting them. The
draft resolution that the Security Council will adopt
later this month should therefore necessarily focus on
all these different aspects of threats as well as on our
joint response to them.
Let me once again thank you, Mr. President, for
this initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important debate
on a subject that concerns us all.
The best way to attack the links between
transnational crime and terrorism is through
50/62

09/07/2019

prevention. States must strengthen the institutions that
combat crime and work hard to reduce impunity and
to respect the rule of law and human rights. To prevent
the radicalization of young people and close spaces to
crime, efforts must also be redoubled to extend such
basic services as education, health and security to areas
where the Government’s presence is weak or scarce.
Costa Rica stresses in this regard the importance
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the four pillars that underpin it, including
addressing the conditions that help to spread terrorism,
preventing and combating terrorism, and strengthening
the capacity of States and the role of the United Nations.
Another way to prevent the interaction of organized
crime and terrorism is by strengthening borders, both
maritime and land. Porous borders lend themselves
to such illicit activities as drug trafficking, the
movement of people and weapons and the smuggling of
prohibited goods.
While preventing and combating these evils are the
responsibility of each State and are matters of national
security, when illicit activities are carried out in a
coordinated manner in several territories, transcending
the borders of one country, this requires international
attention. That is why it is good that we are having this
discussion today.
We are dealing with a phenomenon in which
criminals provide such services to terrorists as moneylaundering, the provision of documents, arms trafficking
and human trafficking. There are also situations where
terrorists engage in such organized-crime activities as
kidnapping or the illegal extraction of metals, in order
to obtain financing. This represents a great challenge
for crime prevention and for the administration of
justice, because it changes the traditional schemes for
which our law-enforcement officers and administrators
of justice have been trained and the situations they are
accustomed to facing.
Costa Rica has recently made changes to its
domestic legislation in order to strengthen the tools
against money-laundering and terrorist financing.
Although preventive activity is sometimes naively
concentrated only on this aspect, it is, as you yourself
have said, Mr. President, not everything.
The Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica is
working on training judges, prosecutors and judicial
police in cybercrime, in the participation of companies
in organized crime and the money-laundering, human
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

trafficking and smuggling, among others, as ways of
detecting organized crime. Work is also being carried
out to improve the processing and study of information,
analysis and the establishment of relationships among
the various networks made up of such organizations.
Cooperation is fundamental to be able to fight these
organized groups, which operate at the international
level and differ in their motives. While the criminals are
in search of profits, generally terrorists seek to impose
ideologies or religions. However, they use common
methods and resources — illicit activities such as the
transfer of arms, human trafficking, money-laundering,
kidnapping, bank robbery, among others — to achieve
their ends.
Apart from the assistance that countries can
provide through bilateral agreements, Costa Rica is of
the view that regional and subregional organizations,
which have knowledge about the areas in which they
are based, play a key role in cooperation, as well as
in coordinating joint efforts. National needs and crime
patterns vary by region. As we heard in the special
meeting held in April, Latin America is the most violent
region in the world, with the highest rate of homicide
and kidnapping for ransom and the largest diaspora.
That is an example of very peculiar characteristics of
a geographical space, where the link between terrorism
and organized crime is probably different from that
which occurs in other regions that do not have such a
predominance of violence. Examples of that have been
heard here in the Chamber throughout the day.
Cooperation should include training and technology
transfer, both when it comes to States as well as between
the United Nations and regional bodies. Computing
tools, used mainly for tracking foreign fighters, should
be available to all countries, and that should be a joint
effort. The standardization of contents in databases
that facilitate the exchange of information should
be a common objective to improve the fight against
terrorism. With regard to the latter — to the extent that
domestic regulations permit — countries must make
an effort to establish public-private partnerships that
facilitate access to technological advances to serve
both in the prevention of terrorism and in the gathering
of evidence.
All of that should take place while respecting
the rule of law, human rights and the fundamental
freedoms of individuals. We must bear in mind that
criminal and terrorist organizations, whether acting

S/PV. 8569

in tandem or not, have shown that they have access to
all kinds of resources. To cooperate in an orderly and
equitable manner and achieve an effective exchange
of information, Member States must subscribe to the
relevant United Nations instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its three Protocols.
Costa Rica believes it is urgent to bolster our
ability to be able to identify new trends in preparations
for sophisticated events. To that end, it is important
to raise awareness not just among officials but among
society at large. Prosecution and the establishment of
norms are important, but it is just as important to seek
mechanisms and guidelines that allow for the timely
identification of indicators in order to avoid large-scale
events and actual crisis situations. To achieve that, it
is vital that States cooperate with one another in the
exchange of information. That is why we support the
draft resolution being advanced by Peru.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): Let me begin by
expressing my appreciation to the Peruvian presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this timely
and extremely important open debate on linkages
between international terrorism and organized
crime. I also thank each of the three briefers for their
comprehensive briefings.
The growing threat to peace and security posed
by organized transnational crime and its nexus with
terrorism and violent extremism certainly require further
attention and action by the international community.
It must step up its efforts to sever the links between
both scourges and address them in a holistic manner.
Despite territorial setbacks and the limiting of the funds
available to such terrorist groups as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida, these entities are
showing a great capacity for mobility, adaptation and
innovation and often resort to new methods of financing
to diversify their revenue streams. It is therefore
expected that terrorist groups across Africa and other
parts of the world will support themselves through a
variety of criminal activities, including trafficking in
persons, illicit drug trafficking, cybercrime, illegal
exploitation of natural resources, extortion, kidnapping
for ransom, trafficking in firearms, money-laundering
and smuggling of migrants, as well as radicalizing
criminals in the prison system.

19-2099951/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

As underscored in the concept note (S/2019/537,
annex), there is an urgent need to better understand and
address the evolving linkages between terrorism and
organized crime, as well as the manner and extent to
which they vary in different regions and contexts. We
must mobilize our joint efforts to develop and deploy
a set of tools to disrupt those expanding networks and
cut off the funds that they are generating. Exchanging
information among intelligence, military and police
officials, enhancing the capacity of national police and
financial intelligence units, providing the necessary
technical assistance as requested and further sharing
of resources and technology among States must be
key priorities.
It is also important to highlight the importance for
Member States to invest more in promoting effective
border control and surveillance technologies, including
introducing biometric identity documents. In that
connection, we reaffirm that States have the sovereign
right, in accordance with international law, to secure
their borders. Cooperation between States in that
regard can be achieved only through a coherent and
coordinated approach that respects the basic principles
of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within a State’s domestic jurisdiction. The
United Nations counter-terrorism entities, particularly
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
have an important role to play in identifying threats
and capacity-building needs at the request of States,
while bearing in mind that each region has its
own specificities.
We also need to address the structural conditions
that are conducive to criminal activity and terrorism.
The fight against both scourges can succeed only
through a comprehensive approach to economic and
social development and by promoting transparency
and good governance and addressing the root
causes, including poverty, inequality, exclusion and
radicalization. Ensuring the effective implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the involvement of civil society and local communities
are also essential in that regard.
Addressing the nexus between terrorism and
organized crime remains a central component of
Algeria’s comprehensive national strategy in the
fight against terrorism. Accordingly, my country has
adapted its legal framework related to anti-money52/62

09/07/2019

laundering and the criminalization of the financing of
terrorism, assets-freeze measures and control of the
non-profit sector, in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Financial Action Task
Force standards.
At the regional level, Algeria is fully committed
to regional cooperation in fighting the destabilization
caused by terrorist and organized crime groups in the
Sahel region. Like all Sahel countries, Algeria has
consistently advocated an approach geared towards
targeted and efficient action based on national
ownership and aimed at combating terrorism and crossborder criminality, while assuming responsibility for
security and stability within our territory, in keeping
with our international obligations. Algeria’s extensive
military deployment on its borders is part of its efforts
aimed at ensuring its national security and that of all
its neighbours.
Algeria has engaged in a concerted approach among
the countries of the Sahel through various cooperation
mechanisms, such as the Joint Operational General
Staff Committee, the Sahel Fusion and Liaison Unit
and many other forums. Such mechanisms contribute
to enhancing security cooperation among the Sahel
countries, through the coordination and strengthening
of border control measures, as well as through training
and the sharing of intelligence and equipment.
It is worth mentioning that, at the thirtieth African
Union (AU) Heads of State and Government Summit in
February, in its capacity as an African Union Champion
in combating terrorism and violent extremism, Algeria
presented a report that outlines terrorist threats and
trends on the African continent in 2018. The report
notes that the connection between terrorism and
transnational organized crime in Africa has grown
at an alarming pace. Although driven by different
motives, the two scourges have a common purpose
that serves their respective interests, that is, to weaken
State institutions and reduce their capacity to assume
their responsibilities.
Terrorist groups in Africa are increasingly
involved in criminal activities related to drugs and
psychotropic substances, trafficking in firearms and
humans, counterfeiting, the smuggling of cultural
goods, the exploitation of natural resources and
minerals, cattle rustling and piracy. The transboundary
nature of terrorism and organized crime, as well as the
existence of porous borders and ungoverned spaces in
19-20999

09/07/2019

S/PV. 8569

Threats to international peace and security

some AU member States, coupled with weak national
institutional capacities of other member States, are
often exploited by terrorist and criminal groups as they
expand their activities.
The African continent, through the African Union
and its various institutions, and the countries directly
affected have shown resilience and determination
in combating terrorism and addressing traffickingrelated terrorist financing. Various continental
collective security initiatives and arrangements have
been established, such as the Nouakchott and Djibouti
Processes, the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa, the African Police Cooperation
Organization (AFRIPOL) and the African Centre for
the Study and Research on Terrorism (ACSRT).
AFRIPOL and ACSRT, both based in Algiers,
continue to play an important role in strengthening
Africa’s capacities to combat terrorism and organized
transnational crime. The signing, in January, of an
information-sharing agreement between INTERPOL
and AFRIPOL provides an important joint platform
for cooperation in a bid to reinforce their partnership
and coordination in terms of combating both scourges.
Further steps were also taken in supporting AU
member States to further enhance the capacity of their
national law enforcement agencies, including through
the establishment of AFRIPOL national liaison offices
and the African Police Communication System.
As part of its global efforts to counter terrorism
and violent extremism, Algeria also works closely
with other actors, particularly the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF), which complements United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that framework,
Algeria and Canada are chairing the GCTF Capacitybuilding in the West Africa Region Working Group.
In that connection, a meeting on the nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime in West
Africa was jointly organized in Algiers by Algeria and
Canada in October 2017. The GCTF has also produced
useful framework documents addressing the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, as well as the
Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices on Preventing
and Denying the Benefits of Kidnapping for Ransom
by Terrorists.
Finally, Algeria remains firmly engaged in global
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism at
all levels, and is ready to contribute to the collective
endeavour to curb the threat posed by transnational

organized crime
with terrorism.

and

its

nexus

and

collusion

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by commending the Peruvian
presidency for the initiative of convening this important
debate and by recognizing the value of the briefings,
which lay bare the current reality regarding the links
between international terrorism and organized crime.
One of the paradigms at play in the globalized world
has been the internationalization of organized crime,
whose illicit activities have expanded to include new
and dynamic methods and now increasingly challenges
our countries to identify and effectively prevent any
activity utilized by terrorist or criminal organizations.
In order to achieve their goals, terrorist organizations
associate themselves with organized crime, through
both legal and illegal activities, so as to generate the
financial resources that will allow them to develop their
ongoing or potential activities.
As a transit and bi-oceanic country that is a
bridge between North and South America, we are no
strangers to the scourge of organized crime, which goes
hand in hand with forced migration and trafficking in
persons, arms, cultural goods and drugs, among other
phenomena. As such, we are also aware of our global
responsibility to tackle it decisively.
Panama has expressed its firm commitment to
the head-on fight against the financing of terrorism.
We also recognize the value of joint initiatives with
international organizations. The support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for such efforts
confirms that we cannot rely on isolated action alone.
We have ratified 18 international counter-terrorism
instruments at the regional and global levels and,
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), set up a national
list on terrorism and its financing. At the regional
level, together with the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism, Panama is implementing the
legislative assistance and combating terrorist financing
programme and continuing to enforce measures on
preventive freezing, travel bans, arms embargo and
other measures adopted at the Security Council through
the updating of the sanctions lists.
Panama’s criminal code now criminalizes and
imposes a harsh penalty for the financing of terrorism.

19-2099953/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

We enacted a law on money-laundering, terrorism
financing and the financing of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which includes
regulations on preventive asset freezing, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Panama will continue to join forces in the fight
against terrorism and its financing, while investing
resources in improving its counter-terrorism capacity.
Our efforts are focused on protecting our borders
and financial and logistics system, with the aim of
preventing, deterring, detecting and suppressing
terrorism and organized crime networks.
The interconnected world makes us vulnerable and
continues to challenge us. The dynamic development of
telecommunications, social networks and connectivity
indicates significant progress in the area of economics,
as well as major security challenges. Based on today’s
concept note (S/2019/537, annex), I underscore the role
that all actors — public and private alike — can and
should play in preventing terrorism and organized
crime from undermining our societies and generating
instability. Collective efforts, the constant sharing of
good practices and dynamic and effective cooperation
are prerequisites for generating responses with
comprehensive approaches that address the phenomenon
in the various environments where organized crime
is committed. Given that the challenges we face are
global, solutions must also be global.
In recognizing the significant importance of
multilateral efforts and, with them, the value of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
poised to conduct its seventh biennial review in 2020,
I reiterate that Panama will continue working with the
international community to maintain efforts aimed at
the higher purpose of promoting peaceful and inclusive
societies that are intolerant of organized crime
and terrorism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
meeting. My gratitude also goes to the Executive
Directors of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate for their input.
54/62

09/07/2019

As global concerns, both international terrorism
and transnational organized crimes require a global
response, and the United Nations has a decisive role to
play in both cases. While the Security Council should
continue its role in addressing international terrorism,
issues related to transnational organized crimes
must be dealt with only by the General Assembly.
Terrorist and criminal groups have different motives
and use different methods. However, the impacts of
their activities are very similar — both are extremely
disruptive and exceedingly destructive.
Iran is the victim of the activities of terrorist groups
and transnational criminals alike. At the same time, we
are at the forefront of combating both menaces. In the
past four decades, 17,161 Iranian citizens, including
almost 200 high-ranking political figures, among them
one President, one Prime Minister, one judiciary chief,
one deputy chief of the armed forces and 27 members of
Parliament, as well as four nuclear scientists, have been
martyred by foreign-backed terrorist groups.
The Mujahedeen-e Khalq (MKO), which is
responsible for the killing of at least 12,000 Iranian
civilians and many Iraqi citizens, as well as a number
of citizens of various nationalities, continues to receive
funds from certain countries in the region, while
enjoying the support of certain States, including in
Europe. Moreover, after being delisted as a terrorist
group by the United States, MKO is now active in this
country and its members are cooperating closely with
the United States intelligence community to develop
disruptive and destructive plots and plans against Iran.
Cognizant of the serious threat posed by terrorist
groups in our region, Iran has assisted Iraq and Syria,
upon their request, in combating the most dangerous
terrorist groups. In our neighbourhood, terrorist groups
and organized criminals are involved mostly in the
trafficking of drugs and, in certain cases, of arms and
cultural properties in order to finance their activities.
Therefore, in addition to combating terrorist groups,
we have also engaged seriously in countering organized
criminals, mainly those involved in drug trafficking. As
a result, in the past 40 years, 3,815 members of our law
enforcement forces have lost their lives and over 12,000
others have been wounded. In the past three decades,
Iran has seized approximately 11,000 tons of different
types of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
In 2018 alone, our law enforcement forces carried
out 1,557 operations against drug traffickers, seizing
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

approximately 807 tons of different types of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances. Our outstanding
activities in combating drug traffickers have always
been acknowledged at the global level. For instance,
according to the World Drug Report 2019 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2017, Iran seized
the largest quantity of opiates, accounting for 39 per
cent of the global total. Likewise, during the same
period, the largest quantities of opium, as well as the
second-largest quantities of morphine and heroin, were
also seized by Iran. We are determined to continue our
efforts in combating terrorists and drug traffickers.
However, to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of
our efforts, the international community must assist
Iran — of course, without preconditions, discrimination
or politicization.
I also refer to the detrimental effects of unilateral
sanctions in undermining our efforts to counter
terrorism and organized crime. Countries imposing
such unlawful sanctions have to be reminded that their
sanctions policies seriously weaken the effectiveness
of the counter-narcotic efforts of transit countries.
Ultimately, our success in countering those menaces
is dependent largely on our genuine political will,
comprehensive approach and non-discriminatory
cooperation and assistance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing today’s important debate.
While fully aligning myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union,
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
Terrorism, fuelled by the root causes of
radicalization and violent extremism, is ever-more
interlinked with organized crime and the trafficking in
people, drugs and arms, as well as corruption. Needless
to stress, further synergy among terrorist organizations
and organized crime groups can provoke more dire
consequences, not only for certain countries but at the
global level.
According to experts’ assessment, the common
denominator in all such groups is that their field of
activities is not limited to a specific region or State;
instead, they have expansionary aspirations and a vast
development agenda. Up until now, the international

S/PV. 8569

community has been exposed to constantly evolving
threats from the so-called crime-terror nexus, with
more sophisticated methods and tactics, including in
the financing of transnational criminal activity.
The following are some of the factors that allow
terrorist and criminal groups to remain active and
ambitious: the misuse of technological advances
and communication innovations, loosely controlled
borders, complex challenges with regard to returnees
and relocators from the conflict zones, and insufficient
prosecution and punishment measures in place for
those who provide funding or other support to terrorist
and criminal activities in any form and by any methods,
to name a few.
It remains crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of all international instruments in
combating terrorism and transnational organized
crime in force, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the Financial Action Task
Force standards and recommendations. I also wish
to reaffirm the importance of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols in combating both existing and
emerging forms of transnational organized crime. The
provisions of the Convention can target profit-oriented
transnational organized crimes by terrorist groups,
including armed robbery, kidnapping for ransom,
money-laundering, corruption and participation in an
organized criminal group involved in such activities.
Moreover, it can address the role of terrorists in
human trafficking, migrant smuggling and the illicit
trafficking in firearms. Therefore, Ukraine supports
the establishment of the mechanism for the review
of the implementation of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto. We believe that any mechanism
that might be adopted should be transparent, efficient,
non-intrusive, impartial and aimed in particular to
assist States in the effective implementation of the
Convention and its Protocols.
Besides that, we recognize the urgent need to find
additional effective measures to counter evolving trends
in both terrorism and organized crime. In particular,
having been unpunishably integrated into the State
policy of some countries, terrorism and criminal
components lead to brutal violations of international
law, including to the most hostile war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Ukraine continues to experience

19-2099955/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

such consequences while countering the Russian hybrid
aggression for more than five years now.
Switching blame, manipulation, propaganda, the
interference in the internal affairs of States, fuelling
international conflicts by supplying weapons and
financing terrorism, and killing civilians, including
medical personnel, is the modern political course of
the Russian Federation. The Russian representative
so graphically described earlier in his statement the
dangers of supplying weapons to terrorists in Syria.
Instead, I would love to hear him talk about an even more
relevant topic, namely, when Russia itself will end the
non-stop delivery of arms and munitions to terrorists,
fuelling the senseless bloodshed in occupied Donbas.
Transnational
criminal
activity,
including
terrorism, must be not only condemned, but rather
effectively countered and punished. Regrettably, the
current situation in Ukraine clearly demonstrates
that the accommodation, or the appeasement, of an
aggressor breeds further aggression. That is why it is
critically important to firmly hold the aggressor State
to account and employ all the necessary instruments to
make it return to the tenets of international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): At the outset, let me
thank the delegation of Peru for organizing today’s
open debate. Our special appreciation goes out to the
representatives from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate for their remarks. We also thank
the other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this
very important subject.
The existence of militant groups and organized
criminal gangs is not a new phenomenon. In recent
times, however, their manifestation and intricate
linkages have been of growing concern at the national,
regional and international levels. More important,
their convergence has now become an urgent threat
to international peace and security. Its widening base
at the grass-roots level has led to the failure of some
States and the weakening of others.
There are also increasing similarities between
terrorism and organized crime. Both use extreme
violence and the threat of reprisals. Both use
kidnapping, extortion and assassinations. They also
operate secretly, although at times publicly, in friendly
56/62

09/07/2019

territories. Both defy the State and the rule of law. For
a member to leave either group is rare and often fatal.
Both present an asymmetrical threat to the nation, and
both are highly adaptable, resilient and innovative.
They have back-up leaders and foot soldiers. While
some criminal groups and terrorists might operate
opportunistically in partnership, others might converge
in a single terror-crime entity.
Three levels of interplay between organized crime
and terrorist groups have been identified, namely,
coexistence, cooperation and convergence. cooperation
can take various forms when criminal groups work
together, from a purely financial or transactional nature
to an operational and organizational arrangement.
Moreover, such groups often cooperate for mutual
assistance with intangible technology transfers, which
are defined as the export or transfer of technology
from one entity to another via non-physical means,
such as the Internet. In the case of organized crime
and terrorism, that might include technical know-how,
intellectual property and manufacturing techniques for
building anything from bombs to drones.
Correspondingly, four major developments have
been identified as enablers of the increasing convergence
between organized crime and terrorism. They are:
globalization, which has provided the space for the free
flow of trade and human resources, thereby providing
the opportunity for organized crime and terrorism to
mingle; the end of Cold War, which has reduced State
financing of terrorists, leading to terrorists resorting
to self-help by indulging in criminal activities to fill
financial needs; communication through the Internet;
and the global war on terror, which has led to global
cooperation to crackdown on terror.
Nigeria has had a fair share of outbreaks of attacks by
Boko Haram targeting civilians, public infrastructure,
community and religious leaders, places of worship,
markets and media houses, among others. Further
complicating the security landscape is the increase in
the outbreak of transnational organized crimes that feed
into the so-called terrorist loop in West Africa with
threats of terrorism, drug and arms trafficking, illegal
oil bunkering, piracy and human trafficking, which
have acquired a worrisome transnational dimension in
recent times. Due to porous borders and the growing
demand for arms by criminals and militants, cartels
specialized in arms trafficking are devising ingenious
methods for concealing and conveniently trafficking
arms across borders in West Africa.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

In order to address those security challenges, Nigeria
has adopted several mechanisms and instruments
to enhance security, including the national counterterrorism strategy, adopted in 2014, the national policy
framework and national action plan for preventing and
countering violent extremism, adopted in 2017, and the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), established
in collaboration with our neighbours, such as Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin, to defeat the Boko
Haram insurgency. We are therefore making an appeal
to the international community to continue to support
the MNJTF and other activities involving countering
terrorism, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
Nigeria, West Africa and Africa at large.
It is our expectation that this debate will offer
suggestions to address the prevailing challenges of
terrorism and organized crime, which are increasingly
joining forces to challenge States and threaten human
security worldwide. Policy makers and scholars alike
claim that new and unconventional methods are
needed to counter the existential risks that arise from
cooperation, convergence and the merging of terrorism
and organized crime. Therefore, as distinctions between
terrorists and criminals fade, so too must distinctions
among the traditional measures used in fighting them.
Since organized crime and terrorism are converging, a
single, comprehensive concept is required to counter it.
The challenge, therefore, has not been a regional
lack of frameworks and instruments to respond to those
threats, but rather the failure to address the underlying
factors contributing to the outbreak of those crimes,
as well as the complex linkages among them. In order
to deal effectively with the threats of terrorism and
organized crime, there must be a broad approach that
integrates efforts at the national and regional levels into
a robust strategy focused on improving governance,
development and security.
There is also a need for improved knowledge-sharing
and cooperation on all levels, especially internationally.
Following the money trail and countering financing
remain a focus through targeted strategies to prevent and
control money-laundering, extortion and kidnapping
for ransom, among others.
Ultimately, it is important to reiterate that the
eradication of this phenomenon can be possible only
if cooperation can be achieved at the international
level and counter-terrorism programmes, along with

S/PV. 8569

development schemes, are implemented at the grassroots level.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Peru for convening this
open debate to discuss linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime and for submitting the
concept note (S/2019/537, annex) on the topic.
Terrorism and related criminal activities continue
to represent a serious threat to international peace and
security, the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the social and economic
development of all Member States. Those activities are
unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, constitute
serious crimes and must be condemned and prosecuted.
Instances of shielding and glorification of terrorists
must not be tolerated.
The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
and unresolved armed conflicts in the region increase
transborder threats, such as international terrorism and
related criminal activities. Since the end of the 1980s, as
a mean of realizing groundless and unlawful territorial
claims and as a method of warfare, externally directed
terrorist attacks have been repeatedly perpetrated
against my country, claiming the lives of thousands of
its citizens.
While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, it is
critical to intensify conflict resolution efforts in various
parts of the world. Areas of armed conflict, especially
territories under foreign military occupation, often
create opportunities for terrorists, organized criminal
groups and networks to benefit from the exploitation of
natural resources, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in
cultural property, money-laundering and other crimes.
The strict compliance of all States with their
international obligations, including the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, is critical
to ensuring, inter alia, that their respective territories
are not used for terrorist and related criminal activities,
in particular for the financing of and providing, directly
or indirectly, any support to such activities under any
pretext or disguise.
It is important that, where terrorists or organized
criminal groups are engaged in unlawful commercial

19-2099957/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

activities, including in conflict zones and occupied
territories, corporate liability and the individual
criminal responsibility function in tandem to ensure
the prosecution of corporations or their representatives
for violations of international law. In that connection,
in addition to measures that States are entitled to take
at the national level to assert criminal jurisdiction
over crimes perpetrated by their nationals overseas,
international cooperation in criminal matters, with
mutual legal assistance as one component, is the
key to combating impunity for acts of terrorism and
related offences.
Azerbaijan strongly supports enhanced individual
and collective counter-terrorism measures, including
in particular those aimed at degrading and ultimately
defeating terrorist organizations, their affiliates and
networks. We recognize that significant efforts have
been made by the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations to promote
cooperation and coordination and to strengthen the
capacities of Member States in combating international
terrorism and organized crime. It is important that
those efforts continue and expand.
Although terrorism and organized crime have
different motivations and legal regimes, there is a need
for the further comprehensive examination of evolving
linkages between them. We commend the initiative
of holding this open debate to share and highlight
experiences, lessons learned, good practices and
context-specific challenges, and consider it useful to
continue discussions on the topic.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting
against the backdrop of your concept note, Mr. President,
which was published on 28 June (S/2019/537, annex).
We thank your delegation for maintaining, in the course
of your presidency of the Security Council this month, a
common thread with regard to concerns about regional
situations and their impact on international peace and
security. On this occasion, nothing is more appropriate
than referring to the links between terrorism and
organized crime and the difficulties that their multiple
facets represent for Governments.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Under-Secretary-General Michèle
58/62

09/07/2019

Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Tamara
Makarenko for their enlightening briefings.
Of the activities mentioned in the concept note that
can be linked to terrorism, the fight against two of them
is fundamental for my country, namely, drug trafficking
and corruption. Ecuador has experienced the impact of
the Colombian conflict throughout its history. On the
northern border, the splinter groups that did not comply
with the peace agreement are part of transnational
crime networks. They seek to keep their activities
undisturbed through the use of terror, including attacks
and death. Security issues have been linked to criminal
gangs and an increase in illicit activities, including
organized crime, drug trafficking, human trafficking
and money-laundering.
With varying degrees of penetration, organized
crime permeates society and secures its survival by
expanding its markets through micro-trafficking,
whereby children and young people are condemned
to lives without a future. We see how corruption in
our region, which involves the private sector and
Governments alike, became a sophisticated mechanism
for self-perpetuation. In addition to the diversion of
resources that should be devoted to development,
citizens lose faith in the values that
​​
support coexistence
in the community, accountability and democracy.
Drug trafficking and corruption are two of the most
important challenges my country faces. Both require
solutions that go beyond national borders and that
must be interlinked to be effective. Every sector must
be involved: the Government and its functions, public
and private institutions, academia with its analysis and
citizens with their convictions.
My delegation has spoken here on numerous
occasions in favour of working to identify and address
the underlying causes of conflicts — an aspect that
coincides with the vision that Peru’s presidency has
brought to the Council. In the case of organized crime
as well, it is necessary to go beyond the commission of
crimes, to the elimination of their origins.
Working with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, my country is actively working to combat
drug trafficking and corruption through a dedicated
committee made up of experts at the highest level
that also includes bilateral cooperation. However, the
challenge is not individual. It requires the commitment
and cooperation of the entire international community.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

In that regard, my delegation endorses and reiterates
the content of presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9,
which the Council issued on 8 May 2018 and which, in
its second paragraph, calls on States
“to enhance cooperation and strategies to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from transnational
organized crime, and to build the capacity to
secure their borders against and investigate
and prosecute such terrorists and transnational
organized criminals working with them, including
through the strengthening of national, regional,
and global systems to collect, analyse and exchange
information, including law enforcement and
intelligence information.”
To be credible, the results must be visible and
lasting. It is not enough that tons of drugs be seized
every day, as happens in my country; it requires that
there be no consumers and no crops. It is not enough
to identify corruption and begin the processes of
dismantling its frameworks; it is necessary that the
diverted resources return to the countries of origin.
It is necessary to create just, peaceful and inclusive
societies and to work for the elimination of poverty
and for the recovery of ethical values. To that end,
it is essential to have a convergence of efforts at the
national, subregional and organizational levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow me, as well, to commend you for your leadership
in bringing this significant and urgent issue before the
Chamber. As a small island developing State, Trinidad
and Tobago remains at the forefront of this pressing
challenge. The convening of this open debate presents
an ideal opportunity for the international community to
assess fully the interconnectivity between international
terrorism and organized crime.
My delegation notes with appreciation the very
informative and comprehensive interventions delivered
by the briefers, which we believe constructively added
to the debate.
In the Caribbean, transnational organized
crime and its attendant cross-border activities have
evolved into a major threat to regional security as the
countries within the region grapple with increased

S/PV. 8569

criminal activity, which has moved from random acts
of criminality to criminal activities that are being
carried out in an increasingly organized and highly
professional manner. These indicators undeniably point
to a changing dynamic of illicit cross-border activity in
an increasingly sophisticated and technological global
environment. Transnational organized crime represents
a threat not only to peace and security, but to the rule
of law, human rights and socioeconomic development.
For our region, the confluence between
international terrorism and organized crime cannot
be ignored. Trinidad and Tobago is a uniquely diverse
society, founded on a rich history of inclusion, tolerance
and the peaceful coexistence and harmony of all its
citizens in a pluralistic, multicultural and multi-ethnic
society. To this end, we are committed to safeguarding
our citizens and supporting international efforts to
combat terrorism, and have taken a comprehensive and
inclusive approach to the issue of countering terrorism
and, in particular, to addressing the potential threats
posed by returning foreign terrorist fighters.
Our approach has involved the establishment of
a national counter-terrorism policy and strategy, the
improvement of the national legislative framework,
the enhancement of the national capacity and the
deepening of collaboration with local and international
partners, inclusive of civil society and academia, while
maintaining respect for human rights and dignity.
Most notably, in 2017 Trinidad and Tobago approved
its counter-terrorism strategy, which was founded on
three mutually reinforcing pillars, namely, protect and
prevent, pursue, and respond and recover.
In addition to policy development, we have
recognized that legislation is a key pillar of the national
response to terrorism. In this regard, Trinidad and
Tobago has conducted a review and amendment of
key legislation pertaining to terrorism, in particular
its Anti-Terrorism Act. One example is the significant
amendments that have been proposed through the
Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill 2018, which speaks
specifically to the threat posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters and addresses technical deficiencies
in terms of compliance with resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001). In this context, special consideration
is being given to the implications of this legislation for
women and children.
In conveying our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, I wish to reiterate my

19-2099959/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

country’s commitment to countering the threat of
terrorism, including the financing of terrorism, and to
taking active measures to create enabling environments
to resist the fostering of foreign terrorist fighters.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): At the outset, we
would like to congratulate Peru on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and to thank it for its choice of the theme of today’s
open debate. We thank the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Executive
Director of the Counter- Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the invited international
consultant for their briefings.
Terrorism continues to pose significant threat to
international peace and stability. Horrific terrorist acts
have been perpetrated in many parts of the world in
recent years. Undoubtedly, enhanced cooperation at
both the regional and the international levels is crucial
to countering and addressing the multifaceted threats
posed by terrorism and transnational organized crime,
which quite often appear to be closely interlinked.
The Security Council has recognized and expressed
concern over the connection between transnational
organized crime and terrorism in several of its
resolutions, most recently in resolution 2462 (2019),
which Armenia co-sponsored. The nature and scope
of the linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime vary by context. The sustained
and comprehensive engagement of all States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
is as critical as ever if we are to better understand the
links that exist between terrorists and transnational
organized crime.
We express our support to the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism in its activity aimed at improving
visibility, advocacy and resource mobilization for
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
We are glad to note the enhanced cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). CTED conducted its followup visit to the Republic of Armenia in 2018 to assess
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
subsequent counter-terrorism resolutions. Armenia’s
relevant national security and law enforcement
authorities reaffirmed their unequivocal commitment
60/62

09/07/2019

to contributing to fighting terrorism and its financing
in all its forms and manifestations so as to ensure
further compliance with the counter-terrorism
resolutions of the Security Council and in line with
CTED recommendations.
Armenia has made considerable efforts to strengthen
its
anti-money-laundering/counter-financing
of
terrorism regime, having conducted a thorough national
risk assessment and introduced its national strategy for
combating money-laundering and terrorism financing.
We have significantly improved our legal framework
on terrorism financing and the freezing of terrorist
assets. Armenia has strengthened operational access
to the relevant tools and databases of INTERPOL
and cooperates in counter-terrorism matters with the
relevant regional and international organizations.
We pursue also cooperation with Anti-Terrorism
Center of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), relevant structural units of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Council of Europe, and advance collaboration in the
bilateral format. We actively participate in the regularly
conducted joint operations of CSTO member States to
counter drugs and arms smuggling and information
and communications technology-related threats and to
combat threats arising from foreign terrorist fighters,
which are closely interlinked with terrorist and
organized criminal groups.
The relocation of foreign terrorist fighters from the
Middle East, particularly to the conflict areas in the
OSCE and CIS regions, poses a serious threat to regional
security. Foreign terrorist fighters returning from
conflict zones in the Middle East import their violent
practices and disseminate virulent extremist ideas,
thereby contributing to the radicalization of societies.
Da’esh-style executions and other atrocities are already
not limited just to the Middle East. Unfortunately, the
events of April 2016 in our region proved the validity
of our concerns.
Armenia reiterates its full commitment to working
with the relevant United Nations bodies and Member
States to redouble collective efforts to fight international
terrorism and its links with organized crime, in
whichever form it takes and wherever it happens.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
19-20999

09/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I wish at the outset to congratulate the
Republic of Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and on holding this
important debate.
I also thank the briefers for their valuable
presentations this morning.
The United Arab Emirates is participating in
this debate because of the great importance my
country attaches to combating terrorism, including
its relationship with organized crime. My country,
as an important commercial and financial hub of the
Middle East, seeks to combat these serious crimes at
all levels. As speakers have pointed out today, there
is a growing linkage between organized crime and
terrorism, whereby terrorists benefit from trafficking
in persons, weapons, cultural heritage and natural
resources, as well as kidnappings and bank robbery,
to finance their operations and support their terrorist
activities. Therefore, the elimination of international
terrorism requires cutting off all sources of financial
and logistical support, including organized crime.
The concept paper submitted for this debate
(S/2019/537, annex) points to the importance of sharing
best experiences and practices to address the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime and to explore
ways of enhancing cooperation among regional,
international and subregional organizations. In this
context, I would like to note a number of initiatives and
actions taken by the United Arab Emirates to disrupt
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime,
especially in the area of financial support, which have
contributed to my country’s ranking among the top
five countries of the world in terms of commitment to
combating money-laundering and terrorist financing,
according to the Global Competitiveness Report.
At the local level, the United Arab Emirates
has strengthened its legal frameworks to combat
the financing of terrorism and implement the latest
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), which contribute to ensuring continued
compliance with international standards related to
combating money-laundering and countering the
financing of terrorism. Accordingly, my country
has issued wide-ranging legislation to address these
crimes, including Federal Decree No. (20) of 2018
on countering money-laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism and illegal organizations. That

S/PV. 8569

law includes provisions covering the obligations under
the FATF recommendations.
My country has also established a national
committee to counter money-laundering and combat the
financing of terrorism and other illegal organizations
within the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates.
The committee receives and analyses suspicious
transactions from financial institutions and refers them
to the competent authorities for appropriate action.
It must be emphasized that our efforts to combat the
linkages between organized crime and terrorism cannot
be effective without close cooperation with the private
sector and non-profit and charitable organizations.
In addition, the United Arab Emirates seeks to
protect its domestic financial system by applying the
latest and most efficient global systems, including by
providing financial intelligence units with the necessary
equipment and expertise, enabling them to analyse and
investigate suspicious transactions. In that regard, we
are proud to be the first country of the Gulf region
to launch the goAML platform to collect and analyse
financial information on anti-money-laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
At the international level, my country has spared
no effort to combat this phenomenon. In addition to
its accession to regional and international treaties and
conventions relating to combating the financing of
terrorism, the United Arab Emirates has co-sponsored
and implemented Security Council resolutions on
this issue. Most recently, we co-sponsored resolution
2462 (2019), which calls on Member States to take
further measures to prevent and combat the financing
of terrorism. My country is also a founding member
of the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action
Task Force, which plays an important role in the
exchange of information between financial intelligence
units to combat terrorism financing in the region.
The relevant authority in my country has signed
more than 45 memorandums of understanding with
international entities to combat money-laundering and
terrorism financing.
In addition, my country co-sponsored resolution
2347 (2017), which is the first Security Council
resolution to deal exclusively with combating the
destruction and illegal trafficking in cultural heritage
by terrorist groups in armed conflict. The resolution
was adopted following the launch by the United Arab

19-2099961/62

S/PV.8569

Threats to international peace and security

Emirates, in cooperation with France and UNESCO, of
the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage
in Conflict Areas. This is an international fund to
protect cultural property and combat the theft, smuggle
and sale of such property by terrorists to finance their
destructive activities. The fund has raised nearly
$60 million, of which $15 million were provided by the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like to stress that the United Arab Emirates
will continue to take all measures and implement best
practices to combat the linkage between organized
crime and international terrorism, including by
combating money-laundering and strengthening border
security in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security.
In conclusion, I would
following recommendations.

like

to

make

the

First, we must focus on implementing Security
Council resolutions and FATF recommendations.
In that context, the United Nations should focus on

62/62

09/07/2019

strengthening the capacity of Member States to better
understand and implement their new commitments
when the Security Council adopts resolutions on these
issues, in addition to holding accountable States that
finance and support terrorist groups in clear violation
of Council resolutions.
Secondly, we must continue to promote a better
understanding of the linkage between international
terrorism and organized crime, including through
further studies and research, the sharing of experiences
and best practices, and improved regional and
international cooperation in this regard.
Thirdly, we must understand the specific context
of each region upon taking action and ensure the
implementation of programmes aimed at disrupting the
linkage between organized crime and terrorism, taking
into account the advice and opinion of the States of
these regions on the best means to combat such crimes.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

19-20999
