86

General Assembly-Twen_t_:_y_-s_e_ve_n_t_h_Se_s_s_io_n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

8. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progrcss in ali sectors
of the national .Jife of those Territories;
9. Calls upon the administering Power conccrned,
in view of its responsibility towards the welfare of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territorics in the
region, to discontinuc any further nuclear atmospheric
testing in the South Pacific arca, in arder not to endanger thc life and environment of the peoples of thc
Territories concerned;
10. Invites the Sccrctary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 2909 (XXVII) of 2 Novcmbcr 1972, to
pay particular regard to the necd to intensify widespread dissemination of information on the proccss of
decolonization in respcct of the Territories ]isted above;
l l. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including in
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2 lJ 0th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2985 (XXVII).

Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having considered the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 33
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2866 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971 concerning the question,
Reaffirming that the Seychelles should accede to independence without any prejudice to their territorial
integrity,
Expressing its deep regret that it has not been possible to send a special mission of the United Nations
to the Territory, as envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI),
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Seychelles to self-determination and independence
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and cal!s upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, to take all necessary measures to enable the people to cxercise that right without
further delay;
2. Requests the administering Powcr, in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the neccssary arrangements, in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding
of a referendum on the future status of the Tcrritory;
3.1 /bid., cha,ps. IV, VI and XL

3. Requests the Special Committce on thc Situation
with rcgard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independcnce to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question, including in particular the dispatch of the special
mission referrcd to above, and to report thercon to
the General Asscmbly at its twcnty-eighth scssion.

2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2986 (XXVII). Question of Niue ami the
Tokelau falands

The General Assembly.
Having considcred thc qucstion of Niue and the
Tokelau Island,,
Noting that, at the invitation of thc Governmcnt of
New Zcaland, the administering Powcr, a United Nations mission visited Niue in June 1972,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independcnce to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 31 including in particular the report of the
United N ations Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972,35
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dccember
1960 containing the Dcclaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having heard the statemcnts of the reprcscntative of
the administering Power, 06
Noting with satisfaction that, following the visit of
the United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, the Select
Committee on Constitutional Development, established
by the Niue Island Legisla ti ve Assembly, concluded
popular consultations on mcasures for the further constitutional advancement of the Territory of Niue, including the establishment of a time-table for the attainment of self-government,
Stressing the special responsibility of the Govcrnment of New Zealand, as the administering Power, to
continue to assist the pcoples of Niue and the Tokelau
Islands freely to decide their own future,
Mindful that Niue and the Tokelau Islands require
the continued attention and assistance of the United
Nations in the achievement by their peoples of thc
objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1. Reaffirms thc inalienable right of colonial peoples
to self-dctcrmination and independence in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the rclevant chaptcrs of the report of
the Spccial Committee on the Situation with rcgard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countrics and Peoples;
3. Commen:ds the conclusions and rccommendations contained in the report of thc Unitcd Nations
Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972, to the Government of
,14 /bid., chaps. TV and XVI.

35 /bid., chap. XVI, annex l.
3 6 /bid., Twenty-seventh Session, Fourth Committce, 2005th
meeting; AIC.41757.

87

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

-------------

New Zea.Jand, as the administering Power, and to the
Niue Island Legislative Assembly for consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-opcration
extended to the United Nations by thc Governmcnt of
New Zealand in connexion with its special study of thc
question of Niue and the Tokelau l,lands;
5. Takes note of the decision of thc Niue Island
Legislative Assembly concerning the futurc status of
the Territory;
6. Expresses the hope that the forthcoming constitutional talks between the administcring Power and
the representatives of the people of Niue will result in
an early realization of thc aspirations of the Niuean
people regarding their future status in accordancc with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of thc United
Nations and thc Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue its
assistance to the Territories in order to promote their
economic, social and educational development and, in
that conncxion, to avail itself of assistance from the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as from competent regional and intergovernmental organizations;
8. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of po.Jitical
education as well as to preserve the cultural heritage
of the people of these Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th p/enary meeting
14 December 1972

2987 (XXVII). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Luda
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Antigua,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its re·solution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolutions 2593 (XXIV)
of 16 December 1969 and 2867 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples,87
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the peoples of
Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent to achieve independence in
conformity with the provisions of rcsolution 1514
(XV),
37 !bid.,
Twenty-seventh Session,
(A/87i3/Rev.1), chap. XXIV.

Supplement

No.

23

l. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implcmentation of thc Declaration on the Granting of
Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vinccnt:
2. Rcquests the Special Committee to continue to
givc consideration to this question in accordance with
thc provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Asscmbly, and to rcport thercon to the Assemb!y
at its twcnty-cighth session.
l l I 0th plenary meeting
I 4 Decemher 197:]

3030 (\.XVII). ÜJ1itPtl Nations Fund for Namibia

T/1e General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 Octobcr 1966, by which the United Nations decided to
termínate the Mandatc of South Africa over Namibia
and assume direct responsibility for the Territory until
its indcpcndence,
_ Reaffirming its resolve to discharge that responsibility
m regard to the Territory,
M~n~ful that, _by assuming direct responsibility for
~am1bia. t~c Umted Nations incurred a solemn obligat1011 to ass1st and prepare the people of the Territory
for self-determination and independence,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970 and 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning the establishment of the United
~ations Fund for Namibia for the purpose of putting
mto eff':'c! a comprehensive programme of assistance
to Nam1bians, as outlined in the report of the Secret~ry-Gcn~ral to the General Assembly at its twentys1xth sess10n, 38
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
N_ati?ns from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
w1thm the Territory,
Hai·ing examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the Fund during 1972,39
Bearing in mind that the scope of the programme,
as_ well as i!s financing and administrative machinery,
w1ll be subiect to review by the General Assembly
whcn South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia is
terminatcd,
Noting that the Secretary-General, owing to Iack of
funds, has not been able to carry out the programme in
ali its parts as envisaged in his report submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session in accordancc with its resolution 2679 (XXV),
Noting further that thc Sccretary-General has, for
the abovc-mcntioncd rcasons, found it necessary, inter
a/ia, to dcfcr implementation of the preparation and
investigation of thc long-term measures described in
paragraph 108 of his report to the General Asscmbly
at its twcnty-sixth session,
Recag11izing the importance of undertaking a detailed invcstigation of the human and natural resources
of Namibia, with a vicw to prcparing proposals for a
co-ordinatcd plan of international economic and technical a,sistance, inclmling manpowcr training, to be
::R A 1 8473.
:io A/~841 aml Corr. l.
