TWEiVTY-SIXTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

26 AUGUST

1971

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . ,. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . I . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . .. , . , ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. I . ..

1

Complaint
by Guinea:
Special Mission to the Republic
of Guinea established
under resolution
295 (1971)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . I.. .

1

Farewell
to Mr. Davidson S. H. W. Nicol, Permanent Representative
of Sierra
Leone to the United Nations . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1576)

SlPV.1576

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi~ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 26 August 1971, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr, Piero VINCI (Italy).

Guinea, having considered Security Council resolution
295 (1971), agreed to receive, as soon as possible, the
special mission referred to in that resolution [S/10287].
Immediately upon receipt of the letter, consultations
between the President of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General were resumed. Consultations were also
held with all members of the Security Council after possible
candidates had been sounded out.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 576)
4. As a result of those consultations, I have been authorized to make a statement expressing the consensus of the
Council. The text of the statement is as follows:

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Guinea:
Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 295 (1971).

“It is the consensus of the Security Council that the
Special Mission called for in resolution 295 (1971) should
be composed of two members of the Council instead of
three. The Special Mission will proceed to Conakry to
consult the Government of the Republic of Guinea on its
complaint and will report back to the Council as soon as
possible.”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Guinea
5. If there are no objections, I shall take it that this
consensus may now be considered formally approved by
the Security Council,

Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 295 (197 1)

It was so decided.

1. THE PRESIDENT: I have called this meeting following
consultations with all members of the Council on the
question of the implementation of paragraph 2 of resolution 295 (1971).

6. In view of the consensusthat has just been adopted, I
wish to announce that the President of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General have decided that the Special
Mission will be composed of Argentina and Syria. It will be
accompanied by the necessarystaff from the Secretariat.

2. Members of the Council will recall that in its resolution
295 (1971), adopted at its 1573rd meeting on 3 August
1971, in connexion with a complaint by the Republic of
Guinea, the Security Council decided to send a special
mission of three members of the Security Council to the
Republic of Guinea to consult the authorities and to report
on the situation immediately. The Security Council also
decided that “this special mission be appointed after
Consultation between the President of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General”. Accordingly, the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General started
consultations with a view to appointing the members of the
mission. Those consultations were, however, suspended
following the receipt of a letter dated 4 August 1971, from
the Permanent Representative of Guinea, addressed to the
President of. the Security Council, requesting that the
sending of the special mission to the Republic of Guinea be
delayed [S/1 02831,

Farewell to Mr. Davidson S. H. W. Nicol, Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations
7. The PRESIDENT: Some members of the Council have
expressed a desire to speak in connexion with the imminent
departure from the United Nations of the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone and I shall now call on
them.
8. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I have asked for the floor to say
a few words in connexion with the impending departure of
my distinguished colleague and friend Ambassador Nicol of
Sierra Leone, My delegation has followed with great
interest the contribution he has made to the United Nations
in the short time-just two years-he has been with us. It
has been a refreshing experience to work with him; it has
been a refreshing experience to hear him speak and to
receive his counsel on many delicate matters with which we
have been faced. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to

3. On 12 August 1971 the representative of Guinea
addressed a letter to the President of the Security Council
informing him that the Government of the Republic of
1

express appreciation for all that he has done and the hope
that in his next post he will meet with equal success.

enough to convince me that he is a diplomat of the highest
calibre, as well as a scholar of rare qualities, In my short
time here at the United Nations, I have come to appreciate
greatly Ambassador Nicol’s warm personal charm, his very
friendly attitude towards a newcomer like me and his
unfailing courtesy. Ambassador Nicol’s contribution to the
work of the Council has been invaluable and his absence
will be keenly felt.

9. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
My delegation and I regret very much that our
colleague of Sien> Leone, Ambassador Nicol, is leaving us.
In the 18 months or so that I have had the privilege of
knowing him, I have learned to appreciate his great ability
and, in particular, his perfect courtesy in all our dealings. I
wish to pay B tribute to him and to congratulate him on a
promotion that does him honour-and I wish him all
successin the new duties to which his Government has
called him.
Frenc/zj:

16. On behalf of my delegation I wish to extend to him
every good wish for successin his new post.

10. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish):First of all, Mr. President, I wish to express

my sincere congratulations to you on the indefatigable
manner in which you carried out the consultations in order
successfully to conclude the discussions on Security Council resolution 295 (1971) and to achieve the consensus
which you have just reid out. We are all fully aware of the
responsibility entailed by all this and of the spirit of
negotiation with which you have faced your obligations as
President of the Security Council, successfully completing
the tasks entrusted to you by the Council’s resolution. As
far as Argentina is concerned, we are both honoured and
privileged to take part in such a delicate mission and we
shall do everything in our power to complete it successfully.
11. I should also like now to join the two previous
speakers in paying a tribute to Ambassador Nicol of Sierra
Leone. We all know his professional ability, his human
feelings, his tact and moderation and the way in which he
has always used the right words at the right time to tackle
problems in the Security Council, problems which are
sometimes very complex. The representative of Sierra
Leone has always, with his statements, helped us to solve
those problems and has thus not only made a persona1
contribution-which is so valuable and welcome-but aIso
contributed much on behalf of the country he represents
and the African Group as a whole,

17. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): Perhaps
the saddest duty that befalls a diplomat is the inevitable
bidding of farewell to a colleague. Ambassador Bush would
have liked to be here today to pay a tribute to such a I
friend; but his unavoidable absence from New York makes
it my privilege to tell Ambassador Nicol of Sierra Leone
that the United States delegation will miss him, that Y
thanks him for his unfailing courtesy and kindness, and that :
we wish him well in the important riew tasks he has been
called upon to undertake.
18. Dr. Nicol brought to the Security Council impressive
credentials. His was a rich and varied background: as :
physician he had devoted his skill to the healing of the ills :
which afflicted men; as statesman and patriot he devoted
his efforts to the improvement of the condition of the land
which had nurtured him; and as diplomat and distinguished
representative of Sierra Leone in the United Nations he :
devoted his talents to that most delicate and difficult of
tasks-the harmonization of relations between nations. The
rich and mellifluous tones with which our friend Mr. Nicot
counselled his colleagues in the Security Council and in the
numerous other bodies of this great Organization in which
he made his influence felt also became widely known
beyond the confines of the United Nations. A generation of
concerned Americans, young and old, were privileged to
hear him tell of the awakening of the great continent of
Africa, for which he has done so much.
19. Now High Commissioner Nicol undertakes his cauntry’s Embassy to the United Kingdom and, for good
measure, to Europe as well. After witnessing his ability
during these past several years to be in half a dozen places
doing half a dozen things at the same time, we do not
doubt his ability to undertake simultaneously ten tasksia
ten places and to carry them all out to perfection.

12. We know that he will be successful in London and it
remains for us only to wish him the best of luck, since he
has everything else.
13. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the representative of Argentina for the kind remarks he has
addressed to me and to reciprocate by expressing my
sincere gratitude to Ambassadbr Ortiz de Rozas for the
co-operation and understanding he showed throughout the
consultations which I conducted in close co-operation with
the Secretary-General,

20. In the name of Ambassador Bush and the entire
United States delegation and in my own, I wish Our
colleague Mr. Nicol godspeed and continued success.
21. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation
ffof)J ;
French): I should like to associate my delegation with the
words of regret just spoken about the forthcoming depsr.
ture of Ambassador Nicol. Mr. Kosciusko-Morizet wfl cep
tainly be sorry to have been unable to take the floor on this
occasion to express our feelings about the departure of the
distinguished Ambassador of Sierra Leone, We have always
appreciated the great authority, the high competence and
remarkable qualities of judgement shown by Ambassador
Nicol in the work of the Security Council. All of us have
also appreciated his remarkable courtesy and his great

14. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): I should like to associate
fully myself with the remarks made by other representatives in connexion with the departure of Mr. Davidson
S. H. W, Nicol, Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone.
15. Since I am relatively new in this Council, it has been
for only a short while that I have had the opportunity to
work closely with Ambassador Nicol, and I deeply regret
that. This short association was, however, more than
2

personal charm. He has made the most valuable contribution to our work.

and knowledge come forth from him in a spontaneous and
natural way.

22. We are happy to know that his Government is
entrusting very important functions to him, and, of course,
rve should like to express our very best wishes and
congratulations to him.

28. It is indeed sad to realize that we have to part with
such a good man, with such a wise man, but it is a source of
joy to know that wherever he is, wherever he will be, his
wisdom and goodness will always contribute to the work of
humanity that he is carrying out.

23. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I, too, should
like to join in the tributes that we are paying to our
colleague Ambassador Nicol-our tributes to the skill and
the tact and the courtesy which he has shown to his
cclleagrres on the Council during his tenure of office. I
particularly appreciate this since I made my &‘bt~t here
myself under his presidency in September of last year, and
there could not have been a more wise, well-balanced,
lrnpartial and considerate President. Indeed, the constructive work which the Council has undertaken during the last
two years is in no small measure due to Mr. Nicol.

29. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Syria
for the kind and generous words he used about the
Secretary-General and me, and I wish to assure him that we
both appreciated his understanding and co-operation during
the consultations we conducted.
30. Mr. ROMAN (Nicaragua) (interpretation fram Spanish/: The delegation of Nicaragua endorses what all the
other representatives have said in tribute to Ambassador
Nicol of Sierra Leone. His brilliant conduct during the time
that he has been with us has earned him our affection and
respect, and the admiration of all members for his calm
judgement and other valuable qualities. We are convinced
that these qualities will ensure him success wherever his
country may send him.

24. However, as far as my country is concerned, the
United Nations loss is the United Kingdom’s gain, since he
is to become his country’s High Commissioner in London.
He is, of course, already very well known in my country
arid, indeed, he is already the recipient of the highest
academic honours that we can award him. I am glad to
think that in bidding him farewell today our opportunities
for benefiting
from his skill and experience will, if
anything, be enhanced by his transfer.

31. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfiom Russian): I, too, should like to offer
my best wishes to Mr. Nicol, the Ambassador of Sierra
Leone, on the occasion of his new appointment.

25. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, I wish, first of all,
to address the thanks of my delegation to you personally,
as well as to our very esteemed Secretary-General, U Thant,
for the untiring efforts that both of you have made in
carrying out the terms of the Security Council resolution
under which a mission is to be sent to Guinea. I wish also,
on behalf of my delegation, to express my thanks for
having been chosen to be part of the mission, for the
honour that has been bestowed on my country Syria, and
to assure you that we will carry out the mandate of the
mission to the best of our ability and as well as is humanly
and genuinely possible.

32. Mr. Nicol is well known to the Soviet delegation, and
not only as a member of the Security Council. He is also
well known to us as the Chairman of the Committee of
Twenty-Four, the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. For one year, in 1970, Ambassador Nicol presided
over the work of that important and responsible organ of
the United Nations.
33. I should like to remind all those present here that it
wasunder Ambassador Nicol’s leadership and guidance last
year that the Committee of Twenty-Four adopted some
very important documents, including the Programme of
action for the full implementation of the Declaration on
decolonization, which, as we all know, was subsequently
adopted at the commemorative twenty-fifth session of the
General Assembly [resolution 2621 (XXVJ. It is therefore
no coincidence that Ambassador Nicol has so brilliantly
represented not only the interests of his own country in the
Security Council, but also the interests of the whole of free
Africa. Nor is it a coincidence that Ambassador Nicol has
always defended the cause of decolonization in Africa with
such regard for principle and such consistency when the
Security Council has discussed matters relating to that
problem.

26. Now, it is both a sad and a happy duty to associate
myself with other representatives in paying a tribute to our

very distinguished and beloved colleague Ambassador Nicol
of Sierra Leone. I have been associated personally with the
work of Ambassador Nicol in the Security Council for the
last two years or so, and one great characteristic of his has
struck me. Of course, the members who have preceded me
have mentioned
many brilliant characteristics of the personality of the Ambassador of Sierra Leone, but the one
which has struck me most is his deep humanity, coupled
with a real and genuine humility and humbleness. The great
man, the great scholar, is always humble, and one rarely
finds that nowadays. That speaks for itself.
27. We have a very old proverb in Arabic-at least 2,000
Years old-which
says about an Ambassador: “Send a wise

34. Finally, I hope that Ambassador Nicol will excuse me,
but I do not think that I shall be revealing any great secret
if I mention one detail: Ambassador Nicol is not only a
famous African diplomat, he is also a well-known physician,
a professor of medicine. It is a pleasure for me to inform
members of the Security Council that many, many years
ago, when I was working at Peterhouse in Cambridge,

man and do not give him guidelines”. That means that
wisdom, when it flows naturally and spontaneously, gives
its own directives and its own guidelines. That wisdom does
exist
in Ambassador Nicol, for like the clean spring of water
which gushes forth spontaneously and naturally, wisdom
3

England, I was already aware of Dr. Nicol’s renown. Of
course, I could not have imagined at the time that many
years later I would meet Dr. Nicol here in the United
Nations.
35. It seems to me that the combination of these two
professions, diplomacy and medicine, is not fortuitous. In
fact, in his activities as a famous diplomat, Ambassador
Nicol has tried to cure mankind of the evils of war, conflict
and dissension on a world-wide scale, so to speak.
36. As a physician, Dr. Nicol has sought to help individual
human beings to rid themselves of human ills, at what
might be called the individual level. AU this bears witnessto
the many-sided character of Ambassador Nicol, professor of
medicine.
37. I should like to conclude by once again wishing
Ambassador Nicol every successin his new and responsible
post.
38. Mr. LUDWICZAK (Poland): On behalf of the Polish
delegation and personally on behalf of Ambassador Kujaga,
I should like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Nicol, the
representative of Sierra Leone, and to convey to him our
best wishes and congratulations in connexion with his
departure and the new, important assignment to which he
hasbeen called.
39. My delegation highly appreciates the very good cooperation between our two delegations in the work of the
Security Council and other organsof the United Nations, in
particular the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,
40. Mr. NDURURUTSE (Burundi) (interpretation from
FrerzchJ:My delegation also would like to associate itself
with those representatives that have spoken on the forthcoming departure of Ambassador Nicol. A remarkablf
statesman, an eminent and qualified diplomatist, Ambassa
dor Nicol has contributed very positively to the wQrk of the
United Nations and, more particularly, to that of the
Security Council. My delegation is very happy to wish
Ambassador Nicol continued successin the functions which
his Government has now entrusted him.
41. The PRESIDENT: Since there are no other names on
the list of speakers,I should like now, speaking asPresident
of the Security Council and asPermanent Representative of
ITALY, to join previous speakers in the warm farewell
given to Ambassador Nicol, who is to leave shortly to take
up another high responsibility in the service of his country,
Sierra Leone,
42. My delegation has had the good fortune to work
closely with Ambassador Nicol in this Council and in the
Committee of Twenty-Four, and has thus had numerous
opportunities to appreciate fully his professional skill his
fairness, his integrity and hjs humanistic culture. In’this
Council and in all other bodies of the United Nations he has
been an eloquent and fervent advocate of his continent’s
yearning for justice. In pleading the African cause, he has

always shown a deep sense of history, which, since it is the
main quality of statesmanship, accounts for the moral
strength of his interventions.
I
43. Ambassador Nicol’s interventions and contributions to
the work of the United Nations have won great esteem for
him and his country and have done honour to the African
Group. We shall certainly miss him; we shall certainly miss
his charming companionship and his learned and witty
interventions.
44. Allow me to wish him whole-heartedly every success
and happiness in his new office.
45. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I congratulate you on your presidency during this difficult month.
You have brought it to a successful conclusion with the
impending report on Senegal and the consensus which we
have just adopted, as well as the reports which you have
given us informally about progress in the Middle East
negotiations.
46. I wish to thank members for their very kind words,
which I feel are totally undeserved. I am extremely gratefuI
to them. I accept their remarks as a tribute to my
delegation and to the Government and people of Sierra
Leone. I owe much gratitude to Sierra Leone for my
appointment here and for the constant support which I
have always received from my Government. We have tried
to work within the circles of the African Group, the
Afro-Asian
Group and all the nations of the world, including
_ the Commonwealth representatives.
47. During our period of 21 months on the Council WC
have been privileged to notice many positive gains. The !
principle of universality of membership is being actively
pursued by the admission of new Members and the
important consideration of others for this year and next i
year. The International Court of Justice has given a ruling ’
on Namibia which we feel should be implemented. South
Africa, Portugal and Rhodesia will find their best allies
among the black citizens of their countries if they are
treated with fairness and decency.
48. In this connexion, we have observed the negotiations
being carried out by Britain with Rhodesia. We welcome
this acceptance of their responsibility, and they have OUT
best wishesfor a just, peaceful and speedy solution.
49. The important proposals for peace being put forward
by the United States and the Soviet Union, both at the
United Nations and at the disarmament and SALT’
conferences, are very important factors towards the establishment of lasting and universal peace.
50. In the Middle East an increasing feeling of good sense
and justice on both sides, spurred on primarily by the
nations concerned themselves and also by the persuasion of
the Big Four and the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his representative, is most welcome to us.
51. Those who have made observations and written on the
Security Council have missed the sense of comradeship and
warmth amongst its members and the feeling of achieve.
merit when a consensus is reached.
1 StrategicArms Limitation Talks.

52. The Security Council is charged with the maintenance
of international peace and security. It has been attempting
-and, we hope, will make even greater attempts-not only
to maintain international peace and security but also to
initiate and further the causes of international peace and
security. We are reminded of Greek mythology, of the
mythical figures of Atlas and Antaeus. Atlas carries the
world on his shoulders, and we have attempted to do so;
but we are like Antaeus the giant, who derived strength
from contact with the ground-if he was lifted up for too
long he became weak and lost his strength. And so,
although we try to solve these great problems of war and
Peace, our work here cannot have the sufficient strength to
combat the forces of evil unless we are firmly rooted and
unless we are helped by the various nations of the world,
including the most powerful ones.
53. I pay a tribute to the skill and great moral influence of
OuI beloved Secretary-General U Thant and to the leadership he has given to an efficient Secretariat.

54. It is given to few people to be so favoured as I have
been with the wisdom and congeniality which my colleagues and I from Sierra Leone have found amongst past
and present members of the Security Council during the
last 21 months and at the United Nations during the past
two and a half years that we have been here. It is an
experience for which I shall be everlastingly grateful.
55. I am glad, Mr. President, that you have given me the
opportunity to thank the distinguished members of this
Council and, through them, the United Nations for what I
have learned and will continue to learn from them.
56. The PRESIDENT: I believe I can speak for all the
members of the Security Council and for the SecretaryGeneral in expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Nicol
for the inspiring and human message he has left us.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATION5

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

Ler publicotionr
des Notions
Unier
sent
dkporitairer
du monde
entier,
Informer-vour
Notions
Unies, Section
der venter,
New York

KAK IlOJlY’iHTb

M3,lJAHMR

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

DES NATIONS

CONSEOUIR

ou Ge&ve.

OPrAHM3ALJMM

PUI~LICAC~ONES

in United

Nations,

NEW York

Price:

$U.S.

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAIJMA

JlOiliIlO
Ii~UllTb
n IiIIlI;h'III~IS
>ltl~~:JlIlIaX
II
Hl~Ellllill
06 ll3~llllllllS
II llLllllPJl
lillll~l~llOW
ohegllllcrrlll~lX
Iral~lril,
Ccl~lIlIH
I10

DE LAS NAC~ONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioner
Unidos
estdn
en todar
porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
II su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

UNIES

en vente
danr
les libroiries
et ler agencer
auprirr
de votre libroirie
ou odrerser-vous
b;

II:I&~IIIIII
OI~P;IIIII:IS.I<N~
O~%C?~~IICIIIIIJS
II~I{III"I
IIWIITI’TIl1IS
110 III'CS ~NfiOll~X
NIlpa.
bIlO,~SlTC
Yi1PZL:lllllC
11.~11 llll"lllTC
110 l,J~WL'J':
OprallnsnI~llrl
U~OJ,RXiC Imqcwnil, IhO-llOpI<
Llll
BCCllCllt4.

coM0

throughout
New York

en venta
o dirijose

0.50 (or equivalent

UN~DAS
en librerios
o: N&ones

in other

y caso~ distribuidoros
Unidar,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

82055~July

197%2,050
