UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

w LlBR&Ry
WJ 1 I 1992

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
i

24881”

MEETING:

NEW

26 OCTOBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2488)
of the agenda

The situation

....................................

...............................................

in Namibia:

(4

Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);

(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(cl

Further report of the Secretary-General
concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
................................................
Namibia (S/15943)

WPV.2488

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
. with tigur&.‘Mention
of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
*x.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly SupplemmtS df the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
in which it appears or in which information about
1.’??..-%i I document indic&k%&upplement
’ ’ it is- given.
,.

‘,

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2488th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH (Jordan)

1983, at 11 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meetirig, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malia, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
membersof .the delegation took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2488)
1. Adoption

26 October

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) conceming the question of Namibia (S/15943)

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Mueshihangetook a
place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st to 2486th
meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the
Federal Republic of Germany, India, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was caIIed to order at I2 noon.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. Sahnoun(Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr.
LegwaiIa (Botswana). Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. PeIIetier
(Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Kulawiec (Czechoslovakia), Mr. WoIde (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. van Well (FederalRepubIic of Germany), Mr.
Krishnan (India), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. AbuIhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya). Mr. Marln
Bosch (Mexico), Mr. DOSSantos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone),Mr. von Schimding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka(Sri Lunka), Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. SIim (Tunisia), Mr. Rupia
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (venezuela), Mr. GoIob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kunda (Zambia)
took the pIaces reservedfor them at the sideof the Council
chamber.

The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
(6) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to tbe President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (5115943)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.

5. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Hungary,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Peru and the Sudan in which

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aidara (Senegal)
took a pkxe at the Council table.

1

they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

ment and sincerity of States with regard to their own decisions. It is a source of particular concern that Members that
have a special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security go back on their commitments.
13. There is a climate of tension in southern Africa created
by the convergence of intervention, destabilization and
interference, which are now also taking place in other
regions of the third world.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Somogyi (Hungary), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic RepubIic of Iran), Mr.
Arias Stella (Penr) and Mr. AbaWIa (S&n) took the pIaces
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

14. The South African regime has occupied, in addition to
Namibia, part of the territories of other independent countries in the region. It has invoked alleged security reasons
for its actions, contending that security can be achieved
through violating the integrity and sovereignty of those
States with which it has ideological differences and which
refuse to co-operate in the maintenance of apartheid.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
first speaker is the representative of Mexico. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

15. Pretoria encourages and supports dissident elements
in neighbouring countries and uses them to carry out destabilizing actions of sabotage and terrorism, with the intention of negotiating with the Governments concerned the
suppression of movements that run counter to the South
African racist policy.

7. Mr. MARfN BOSCH (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): We thank the members of the Council for giving
us this opportunity to participate once again in its consideration of the item on the situation in Namibia.
8. The permanency of the illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by the racist regime of Pretoria is one of
the issues of greatest concern to the countries of the third
world, which are the very countries that feel most keenly
the ominous consequences of the tension in southern
Africa.

16. The international community must condemn and
reject new forms of interference and intervention in order to
prevent them from proliferating and spreading to other
regions of the third world. South Africa and its allies have
imposed conditions throughout the negotiations that have
been accepted by the South West Africa People’s Organiration (SWAPO) and the front-line States. However, flexibility has been interpreted as weakness, and a readiness to
negotiate as a basis for additional demands.

9. There has been considerable progress towards Namibian independence, both in developing and agreeing on
modalities for its attainment and in identifying the artiticial obstacles that have been placed in its way. In the
further report on this matter submitted by the SecretaryGeneral [S/15943], he stated that we have never before
been so close to finality on the modalities of implementing
resolution 435 (1978). None the less, he also asserted that
South Africa’s demand that the withdrawal
of Cuban
troops from Angola must be a precondition of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) has made it impossible
to launch the United Nations plan for the exercise of selfdetermination by the Namibian people.

17. The independence of Namibia is a matter of priority
for the vast majority of Member States of the United
Nations. Negotiations to achieve it have been long, difficult and painstaking and have required a prudent and
flexible policy on the part of the people of Namibia, guided
by SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative. That
process now seems on the verge of conclusion. It is therefore essential that we reject the imposition of new conditions, conditions that are totally extraneous to resolution
435 (1978).

10. The contradiction between the completion of negotiations in accordance with a Security Council resolution
and the creation of new prerequisites for its implementation must be declared intolerable by the Members of the
Organization, otherwise decisions of a binding nature will
be doomed in advance to failure and doubts will be cast on
the effectiveness of the Council in fulfilling its obligations,
even in cases where positions are in accord.

18. The Council must be very clear in respect of South
Africa. It must unfailingly emphasize that it cannot accept
a linkage of the independence of Namibia and the presence
of Cuban troops in Angola, whose purposes and objectives
are matters pertaining to the internal sovereignty of the
countries concerned. Furthermore,
Pretoria must understand that the independence of Namibia has to be obtained
in the short term and that if it continues its obstruction it
will be subject to mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Il. Resolutions unanimously adopted, which also have
the consent of the parties directly concerned and the
explicit support of the international community, cannot be
called into question or subordinated in an artificial way to
questions that are extraneous to their substance.

19. In conclusion,
accordingly.

12. If new demands are acceded to or attempts made to
change the very essence of the problem, countries are led to
question the work of the United Nations and the commit-

20. Mr. NATORF (Poland): Sir, I should like first of all
to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the
high office of President of the Council for the month of
2

we appeal to the Council

to act

October. We are firmly convinced that your able guidance,
coupled with your diplomatic ski!! and experience, will
contribute to the discharge of the responsible duties that
have been vested in the Council.

neighbouring countries constitute a grave danger for peace
in that region. The statement by the representative of
South Africa at the 2481st meeting constituted yet more
arrogant evidence that nothing has changed in its
approach. One can easily identify the source of that arrogance, for it stems directly from the unlimited support the
South African regime receives from certain quarters,
which it can always count on, even if that is not so clearly
demonstrated in this chamber.

21. At the same time, let me also express our appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair of
Guyana, for his wisdom and for the most efficient and
exemplary manner in which he conducted the Council’s
business in the month of September.

28. We read with great interest the report of the
Secretary-Genera!
concerning the implementation
of
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 532 (1983). We took
note of its conclusion that “the position of South Africa
regarding the issue of the withdrawal
of Cuban troops
from Angola as a precondition for the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) still makes it impossible to launch the
United Nations plan.” [Z&id, para. 25.1

22. The present debate confirms
once again that,
although 16 years have elapsed since South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia was terminated, we are facing the same
serious problems today and the Pretoria regime still continues its illegal occupation of the Territory, violates
United Nations decisions and systematically opposes a!!
proposals for a peaceful settlement, thus taxing the
patience of the whole of Africa, of the world community
and of the United Nations.

29. We flatly reject the policy of the so-called linkage. It
is not and cannot be accepted. We share the views
expressed by the representative of Ethiopia on behalf of
the OAU, by the representative of Angola and by other
speakers from the front-line and other States.

23. Five years after the adoption by the Council of resolution 435 (1978), Namibia continues to remain under a
colonial yoke, the United Nations plan remains unimplemented, and peace, freedom and independence for that
Territory are still goals of the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the non-aligned States and
a!! progressive opinion in the world.

30. This is a crucial issue for the future implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Thus the Council cannot but take
a clear-cut stand on it and confirm once again its unequivocal position.

24. We have listened to many speakers in this debate.
The overwhelming majority of them have unequivocally
pointed out that the delaying tactics of the uparrheid
regime and its Western supporters have only one purpose,
that of creating conditions for the continued control of the
Territory by South Africa. The so-called contact group has
in fact only gained time for Pretoria to strengthen its hold
over Namibia. It has permitted the further exploitation of
the resources of the Territory, as the apartheid rulers and
their protectors have not abandoned their ambitions of
keeping Namibia, either as a colony or as a neocolony.

31. We fully support the opinion that Council resolution
435 (1978), without any modification or qualification, is
the only acceptable basis for a peaceful solution of the
question of Namibia and that the independence of that
Territory can be resolved only through a cessation of the
illegal occupation. There should be no illusion that a negotiated settlement of the question of Namibia outside the
consensus contained in resolution 435 (1978) and outside
the framework of the United Nations is possible.
32. We share the opinion of many speakers that, in the
event of South Africa’s continued defiance of United
Nations decisions, the Council should consider the imposition of appropriate measures as envisaged under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Only decisive
sanctions will produce the necessary results provided that
they are universally and effectively implemented.

25. Therefore it is the urgent duty of the Council to
adopt effective measures. The United Nations must-and
I
hope it will-act.
That is the purpose of these meetingsto examine the most important and urgent steps to ensure
independence for Namibia so that the people of the Territory can exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination and freedom. The Council should clearly
reiterate its responsibility. We should not disappoint world
opinion and dash the hopes and expectations of the Namibian people.

33. If the sanctions are not effective and if the United
States and some other countries of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) continue to supply weapons
and war equipment to the apartheid r&me, there will be
no other way for the people of Namibia and SWAPO,
their sole and authentic representative, but to continue to
develop the liberation struggle by a!! means, including
armed struggle, as a legitimate way to achieve freedom and
national independence. In doing so, they will have the
support of a!! of Africa and of a!! progressive forces in the
world.

26. The responsibility of the Council is to make every
effort towards the achievement of this goal in the shortest
possible time. The Council must translate its will to implement fully its own resolutions and to set a time-limit for
their implementation.
27. The Government and the people of Poland follow
with deep concern the situation in and around Namibia.
We consider that South Africa’s military buildup and the
brutal acts of armed aggression against Angola and other

34. There is still a chance for a negotiated peaceful solution. It is not too late to achieve this goal through the
implementation of United Nations resolutions. Poland will
3

support the decision of the Council aimed at achieving this
objective.
35. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerpref&on from Russian): The Council is
meeting once again, at the request of the Group of African
States and the non-aligned countries, to consider the question of Namibia. We welcome the participation in the
work of the Council of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ethiopia, Mr. Goshu Wolde, who, on behalf of the Chairman of the OAU, has most clearly and convincingly stated
the point of view of the African countries regarding the
most recent course of events in Namibia.
36. The Soviet delegation also welcomes the delegation of
SWAP0 and its participation in the work of the Council.
SW’APO has headed the struggle of patriotic forces for the
liberation of Namibia from domination by the South African racists. The statement made by the Secretary for Foreign Relations of that organization, Peter Mueshihange,
attests to the firm decision of the Namibian people to wage
this struggle until they have completely freed their homeland from colonial and racist oppression by South Africa.
37. We have also listened most attentively to the statement made by the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, the representative of Zambia, Mr. Paul Eusaka, under whose leadership the Council for Namibia is
making an important contribution to the cause of defending the interests of the Namibian people.
38. The state of affairs regarding the implementation of
Council decisions on the granting of independence to Namibia is a cause of legitimate concern to the African countries and the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations; I would say that it is a cause of concern to the
entire world community.
Despite numerous Security
Council decisions and General Assembly resolutions, the
Pretoria regime stubbornly persists in its refusal to cease its
occupation of Namibia and to give its people their freedom. Moreover, year after year, the racists of South Africa
continue to aggravate the situation throughout southern
Africa, to extend military actions from the Territory of
Namibia to Angola and wage an undeclared and continuing war against Angola, and to perpetrate constant acts of
armed aggression against other African countries.
39. The recent piratical raid by South Africans against
Mozambique is yet one more link in a long chain of crimes
committed by the racist r&me against independent Africa.
Speaking here on 21 October [2482ndmeeting,para. iWj,the’
representative of Mozambique stated that it was not only
the right but also the duty of his Government to take all
necessary measures to preserve Mozambique’s
national
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty. He
expressed the view that the members of the Council should
take note of that statement. I assure the representative of
Mozambique that his statement did not pass unnoticed.
40. The racists are making a serious mistake if they are
banking on the fact that history and the peoples of Africa
will forgive them for this blanket use of arbitrary will
towards their neighbours. It is now perfectly dear to every-

t 4

one that the Pretoria regime is not merely an outpost of
colonialism and racism in southern Africa but also the
source of an ever-greater danger to international peace and
security.
41. Seventeen years have already passed since the
moment when the General Assembly demanded that
South Africa unconditionally-I
stress “unconditionaIiy”free Namibia. During these long years-long,
above all,
for the long-suffering people of Namibia-South
Africa,
relying on support from the United States and several
other NATO countries, but mainly from the United States,
has done all in its power to block the process of decolonization for Namibia. One has to be incredibly naive to
believe seriously the claim that Pretoria alone is able to
resist the will of the entire world community and to act in
such a provocative and aggressive manner towards other
African countries from a position of strength, an attitude
we observed here last week in the Council during the statement of the South African representative. The representative of South Africa was very frank in dotting all his i’s. He
reaffirmed his position in favour of that notorious linkage,
challenged the Council, and rejected in advance any possible decisions that would set a timetable for the implementation of a solution to the Namibian conflict.
42. Behind the arrogance of the racist regime is the powerful support of its friends and allies-who
are as much the
enemies of national liberation movements in Africa and
throughout the world as are the South African racists.
43. During the process of sabotaging a settlement of the
question of Namibia, which has gone on for many years
now, the opponents of Namibian independence have a
definite distribution of roles: Pretoria refuses to implement
United Nations decisions and is waging an undeclared war
against its neighbours, while the United States and several
other Western Powers do not allow the adoption against
South Africa of effective sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, and try to gain time by
asserting that they will be able to persuade the Pretoria
regime to grant independence to Namibia through peaceful means.
44. For all these 17 years, the African countries and the
entire world have heard optimistic and endless variations
by the United States and other Western Powers on the
theme that the goal is already in sight, that the Africans
need to be more patient, make yet a few more concessions
to Pretoria, remove a few more obstacles in the path of a
settlement of the problem of Namibia with South Africa.
Only the day before yesterday the Council once again
heard the honeyed assurances that the United States is
rendering assistance to the parties in implementing resolution 435 (1978) and eliminating obstacles to its implementation; we also heard appeals to show good will and
redouble efforts, and so forth. Are we ‘really going to be
listening to those statements for another 17 years? It is
clear that all the promises and forced optimism are
nothing but a smoke-screen, just an attempt to deceive,
with the aim of delaying for entire decades the granting of
independence to Namibia.

45. Moreover, the Western Powers do not want to hear
anything about the application of any sanctions whatever
against South Africa-although
in recent times sanctions
have become a popular measure in United States foreign
policy. The present United States Administration
is ready
to threaten anyone with sanctions, even certain members
of the Council, if they do not vote as Washington wishes.
The proper term for that is blackmail. But any compulsory
measures to be applied against Pretoria only have to be
mentioned to be immediately subjected to a taboo.

Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi
in March 1983 [see WI5675 and Con-. I and2, annex, sect. 4,
and also in decisions of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU and in the statement of the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegations of the Non-Aligned Countries to the thirty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, which took place here at
United Nations Headquarters at the beginning of this
month [see 916035, annex].
51. Now this position of the world community must be
clearly and unambiguously reflected in a decision of the
Security Council, which this time also is obliged to make
its authoritative voice heard so as to arrive at a speedy and
unconditional decolonization of Namibia.

46. In refusing to grant independence to Namibia and
stepping up military pressure on independent States of
southern Africa, Pretoria and Washington are trying to
hide their anti-African policy with fabrications to the effect
that the conflict around Namibia represents a confrontation between the East and the West. This is a propaganda
screen and nothing more, intended to create an excuse for
interference by the United States in the affairs of that
region and ensure its strategic interests there, to the detriment of the national interests of the African countries. In
fact the problem of Namibia represents a conflict between
South Africa and the United States and the Western Powers of NATO which support them, on the one hand, and
the people of Namibia and of independent African countries, on the other. It is a conflict between the national
liberation movement of southern Africa and the united
forces of imperialism and racism.

52. Our delegation believes that the proposal of the African countries, too, is correct regarding the establishment in
a decision by the Council of a strict time-frame for starting
implementation of a settlement of the Namibian question.
53. These provisions will be a useful addition to the wellknown position of the United Nations regarding a settlement in Namibia which is determined by decisions taken on
Namibia as a whole. It is precisely in these decisions of the
United Nations, above all in Council resolutions 385 (1976)
an! 435 (1978), that we have the political basis for a just
settlement of the Namibian problem.

47. If during the first stages of this dubious game with
Namibia the Western Powers, hiding behind the role of
intermediaries, still referred to the uncompromising nature
of South Africa, in recent times Washington has ripped off
that mask and is right now itself trying to achieve a link
between the settlement of the Namibian question and the
unrelated question of the withdrawal
of Cuban troops
from Angola, which are there at the request of the AngoIan Government under an agreement between Angola and
Cuba.

54. The adoption by the Council in May of this year of
resolution 532 (1983) was yet another step in the right
direction, and this resolution, and in particular the mandate given in it to the Secretary-General, created specific
machinery to move forward a settlement of the Namibian
question.
55. The present consideration by the Council of the question of Namibia is called on to strengthen and continue
this positive process. It is necessary in the future, as well, to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in settling the
Namibian question by providing for effective control by
the Council over implementation of all aspects of granting
Namibia genuine independence, including, of course, the
questions of the training, composition, leadership, deployment and activities of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG)
in Namibia.

48. This illegal demand of Washington and Pretoria has
obvious objectives in mind, namely, to block the settlement
of the Namibiap question, to weaken Angola through military threats made by the South African aggressors and to
limit the sovereign rights of Angola, including its inalienable right to self-defence, a right guaranteed to it under
Article 51 of the Charter.
49. The representatives of African countries who have
spoken in the Council have rightly revealed the true
motives and the underlying reasons of this policy of the
,United States, which has made Namibia hostage to its
imperialist ambitions on the African continent. They condemned and rejected any and all attempts by South Africa
and the United States to link, in direct form or within the
context of so-called parallelism, the independence of Namibia with any other unrelated questions whatever and,
inter alia, with the question of the presence of Cuban internationalists in Angola.

56. In speaking of all these matters, we cannot, however,
rid ourselves of the impression that, as far as a settlement
of the Namibian problem is concerned, the Council is
beginning to go round in a circle or, more precisely, it has
been led into that position by some of the Western Powers.
To enable the Council to escape from this circle, South
.Africa must be forced to take into account the will of the
Council through the adoption of compulsory measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter, and for these purposes
it is necessary to overcome the resistance of those Western
Powers permanent members of the Council which are
blocking this and defending the racist regime from any
kind of effective international sanctions. It is not easy to
do this, but it must be done in the interest of liberating
Namibia and of preserving international peace.

50. This position is supported by the overwhelming
majority of the States of the world. It has been reflected in
decisions of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
5

57. The Soviet Union supports the demands of the African countries regarding the adoption by the Council of
comprehensive sanctions against South Africa, in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, to force the regime
of Pretoria to cease its illegal occupation of Namibia and
to halt acts of aggression by the racists against African
States.
58. Our country favours the speedy realization by the
Namibian
people of its inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, on the basis of the preservation of the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia,
including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, and the
immediate and complete withdrawal from Namibia of the
troops and administration of South Africa.
59. The Soviet Union has rendered and will continue to
render support in the just struggle of the people of Namibia under the leadership of its sole and authentic representative, SWAPO.
60. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): In May of this
year, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 532
(1983) on the question of Namibia, which, among other
things, authorized the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-fireSouth Africa and SWAPO-with
a view to securing the
speedy implementation of the United Nations independence plan for Namibia approved by resolution 435 (1978).
The Secretary-General’s report is now before the Council
[S/15943]. Once again it falls to us, members of the Council, to assess the situation as outlined in the report and,
conscious of our special and unique responsibility for Namibia and the aspirations for peace, justice and independence harboured by its people, to decide on the action to
be taken in the light of the Secretary-General’s
findings.
61. The Namibian problem has been before the United
Nations virtually since the inception of the Organization.
In fact, Namibia has been an acknowledged international
responsibility for more than 60 years, first as a mandated
Territory of the League of Nations, then as a Territory
under the lawful administration of the United Nations. In
1966, the General Assembly revoked South Africa’s Mandate and placed Namibia under the direct responsibility of
the United Nations [resolution 214.5 @Xl)], an action that
was consequently confirmed and endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 245 (1968) and by the International Court of Justice.’ Yet South Africa simply ignored
the verdict of these three United Nations bodies and continued its iilegal occupation of the Territory in defiance of
the international community and world opinion.
62. It is a source of deep regret and anger to my Government that, while the Namibian people continue their interminable wait for independence, negotiations that should
lead to an internationally acceptable solution in accordance with resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) seem to be
endlessly protracted. Now, as in May, my Government
feels justified in questioning South Africa’s readiness to
co-operate in good faith with the United Nations in enabling the people of Namibia freely to determine their own
future and granting them their long overdue independence.

What is needed now is a firm expression by South Africa
of its willingness to carry out the Councii’s resolutions,
without any further pre-conditions, as concrete proof of its
good intentions.
63. Only such an assurance, followed by practical steps
towards a solution, could remove the widespread suspicion
that South Africa is merely playing for time.
64. We owe the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for Namibia, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, a heartfelt
tribute for the highly skilful way in which they try to carry
out the difficult mandate conferred on them. The
Secretary-General’s
latest report bears eloquent testimony
to his constant and intense personal involvement in the
quest for a settlement and to the prominent place the question of Namibia rightly occupies in his order of priorities.
Feeling that he should leave no stone unturned where the
right of Namibia’s people to independence is concerned,
the Secretary-General this summer decided, after careful
consideration, to pay a short working visit to South Africa
to discuss the two remaining issues: the choice of an electoral system and a few points pertaining to UNTAG. AS
his consultations
with the South African Government
resulted in agreement on these two outstanding issues, the
Secretary-General rightly concluded in his report that “we
have never before been so close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978).” [S/15943,
para. 24.1
65. As we all know, the latest delay in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) was not caused by any fundamental disagreement on the details of the settlement plan.
In the summer of 1982, as the consultations between the
parties were nearing their completion, South Africa raised
a new obstacle by making its final approval conditional on
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. The Organization thus faces a grave dilemma. As the SecretaryGeneral pointed out to the South African side, the
so-called linkage issue falls outside the scope of resolution
435 (1978). We fully share this view. It is clearly unacceptable that the early exercise by the Namibian people of their
internationally recognized and inalienable right to seifdetermination
and independence should be impeded
because of the situation in a neighbouring country. This
would be incompatible with the legal responsibility of the
United Nations towards Namibia and with the general
recognition that the independence of Namibia is the essential and primary issue, which must necessarily take precedence over other considerations. Yet, on the other hand,
none of us would wish to jeopardize the substantial progress which has so far been achieved, thanks to the tenacious work of the many parties involved, by allowing the
process to be side-tracked, or even derailed, because of
extraneous aspects.
66. My Government feels that once an independent Namibia has taken its rightful place among the free nations of
Africa and the threat of South African aggression against
Angola has disappeared, the withdrawal of foreign troops
from that State would increase regional security. Indeed,
there seems some merit in the view that the parties concerned might wish to attain a common understanding on

this and other issues relevant to the stability of the region as
a whole in the situation prevailing after Namibia’s attainment of independence. I repeat, however, that these issues
should not deflect us from our primary responsibility-that
is, to enable the people of Namibia to exercise their right to
self-determination without further delay.
67. The Secretary-General pointed out in his report that
we cannot claim real progress until an actual date is fixed for
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and the ceasefire comes into force. And, sounding a grave warning, he
added that “further disastrous consequences will result if we
do not reach this stage quickly.*’ [Ibid, para. 28.1
68. My Government fully subscribes to the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment of the calamitous situation that will
engulf the entire area if the present stalemate is allowed to
persist. In our view there can be no doubt that South
Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia is part of
a situation which seriously threatens international peace
and security. How seriously this threat must be taken is
vividly illustrated by South Africa’s constant military
incursions into Angola and the attempts at destabilization
and intimidation that have come to characterize South
Africa’s relations with its neighbours. We strongly condemn these acts of aggression, which are obviously meant
to punish these countries for their steadfast opposition to
South African apartheid policies and their insistence that
South Africa comply with the Council resolutions on Namibia.
69. It is imperative, therefore, that South Africa be called
upon to desist from attacking its neighbours and to agree
to a cease-tire as a first, urgent step to improve the security
of all nations in the region. This might in its turn contribute to the creation of an atmosphere conducive to a breakthrough in the present impasse. Modest as such a step may
seem against the background of the long and frustrating
delays that occurred in past years, it nevertheless might be
helpful in getting things moving again in the right direction. Failing this, the Council is duty-bound to consider
appropriate means of applying further pressure to South
Africa to comply with the Council’s previous resolutions.
70. Clearly, the prestige of the United Nations is at stake.
In view of the United Nations’ special responsibility for
Namibia and its long history of involvement in efforts to
enable its people freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination, a smooth transfer of power in Windhoek
under the aegis of the United Nations would be an important boost for the Organization and a victory for intemational co-operation. If the lost impetus is restored and
meaningful negotiations are resumed by building on the
solid foundations
already laid, this will undoubtedly
enhance the credibility of the United Nations and redound
to its effectiveness in dealing with other areas. Perhaps it is
not yet too late, but if we wish to avoid being overtaken by
events that could undo what progress has been made over
the past years we should join hands now in concerted,
decisive action. Only this will convince the Namibian
people and the world community that the Council is
united in its commitment to the establishment of an independent Namibia at the earliest possible date and in its

determination to overcome the remaining obstacles standing in the way of the attainment of this goal.
71. The PRESIDENT
(interpreturion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
72. Mr. PELLETIER (Canada): Mr. President, I am most
grateful to you and to the Council for again giving my
country an opportunity to participate in this debate. The
situation in Namibia is of concern to us all, not least to
those of us in the front-line States and the contact group
that have worked to change it. The situation affects the
people of Namibia, who have an unquestioned right to
freedom and self-determination. It affects the countries of
Africa, which have worked hard for Namibia’s independence. Further delay is in no one’s interest. I am confident,
Mr. President, that, with your experience and understanding, you will lead the Council towards a positive result that
hastens the day when Namibia will be free.
73. The members of the contact group have consistently
supported applications from persons competent for the
purpose who have requested the opportunity to speak at
Council meetings concerning the situation in Namibia, in
order to supply the Council with information on this question in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Contact group members have done so without
passing any judgement on the opinions expressed by those
persons. They consider it important that the Council,
which by its previous decisions has engaged itself to seek
the holding of free and fair elections in Namibia, should
provide, on an impartial basis, opportunities to those who
may be parties to those elections to present their views. In
this context, the members of the contact group are transmitting messages from two internal parties.
74. Canada helped to initiate and to frame the United
Nations settlement plan for Namibia in 1978. My Government deeply regrets that the Council is still seized of this
issue five years later. The people of Namibia are still
unable to exercise their right to self-determination.
We
understand and share the concerns of the international
community which have prompted the call for the Council
to meet.
75. The road to the peaceful independence of Namibia has
not been straight or smooth. We have found many potholes and some major road-blocks. Occasionally the road
has seemed to wind backwards. Sometimes we have feared
that the road might end short of Namibia’s independence,
but we have made progress. It is in this context that I should
like to join other speakers in complimenting the SecretaryGeneral on his recent efforts to restore momentum towards
the implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978).
76. By its resolution 532 (1983), the Council mandated
the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the
parties to the proposed cease-fire, with a view to securing
the speedy implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978). His subsequent efforts, as outlined in his report
[S/1594.?], reflect more than just one visit to southern

Africa. They reflect a continuing commitment on the part
of the Secretary-General and his staff to this just cause.

troons or to keen them on itssoil once Angola is no longer
threatened. The~fu-st step toward a settlement must surely
be the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of South
African forces from Angola. Their presence there cannot
be justified in terms of international law and practice.

77. In his report, the Secretary-General has outlined his
discussions both before and during his visit to southern
Africa. These discussions demonstrated the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to carry out faithfully and conscientiously the mandate entrusted to him by the.Council
last May.

83. The Secretary-General has noted that South Africa
continues to make the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola a condition for its withdrawal from Namibia.
South Africa cannot, however, legitimize its illegal occupation of Namibia by raising other issues. As the Canadian
Deputy Prime Minister and Secretary of State for External
Affairs stated in his speech to the Genera1 Assembly at its
thirtyeighth
session, Namibia should have its independence regardless of what happens or does not happen in
Angola.2

78. We welcome the assurances from the Government of
South Africa that the choice of electoral system, whether
proportional representation or the constituency system,
would be made and would be communicated at an early
stage in the implementation process. That is essential to
the success of the United Nations plan. We are glad that
agreement has been reached on the proposed composition
of UNTAG and that the remaining questions regarding its
status have been settled. We believe, in addition, that the
Secretary-General’s assurances that all parties would be
treated equally in the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) have effectively resolved this matter. We also note
the positive statement that the President of SWAP0 made
to the Secretary-General. We welcome the co-operation of
all parties involved in these discussions and these important steps forward.

84. Canada admires the patience of those leaders in the
region who have worked so hard for so long for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We take their patience
and their dogged persistence as our own example. We shall
not cease our efforts. The implementation of resolution
435 (1978) during 1984 must be our objective and that of
the Council.
85. We have come a long way since 1978. Unfortunately,
we still have some distance to go. I hope that the Council’s
deliberations will lead to practical steps to strengthen confidence in the region and hasten Namibia’s independence.
Its independence is no dream; it is inevitable reality. Our
goal must be to ensure that this independence comes soon
and peacefully.

79. Now that the outstanding issues under resolution 435
(1978) have been resolved, the question is: Where do we go
from here? My Government hopes that the SecretaryGeneral will have the opportunity to build constructively
on his recent success. We believe that he should be free to
use all the means at his disposal to pursue early independence for Namibia and thereby to foster peace and stability in southern Africa. To this end, we would strongly urge
that unrealistic deadlines be avoided while seeking implementation of resolution 435 (1978) in 1984.

86. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

80. The question of peace and stability in the region is
important. My Government fully shares the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report. The instability and conflict arising from South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia have had disastrous consequences for
Namibia and its neighbours. Measures to build confidence
and to reduce conflict in the region are urgently needed.
We would support initiatives to that end for, as the
Secretary-General has said, “it is in the interest of absolutely no one to have this situation continue.*’ [Sd.., para.
27.1

87. Mr. MU&%? (Argentina) (interpretatioit from Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, my delegation wishes to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October, since you represent
a country with which Argentina has very cordial relations.
We are convinced that the Council will be able to accomplish fruitful work on the question of Namibia under your
leadership, thanks to your acknowledged experience and
reputation. We should like to express our delegation’s
readiness to co-operate with you in every way.
88. The Council is once again considering the question of
Namibia, the rapid, just and final solution of which,
through the authentic exercise of the right to selfdetermination and independence of the Namibian people,
is called for by the overwhelming majority of the intemational community.
c

.

81. It is imnorlant that the Government of South Africa
recognize thh basic fact. Just days before this debate,
South African troops again violated the sovereignty of
Mozambique. We condemn that attack in Maputo. We
also condemn acts of violence or terrorism wherever they
may occur.

89. A short time ago, the Council adopted resolution 532
(1983), which called upon South Africa to make a firm
commitment as to its readiness to comply with Council
resolution 435 (1978); the resolution further called upon
the Pretoria Government to co-operate forthwith and fully
with the Secretary-General in order to expedite the imple-

82. South Africa cannot seek, through its use of force,
unilaterally to reshape the region. Boundaries and sovereignties must remain inviolate. That is the only basis for
peace in the region. The President of Angola has reaffirmed that his country has no desire to rely on foreign
8

mentation of resolution 435 (1978) for the early independence of Namibia.

Argentina pledges its support for all the efforts of the
Organimtion
to ensure that the Namibian people may
promptly enjoy their well-deserved freedom and justice.

90. These provisions of resolution 532 (1983) reflect a
virtually universal consensus that this manifestation of
anachronistic and unjust colonialism in southern Africa
must disappear once and for all. International justice,
peace and security must be established in that part of the
world and, in particular, in Namibia.

97. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is Mr. Johnstone F. Makatini, representative
of the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC), .
to whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

91. Argentina, associating itself with the opinion of the
large majority of Members of the Organization. has
pointed out that the independence of Namibia, with full
enjoyment of territorial integrity and an authentically representative Government, will be the fundamental contribution to that much-desired peace and development in
southern Africa.

98. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, I wish to thank you
most sincerely for giving us the opportunity to participate
in this Council meeting. Our thanks also go to all the
members of this body for making this possible. Like many
representatives who have preceded us, we are pleased to
see you preside over the Council when it examines once
again the problem to which the African people and justice-.
loving people as a whole attach so much importance. Your
country’s commitment to the international fight for freedom, justice and peace in the Middle East and southern
Africa is well known, as is your own personal devotion to
these just causes. This double qualification and your rich
diplomatic experience inspire us with confidence that,
under your able guidance, the deliberations of the Council
will be crowned with success.

92. The Secretary-General, who has made very valuable
efforts towards the implementation of Council resolutions
435 (1978), 439 (1978) and 532 (1983), clearly pointed out
in his report that “we have never before been so close to
finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435
(1978).” [Bid., para. 24.1
93. Argentina, in view of the situation I have just described, wishes to reaffirm its traditional position and to
point out that the establishment of Namibia as a sovereign
and completely independent State will only be possible on
the following bases: first, Council resolutions 385 (1976),
435 (1978) and 439 (1978), which form the legitimate
framework for a peaceful transition to the independence of
Namibia; secondly, full respect for the territorial integrity
of Namibia, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands,
in accordance with Security Council resolution 432 (1978)
and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
thirdly, the rejection of any link or condition imposed by
South Africa and not contained in resolution 435 (1978);
fourthly, support for the action of the front-line States and
SWAPO; and fifthly, cessation by South Africa of its policies of intimidation, aggression and illegal military occupation carried out against the neighbouring
States, in
particular, against Angola, Mozambique and Lesotho.

99. May I also, in the name of the National Executive
Committee of ANC, pay tribute to my friend, brother and
comrade, Mr. Noel Sinclair, for what everybody agrees
was the outstanding leadership he provided to the Council
during the difficult month of September. The role played
by Guyana and a host of other countries that provide
international front-line support in the light against the
inhuman system of apartheid is a source of tremendous
inspiration and encouragement to our people.
100. Having failed to secure the intended annexation and
incorporation
of Namibia as a fifth province of South
Africa and contesting the legal authority of the United
Nations on this question, the Pretoria regime defiantly
imposed its illegal occupation of this African territory
some decades ago. This was followed by countless resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the International Court of Justice and
other international institutions, condemning racist South
Africa’s illegal occupation and calling for its termination.
The international community also went further and recognized SWAP0 as the sole and authentic representative of
the Namibian people.

94. As was pointed out by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Worship of my country in a statement before
the General Assembly on 26 September 1983, Argentina
fully agrees with the Secretary-General that no real progress can be made until a precise date is set for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and a cease-fire enters
into force.3
95. Therefore, my delegation is convinced that the Council should assume its primary responsibility concerning the
prompt implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and, if
necessary, apply all relevant measures, including those contained in Chapter VII of the Charter, so that the genuine
I and complete independence of Namibia may be attained as
soon as possible.

101. The Pretoria regime’s response to this consensus
was continued defiance, thereby forcing SWAP0 to resort
to armed struggle. In 1977, at a time when the development of the armed liberation struggle waged by the heroic
people of Namibia, under their sole and authentic representative, SWAPO, had reached a high point, the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany came forward and offered their
services as a contact group which would use its collective
diplomatic and economic leverage to coerce racist South
Africa to co-operate towards a negotiated settlement of the

96. Colonialism and any other form of foreign domination affecting international justice and dignity must be
eliminated without further delay. It is for this reason that
9

Namibian problem. SWAPO, together with the front-line
States and Nigeria, were to become participants in this
exercise.
102. That SWAPO, the front-line States and Nigeria
were suspicious is common knowledge. For our part, we of
ANC fully shared this suspicion. The cause of this strong
suspicion was mainly the fact that all the members of the
proposed contact group were countries that had done
everything possible, short of direct military intervention in
support of the apartheid regime, to thwart the Namibian
people’s liberation struggle.
103. What had brought about this change of heart?
many asked. Was it the development of the struggle, led by
SWAPO, which was progressively making the Namibian
war of liberation unstoppable, as the ANC struggle intensitied in South Africa itself? What was the group’s hidden
agenda? others asked. Was it the derailment of this liberation struggle and the imposition of a neocolonialist solution in Namibia?
104. More questions came up. Was this initiative
intended to help the Pretoria regime buy the time it needed
to set up and consolidate a third-force group in preparation for a solution of its choosing-that
is, the exclusion of
SWAP0 and the imposition of a puppet neo-colonialist
regime in Namibia? Were these negotiations to be held
with the illegal occupier of Namibia simply intended to put
an end to the confrontational posture that had been taken
by the international community
against racist South
Africa and to help rehabilitate that regime-a regime that
stood universally condemned for its practice of the inhuman system of apartheid?

the United States and other contact group members considered the mineral resources with which Namibia and
South Africa itself were endowed to be of vital strategic
interest to the United States. Although we remain convinced that the motive for setting up the contact group in
1977 was the determination to obstruct the outright victory that had become imminent in Zimbabwe and inevitable in Namibia, it is true that there were some positive
elements. For example, we welcomed what we thought
was the beginning of some movement towards recognizing
the fact that the liberation struggle in southern Africa was
indigenous and not an extension of East-West rivalry.
109. But the change in Washington and the assumption
of leadership by the present Administration
have resulted
in the cancellation of the limited positive elements and the
multiplication of the negative elements. While professing
its commitment to the liberation of Namibia, the Reagan
Administration has shamelessly proclaimed friendship and
alliance with the racist oppressor, to which it has offered
nuclear, dollar and other types of carrots, and has pledged
to reward countries that befriend their racist ally and punish or topple those that give assistance to SWAP0 and
ANC.
110. This Pretoria-Washington
unholy alliance has
encouraged the apartheid regime’s intransigence, repression, terrorism, destabilization and aggression in Namibia
and South Africa and against the front-line States and
Lesotho.
111. The linkage issue introduced by the United States is
the most flagrant act of hostility against the liberation cause
of Africa and the international community. Unfolding
events have in fact shown that it is but the starting-point ofa
long chain of other socalled linkages intended to impede
the liberation of southern Africa and strengthen the political, economic and military position of the Pretoria regime
as the bastion, gendarme and strategic ally in the region of
the United States of the Reagan Administration. Part of this
strategy has taken the form of economic blackmail and the
use of armed bandits, who serve as the extension of the
regime’s racist army in carrying out acts of destabilization
and aggression against neighbouring States.

105. These questions have become pertinent in the face
of not only the failure of the contact group to deliver what
it promised but also the attitude, pronouncements and acts
of solidarity displayed by the United States, the leader of
the group, towards the apartheid regime.
106. We are convinced that the Pretoria regime is bent
on perpetuating its illegal occupation of Namibia or
imposing its own solution, in keeping with its determination to prevent the completion of the process through
which neighbouring countries became independent and
ceased to serve as buffer zones. Its policy of destabilization
and aggression against the front-line States and Lesotho is
in fact further proof of its intention to reverse this situation, which had resulted in the independence of Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Angola and extended the frontiers
of freedom to this last bastion of reaction on the African
continent.

112. As a result, we find that the posture adopted by the
apartheid regime with regard to the independent African
States of southern Africa is governed today by the promotion of what Pretoria describes as its policy of national
security. Indeed, this policy constitutes the centre-piece of
Pretoria’s strategy for the defence and entrenchment of the
apartheid system.
113. In accordance with this policy, the regime seeks to
destroy SWAP0 and ANC in Namibia and South Africa,
and it has examples to learn from as it continues its activities in the direction of a Beirut-type operation in southern

107. The propaganda campaign which accompanied the
emergence of the Western contact group and the big promises that diplomatic and economic leverage would be collectively exerted on the Pretoria regime in order to force its
hand tell the rest of the story.

114. The second component of this strategy is the transformation of the rest of the region into a so-called constellation of client States under its domination. Again the
central element of the strategy is the liquidation of

108. A campaign was unleashed not only criticizing the
countries that had always supported SWAP0 and other
liberation movements as interfering, but also claiming that
10

and not through persuasion. Continued delay by the
Council in taking this position and imposing sanctions will
not only erode the authority of the United Nations but
make it an accomplice in the crimes yet to be committed
by the apartheid regi,me. We therefore call for the immediate imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria regime and appeal to the other
members of the contact group to condemn the issue of
linkage and publicly to dissociate themselves from that
position.

SWAP0 and ANC even outside the borders of the respective countries, or at least our eviction from the region. In
pursuance of this strategy, the Pretoria regime is bent on a
campaign of terror, aggression and destabilization which
we are convinced will only stop when the Council takes
effective action or when the regime feels it has pacified the
whoIe region.
115. This position of the Washington Administration
is
taken, for example, by the United States Under-Secretary
of State for Political Affairs, Mr. Lawrence Eagleburger,,
who stated that the efforts to secure a negotiated settlement in Namibia must also address racist South Africa’s
so-called legitimate security concerns. This, we submit, is a
creeping move towards campaigning for the liquidation of
ANC in the region, as yet another linkage.

120. In conclusion I wish to pay a glowing tribute to the
valiant people of Namibia, whose patience, perseverance
and fortitude, combined with the yet unsung political
maturity acquired in the course of the bitter struggle they
have been waging for so long under the far-sighted leadership of their sole and authentic representative, SWAPO,
has enabled them to defeat the countless machinations and
manoeuvres designed to derail their heroic struggle and
pave the way for a new colonialist solution.

116. The statement of the United States representative
before the Council at the 2484th meeting, on 24 October, is
yet another example. And so is the statement of the Pretoria regime’s representative, at the 2481st meeting, to whom
the simple discovery of a pamphlet during its unprovoked
aggression in Maputo, a pamphlet that talks of ANC soldiers, justifies the regime’s aggression against the capital of
Mozambique.

121. Through Comrade Peter Mueshihange, through the
People’s Liberation Army of Namibia and the SWAP0
Central Committee, headed by the indomitable Comrade
Sam Nujoma, we salute our comrades-in-arms,
the people
of Namibia, for the important victories they continue to
win in both the political and the military fields.

117. Perhaps the most central part of the Reagan Administration’s policy and strategy of so-called constructive
engagement is helping to placate world public opinion and
giving credibility to racist South Africa in its pretence of
engaging in peaceful talks, thus helping that regime to buy
time and prepare for the imposition of a neo-colonialist
settlement in Namibia. Evidence on the ground also shows
that part of this strategy is not only the destabilization of
the front-line States but also the toppling of their legitimate Governments. We seize this opportunity to pay a
tribute to those countries for the sacrifice they are making
in resisting the combined pressure of the United States and
racist South Africa, designed to force them to enter into
secret agreements for the liquidation of ANC and the liberation struggle in South Africa.

122. We dip our banner in memory of those who have
fallen in battle or as victims of massacres and assassinations perpetrated by the Pretoria regime while we are being
told in the Council that our frustrations are shared by the
mighty ones.
123. We salute the SWAP0 leadership, and pledge to
reciprocate the support the Namibian people have always
given our struggle by intensifying ours in the belly of the
apartheid beast, thereby complementing yours and bringing closer our inevitable common victories.

118. It is clear that an honest examination of the situation can only lead to the following conclusions.

i%e meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

119. The negotiated settlement has never been, and is not
today, around the corner, as some have been saying for a
number of years now. There has been no substantial progress in that direction, and none can be made in the face of
the anti-African-liberation
position of the Pretoria regime
and its Washington allies. Implementation of the United
Nations plan can be achieved only through forcing racist
South Africa to withdraw unconditionally from Namibia

NOTES
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued
Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council
Resolution
276 (1970). Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports 1971. p. 16.
’ Official
Records of the General
Assembly.
Thirty-eighth
Session.
Plenary Meetings,
8th meeting, para. 42.
’ Ibid., 6th meeting, para. 77.

11

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LE.5 PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gett&ve.
KAK

I-lOJIYYklTb

ki3.UAHRII

OPl-AHW3AIJkIM

.OFbEAMHEHHbIX

HAUMn

M3nrurun
Oprana3aune G6aenwtteHnbtx HamtR t~oxctio ttyrttt~b B xHtixcHbtx
Mara3mrax
HaTeHT~BaX~o~ceXpaftOH~Mupa.H~onHTefnpaBKH
06sw11a~~anx BB~~~MKHII)KHOM
Mara3WHe
HJIW ntmme
no_ anpecy: OpraHw3awn
O6%ellHHeHHblX
Haunt& ceruwx
no
nportaxtett3nartufi, Hbwkiopr
imiXeHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

.
‘i

90-60205-April

1992-2.050
