S/2007/242

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 27 April 2007 from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 27 March 2007
(S/2007/241), and the attached note, concerning the processing of letters of credit
pertaining to the oil-for-food programme, has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
They welcomed the ongoing work of the United Nations Secretariat, in
particular the Secretariat’s efforts to meet with the relevant authorities of the
Government of Iraq in Amman on 6 March 2007, to discuss pending issues with a
view to finding a solution that would bring the oil-for-food programme to a close by
31 December 2007.
In this regard, they took note of and agreed with the proposal in paragraph 2 of
your note to extend certain letters of credit until the end of 2007, and further agreed
that the United Nations Secretariat should not support any extension that would
result in delivery beyond 31 December 2007. The Council members also noted that
the Government of Iraq and the United Nations Secretariat have agreed to cancel 55
letters of credit with a total value of approximately $226.9 million.
The members of the Council noted their concern and disappointment regarding
your observation that slow progress, or in some cases no progress, has been made in
the provision of authentication documents related to remaining contracts and the
associated letters of credit under the oil-for-food programme, and that there are
currently 184 letters of credit with an approximate value of $182 million which have
expired and for which there are claims of delivery from the suppliers. They
underlined that this situation could present a serious risk to the possibility of the
timely termination of the programme.
The Council members recalled, as set out in your note of 10 July 2006, that a
balance of funds of $187 million is to be held in the United Nations Iraq Account as
a reserve for any unanticipated claims, until the issues related to claims from
suppliers are resolved.
The members of the Security Council, referring to the letters from the
President of the Security Council to you dated 11 August 2006 and 29 January 2007,
reaffirmed the importance of promptly finding a final solution to the remaining
issues so that payments can be made to the concerned companies and so that the
programme can close as currently scheduled during the course of 2007.

07-32596 (E) 100507

*0732596*

S/2007/242

To that end, they have addressed another letter to the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the United Nations urging the Government of Iraq to do its
utmost, in liaison with the United Nations Secretariat, to expedite the processing of
the remaining letters, in particular to solve the chronic problem of slow provision or
non-provision of authentication documents and to address allegations regarding the
improper withholding of authentication documents, about which the Council
members expressed their ongoing concern, in order to achieve the timely
termination of the programme.
The members of the Council invited the Permanent Representative to send a
reply setting out the views and experiences of the Government of Iraq in this matter,
and providing specific answers regarding the aforementioned issues, in particular
the problems related to slow provision or non-provision of authentication
documents.
The members of the Security Council request the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts, to report to the Security Council within two months on the
progress made, and in that report to make specific recommendations regarding all
outstanding issues.
The Security Council members also take note of the Secretary-General’s letter
of 9 April 2007 regarding payments under letters of credit by BNP Paribas. The
Security Council members agreed that the concerns raised in the letter highlight the
need for all outstanding issues pertaining to the oil-for-food programme to be
resolved forthwith. They invite the Secretary-General to keep them regularly
informed of developments.
(Signed) Emyr Jones Parry
President of the Security Council

2

07-32596
