A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/130
28 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/596)]
54/130. African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/113 of 9 December 1998 and all other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,1
Bearing in mind the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention strategies for Africa, as well as
the importance of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary at the regional and subregional levels,
Noting that the financial situation of the African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders has greatly affected its capacity to deliver its services to African Member States in an effective
and comprehensive manner,
1. Commends the African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for
its efforts to promote and coordinate regional technical cooperation activities related to crime prevention and
criminal justice systems in Africa;
2. Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to support national
mechanisms for crime prevention and criminal justice in African countries;

1

A/54/340.
/...

A/RES/54/130
Page 2

3. Urges the States members of the Institute to make every possible effort to meet their obligations
to the Institute;
4. Calls upon all Member States and non-governmental organizations to adopt concrete practical
measures to support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity and implement its programmes
and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all relevant entities of the United
Nations system to provide the necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil
its mandate;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to deploy his efforts to mobilize the financial resources
necessary to provide the Institute with the core professional staff required to enable it to function effectively
in the fulfilment of its mandated obligations;
7. Calls upon the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme and the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme to work closely with the Institute;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional cooperation, coordination and
collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with
adequately by national action alone;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to make concrete proposals, including the provision of
additional core professional staff, in order to strengthen the programmes and activities of the Institute and
to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

/...
