S/PRST/2010/22*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6411th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 October 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Women and peace and
security”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
“The Security Council, meeting on the tenth Anniversary of the adoption of its
resolution 1325 (2000), reaffirms its commitment to the continuing and full
implementation, in a mutually reinforcing manner, of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612
(2005), 1674 (2006), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 1894
(2009) and all relevant Statements of its Presidents.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
Women and Peace and Security (S/2010/498), and the analysis it contains on
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
“The Security Council welcomes General Assembly resolution A/RES/64/289
establishing the UN Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN Women) that will be fully operational in January 2011. The Council invites UN
Women to regularly contribute to its work on women and peace and security and
notes the valuable role it will play in supporting women’s roles in peacebuilding and
the prevention of sexual violence in conflict, including through coordination and
coherence in policy and programming for women and girls. It welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Michele Bachelet as its head.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of all violations of
applicable international law committed against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, including rape, other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence and killing and maiming that contravene international law.
The Council urges the complete cessation by all parties of such acts with immediate
effect and also urges Member States to bring to justice those responsible for crimes
of this nature. Their efforts to combat impunity must be matched with assistance and
redress to victims. In this regard, it reiterates its support for the mandates of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict and encourages them to continue to ensure full
transparency, cooperation and coordination of their efforts.
“The Security Council notes that the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern committed against women and girls has been
* Reissued for technical reasons.

10-60352* (E) 101110

*1060352*

S/PRST/2010/22

strengthened through the work of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc and
mixed tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals and takes note
of the stocktaking of international criminal justice undertaken by the first Review
Conference of the Rome Statute held in Kampala, Uganda from 31 May to 11 June
2010. The Council intends to enhance its efforts to fight impunity and uphold
accountability for serious crimes against women and girls with appropriate means
and draws attention to the full range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms to be
considered, including national, international and mixed criminal courts and
tribunals, truth and reconciliation commissions as well as national reparation
programs for victims, institutional reforms and traditional dispute resolution
mechanisms.
“The Security Council recognizes the continued challenges and welcomes the
many efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000) detailed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, in particular positive examples of efforts to engage with women’s
civil society groups in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, and to protect women
and girls from sexual and gender-based violence.
“The Security Council notes with grave concern that women and girls are
disproportionately affected by conflict, and that women’s participation at all stages
of peace processes and in the implementation of peace accords remains too low,
despite the vital role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
rebuilding their societies. The Council recognizes the need to facilitate the full and
effective participation of women in these areas and stresses that the full and
effective participation of women is very important for sustainability of peace
processes.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of Member States to implement
its resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level, including the increase in the number
of States that have formulated or revised national action plans and strategies, and
encourages Member States to continue to pursue such implementation.
“The Security Council welcomes the concrete commitments made by a
number of Member States at the present Ministerial Open Debate on 26 October
2010 to increase their efforts to implement its resolution 1325 (2000) and invites
those Member States and any other Member States that wish to do so to regularly
review implementation of this resolution and to report to the Security Council on
progress made as appropriate.
“The Security Council supports taking forward, including by relevant UN
entities, the set of indicators contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498) for use as an initial framework to track implementation of its
resolution 1325 in situations of armed conflict and post-conflict and other situations
relevant to the implementation of resolution 1325, as appropriate, and taking into
account the specificity of each country.
“The Security Council recognizes the need for consistent implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in its own work and for monitoring progress in
implementation. In this regard the Security Council underlines the need for timely
and systematic reporting on women and peace and security issues and urges the
Secretary-General to ensure that country-specific and relevant thematic issues
reports and briefings, provide information on women and peace and security issues

2

10-60352

S/PRST/2010/22

and on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) using this set of indicators, as
appropriate.
“The Security Council encourages Member States to take into account the set
of indicators contained in the Annex of the Report of the Secretary-General on
Women and Peace and Security (S/2010/498), as appropriate, in implementing
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand to all parties to armed conflict to
immediately and completely cease all forms of violence against women and girls,
including acts of sexual violence.
“The Security Council encourages Member States to deploy greater numbers
of female military and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and to provide all military and police personnel with adequate training to carry out
their responsibilities. The Council requests the Secretary-General to continue and
strengthen efforts to implement the policy of zero tolerance on sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide and deploy guidance
on addressing sexual violence for predeployment and inductive training of military
and police personnel, and to assist missions in developing situation-specific
procedures to address sexual violence at the field level and to ensure that technical
support is provided to troop and police contributing countries in order to include
guidance for military and police personnel on addressing sexual violence in
predeployment and induction training. The Security Council welcomes the work of
gender and women protection advisers appointed to peacekeeping missions. The
Council looks forward to considering the annual report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of its resolution 1820 (2008).
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to submit an
annual report to it on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Council
further requests the Secretary-General to propose in his next annual report a
strategic framework to guide the UN’s implementation of the resolution in the next
decade, which includes targets and indicators and takes account of relevant
processes within the Secretariat. In this context, the Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to include recommendations for policy and institutional reforms in the UN
that will facilitate improved response by the Organization to women and peace and
security issues.
“The Security Council reiterates its request to Member States, international,
regional and subregional organizations to take measures to increase the participation
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding, including in
decision-making roles in post-conflict governance institutions, appointed and
elected. The Council urges the Secretary-General to appoint more women as
mediators and special representatives and envoys to pursue good offices on his
behalf.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to convene a High-level Review
in five years to assess progress at the global, regional and national levels in
implementing resolution 1325, renew commitments and address obstacles and
constraints that have emerged in the implementation of resolution 1325.”

10-60352

3
