United Nations

A/RES/70/186

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 18 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2015
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/70/470/Add.1)]

70/186. Consumer protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/62 of 23 July 1981, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to continue consultations on
consumer protection with a view to elaborating a set of general guidelines for
consumer protection, taking into particular account the needs of the developing
countries,
Recalling also its resolution 38/147 of 19 December 1983 on consumer
protection,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/63 of 26 July 1984 and
1999/7 of 26 July 1999 and General Assembly resolution 39/248 of 9 April 1985,
Recalling its resolution 65/142 of 20 December 2010 on international trade
and development,
Taking note of the mandate entrusted to the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its thirteenth session, held in Doha from 21 to 26 April
2012, to conduct analysis and research and help all Member States, in particular
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, to formulate and
implement competition and consumer protection policies, promote the sharing of
best practices and carry out peer reviews with regard to the implementation of such
policies, 1
Recalling the objectives formulated in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 2 notably the Millennium Development Goals and the reaffirmation they
received in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 3 the outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development

_______________
1

See TD/500/Add.1.
Resolution 55/2.
3
Resolution 60/1.
2

15-16940 (E)

*1516940*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

Goals in 2010, 4 in particular in the pursuit of development and the eradication of
poverty, and the Sustainable Development Goals, 5
Noting that 2015 marks the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the United
Nations guidelines for consumer protection as a thematic issue , and acknowledging
the enduring need for Member States to further strengthen the protection of
consumers, the General Assembly remains committed to addressing the impact of
development on markets and of technology on consumers,
Acknowledging that, although significant progress has been achieved with
respect to the protection of consumers at the normative level since the adoption of
the guidelines in 1985, such progress has not been consistently translated into more
effective and better-coordinated protection efforts in all countries and across all
areas of commerce,
Reaffirming the guidelines as a valuable set of principles for setting out the
main characteristics of effective consumer protection legislation, enforcement
institutions and redress systems and for assisting interested Member States in
formulating and enforcing domestic and regional laws, rules and regulations that are
suitable to their own economic and social and environmental circumstances, as well
as promoting international enforcement cooperation among Member States and
encouraging the sharing of experiences in consumer protection,
Recognizing that, despite the diversity of mechanisms and legal cultures that
exist across Member States, consensus exists on the need for common principles
that establish the main characteristics of effective consumer protection legislation,
enforcement institutions and redress systems,
Believing that a robust legal and regulatory framework for consumer
protection, including effective dispute resolution and redress mechanisms and the
ability of consumer protection enforcement authorities to cooperate in obtaining
redress, where available, across borders for consumers harmed by fraudulent and
deceptive commercial practices, serves an important public interest, contributing to
economic dynamism and consumer welfare,
Recognizing that Member States have a common interest in promoting and
protecting consumer privacy and the free flow of information worldwide,
Considering that electronic commerce, which should be understood to include
mobile commerce, has become increasingly relevant to consumers worldwide and
that the opportunities it offers should be harnessed to help facilitate economic
development and growth based on emerging network technologies, with computers,
mobile phones and connected devices that promote consumer wel fare,
Considering also that Member States, businesses, consumers and their
representatives should devote special attention to the development of effective
consumer protection in electronic commerce and that certain consumer protection
issues, such as applicable law and jurisdiction, may be addressed most effectively
through international consultation and cooperation,
Recognizing that consumer confidence and trust in a well-functioning market
for financial services promotes financial stability, growth, efficiency and innovation
over the long term and that the recent financial crisis places a renewed focus on
_______________
4
5

2/18

Resolution 65/1.
See resolution 70/1.

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

consumer protection, calling for effective regulatory, supervisory and enforcement
frameworks in the financial sector to contribute to the welfare of consumers,
Recognizing also the importance of combating substandard, falsely labelled
and counterfeit products which pose threats to the health and safety of consumers
and to the environment and which also decrease consumer confidence in the
marketplace,
Recognizing further the value of coordination and partnership with established
multilateral organizations that focus on consumer protection in order to maximize
the benefits to consumers and avoid duplicating efforts,
Recalling the proposal of the Seventh United Nations Conference to Review
All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for
the Control of Restrictive Business Practices, 6
1.
Decides to adopt the revised United Nations guidelines for consumer
protection annexed to the present resolution, of which they form an integral part;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the guidelines to Member
States and other interested parties;
3.
Requests all organizations of the United Nations system that elaborate
guidelines and related documents on specific areas relevant to consumer protection
to distribute them to the appropriate bodies of individual States;
4.
Recommends that Member States implement the present resolution and
the guidelines contained in its annex;
5.
Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to exchange information on progress and experiences regarding the
implementation of the present resolution, review that information and report to the
General Assembly on this subject on the occasion of the Eighth United Nations
Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable
Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices;
6.
Requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop ment to
promote the guidelines and to encourage interested Member States to create
awareness of the many ways in which Member States, businesses and civil society
can promote consumer protection in the provision of public and private goods and
services;
7.
Decides to establish an intergovernmental group of experts on consumer
protection law and policy within the framework of an existing commission of the
Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, which will operate until the holding of the Ninth United Nations
Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable
Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices, at which its
work will be reviewed and the renewal of its mandate considered;
8.
Also decides that the necessary resources should be made available
within the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to carry out the
tasks embodied in the revised guidelines through the reallocation of existing
resources and/or the use of extrabudgetary resources from voluntary contributions;

_______________
6

See TD/RBP/CONF.8/11.

3/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective
implementation of the guidelines by Member States, businesses and civil society.

81st plenary meeting
22 December 2015

Annex
United Nations guidelines for consumer protection
I.

Objectives

1.
Taking into account the interests and needs of consumers in all Member States,
particularly in developing ones, recognizing that consumers often face imbalances
in economic terms, educational levels and bargaining power and bearing in mind
that consumers should have the right of access to non -hazardous products, as well as
the right to promote just, equitable and sustainable economic and social
development and environmental protection, these guidelines for consumer
protection have the following objectives:
(a) To assist countries in achieving or maintaining adequate protection for
their population as consumers;
(b) To facilitate production and distribution patterns responsive to the needs
and desires of consumers;
(c) To encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the
production and distribution of goods and services to consumers;
(d) To assist countries in curbing abusive business practices by all
enterprises at the national and international levels which adversely affect
consumers;
(e)

To facilitate the development of independent consumer groups;

(f)

To further international cooperation in the field of consumer protection;

(g) To encourage the development of market conditions which provide
consumers with greater choice at lower prices;
(h)
II.

To promote sustainable consumption.

Scope of application

2.
These guidelines apply to business-to-consumer transactions, including the
provision of goods and services by State-owned enterprises to consumers. For the
purpose of these guidelines, consumer protection policies include the laws,
regulations, rules, frameworks, procedures, decisions, mechanisms and programmes
of Member States, as well as private sector standards and recommendations that
protect consumer rights and interests and promote consumer welfare.
3.
For the purpose of these guidelines, the term “consumer” generally refers to a
natural person, regardless of nationality, acting primarily for personal, family or

4/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

household purposes, while recognizing that Member States may adopt differing
definitions to address specific domestic needs.
III. General principles
4.
Member States should develop, strengthen or maintain a strong consumer
protection policy, taking into account the guidelines set out below and relevant
international agreements. In so doing, each Member State must set its own priorities
for the protection of consumers in accordance with the economic, social and
environmental circumstances of the country and the needs of its population, and
bearing in mind the costs and benefits of proposed measures.
5.
The legitimate needs which the guidelines are intended to meet are the
following:
(a)

Access by consumers to essential goods and services;

(b)

The protection of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers;

(c)

The protection of consumers from hazards to their health and safety;

(d)

The promotion and protection of the economic interests of consumers;

(e) Access by consumers to adequate information to enable them to make
informed choices according to individual wishes and needs;
(f) Consumer education, including education on the environmental, social
and economic consequences of consumer choice;
(g)

Availability of effective consumer dispute resolution and redress;

(h) Freedom to form consumer and other relevant groups or organizations
and the opportunity of such organizations to present their views in decision -making
processes affecting them;
(i)

The promotion of sustainable consumption patterns;

(j) A level of protection for consumers using electronic commerce that is not
less than that afforded in other forms of commerce;
(k) The protection of consumer privacy and the global free flow of
information.
6.
Unsustainable patterns of production and consumption, particularly in
industrialized countries, are the major cause of the continued deterioration of the
global environment. All Member States should strive to promote sustainable
consumption patterns; developed countries should take the lead in achieving
sustainable consumption patterns; developing countries should seek to achieve
sustainable consumption patterns in their development process, having due regard
for the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. The special situation
and needs of developing countries in this regard should be fully taken into account.
7.
Policies for promoting sustainable consumption should take into account the
goals of eradicating poverty, satisfying the basic human needs of all members of
society and reducing inequality within and between countries.
8.
Member States should provide or maintain adequate infrastructure to develop,
implement and monitor consumer protection policies. Special care should be taken
to ensure that measures for consumer protection are implemented for the benefit of
all sectors of the population, particularly the rural population and people living in
poverty.
5/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

9.
All enterprises should obey the relevant laws and regulations of the countries
in which they do business. They should also conform to the appropriate provisions
of international standards for consumer protection to which the competent
authorities of the country in question have agreed. (Hereinafter , references to
international standards in the guidelines should be viewed in the context of this
paragraph.)
10. The potential positive role of universities and public and private enterprises in
research should be considered when developing consumer protection policies.
IV.

Principles for good business practices

11. The principles that establish benchmarks for good business practices for
conducting online and offline commercial activities with consumers are as follows:
(a) Fair and equitable treatment. Businesses should deal fairly and
honestly with consumers at all stages of their relationship, so that it is an integral
part of the business culture. Businesses should avoid practices that harm consumers,
particularly with respect to vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers;
(b) Commercial behaviour. Businesses should not subject consumers to
illegal, unethical, discriminatory or deceptive practices, such as abusive marketing
tactics, abusive debt collection or other improper behaviour that may pose
unnecessary risks or harm consumers. Businesses and their authorized agents should
have due regard for the interests of consumers and responsibility for upholding
consumer protection as an objective;
(c) Disclosure and transparency. Businesses should provide complete,
accurate and not misleading information regarding the goods and services, terms,
conditions, applicable fees and final costs to enable consumers to take informed
decisions. Businesses should ensure easy access to this information, especially to
the key terms and conditions, regardless of the means of technology used;
(d) Education and awareness-raising. Businesses should, as appropriate,
develop programmes and mechanisms to assist consumers to develop the knowledge
and skills necessary to understand risks, including financial risks, to take informed
decisions and to access competent and professional advice and assistance,
preferably from an independent third party, when needed;
(e) Protection of privacy. Businesses should protect consumers’ privacy
through a combination of appropriate control, security, transparency and consent
mechanisms relating to the collection and use of their personal data;
(f) Consumer complaints and disputes. Businesses should make available
complaints-handling mechanisms that provide consumers with expeditious, fair,
transparent, inexpensive, accessible, speedy and effective dispute resolution without
unnecessary cost or burden. Businesses should consider subscribing to domestic and
international standards pertaining to internal complaints handling, alternative
dispute resolution services and customer satisfaction codes.
V.

Guidelines

12. The following guidelines should apply both to home-produced goods and
services and to imports.
13. In applying any procedures or regulations for consumer protection, due regard
should be given to ensuring that they do not become barriers to international trade
and that they are consistent with international trade obligations.
6/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

A.

National policies for consumer protection

14.

Member States should establish consumer protection policies that encourage:
(a)

Good business practices;

(b) Clear and timely information to enable consumers to contact businesses
easily, and to enable regulatory and law enforcement authorities to identify and
locate them. This may include information such as the identity of the business, its
legal name and the name under which it trades, its principal geographic address,
website and e-mail address or other means of contact, its telephone number and its
government registration or licence numbers;
(c) Clear and timely information regarding the goods or services offered by
businesses and the terms and conditions of the relevant transaction;
(d)

Clear, concise and easy to understand contract terms that are not unfair;

(e) A transparent process for the confirmation, cancellation, return and
refund of transactions;
(f)

Secure payment mechanisms;

(g)

Fair, affordable and speedy dispute resolution and redress;

(h)

Consumer privacy and data security;

(i)

Consumer and business education.

15. Member States should work towards ensuring that consumer protection
enforcement agencies have the necessary human and financial resources to promote
effective compliance and to obtain or facilitate redress for consumers in appropria te
cases.
B.

Physical safety

16. Member States should adopt or encourage the adoption of appropriate
measures, including legal systems, safety regulations, national or international
standards, voluntary standards and the maintenance of safety records to e nsure that
products are safe for either intended or normally foreseeable use.
17. Appropriate policies should ensure that goods produced by manufacturers are
safe for either intended or normally foreseeable use. Those responsible for bringing
goods to the market, in particular suppliers, exporters, importers, retailers and the
like (hereinafter referred to as “distributors”), should ensure that while in their care
these goods are not rendered unsafe through improper handling or storage and that
while in their care they do not become hazardous through improper handling or
storage. Consumers should be instructed in the proper use of goods and should be
informed of the risks involved in intended or normally foreseeable use. Vital safety
information should be conveyed to consumers by internationally understandable
symbols wherever possible.
18. Appropriate policies should ensure that if manufacturers or distributors
become aware of unforeseen hazards after products are placed on the market, they
should notify the relevant authorities and, as appropriate, the public without delay.
Member States should also consider ways of ensuring that consumers are properly
informed of such hazards.
19. Member States should, where appropriate, adopt policies under which, if a
product is found to be seriously defective and/or to constitute a substantial and
7/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

severe hazard even when properly used, manufacturers and/or distributors should
recall it and replace or modify it, or substitute another product for it. If it is not
possible to do this within a reasonable period of time, the consumer should be
adequately compensated.
C.

Promotion and protection of the economic interests of consumers

20. Member States should seek to enable consumers to obtain optimum benefit
from their economic resources. They should also seek to achieve the goals of
satisfactory production and performance standards, adequate distribution methods,
fair business practices, informative marketing and effective protection against
practices which could adversely affect the economic interests of consumers and the
exercise of choice in the marketplace.
21. Member States should intensify their efforts to prevent practices which are
damaging to the economic interests of consumers through ensuring that
manufacturers, distributors and others involved in the provision of goods and
services adhere to established laws and mandatory standards. Consumer
organizations should be encouraged to monitor adverse practices, such as the
adulteration of foods, false or misleading claims in marketing and service frauds.
22. Member States should develop, strengthen or maintain, as the case may be,
measures relating to the control of restrictive and other abusive business practices
which may be harmful to consumers, including means for the enforcement of such
measures. In this connection, Member States should be guided by their commitment
to the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of
Restrictive Business Practices adopted by the General Assembly in resol ution 35/63
of 5 December 1980.
23. Member States should adopt or maintain policies that make clear the
responsibility of the producer to ensure that goods meet reasonable demands of
durability, utility and reliability, and are suited to the purpose for wh ich they are
intended, and that the seller should see that these requirements are met. Similar
policies should apply to the provision of services.
24. Member States should encourage fair and effective competition in order to
provide consumers with the greatest range of choice among products and services at
the lowest cost. Member States should ensure that their consumer protection policies
are not used to protect domestic businesses from competition or applied unfairly.
25. Member States should, where appropriate, see to it that manufacturers and/or
retailers ensure adequate availability of reliable after -sales service and spare parts.
26. Consumers should be protected from such contractual abuses as one -sided
standard contracts, exclusion of essential rights in contracts and unconscionable
conditions of credit by sellers.
27. Promotional marketing and sales practices should be guided by the principle of
fair treatment of consumers and should meet legal requirements. This requires the
provision of the information necessary to enable consumers to take informed and
independent decisions, as well as measures to ensure that the information provided
is accurate.
28. Member States should encourage all concerned to participate in the free flow
of accurate information on all aspects of consumer products.
29. Consumer access to accurate information about the environmental impact of
products and services should be encouraged through such means as product profiles,
8/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

environmental reports by industry, information centres for consumers, voluntary and
transparent eco-labelling programmes and product information hotlines.
30. Member States, in close collaboration with manufacturers, distributors and
consumer organizations, should take measures regarding misleading environmental
claims or information in advertising and other marketing activities. The
development of appropriate advertising codes and standards for the regulation and
verification of environmental claims should be encouraged.
31. Member States should, within their own national context, encourage the
formulation and implementation by businesses, in cooperation with consumer
organizations, of codes of marketing and other business practices to ensure adequate
consumer protection. Voluntary agreements may also be establis hed jointly by
businesses, consumer organizations and other interested parties. These codes should
receive adequate publicity.
32. Member States should regularly review legislation pertaining to weights and
measures and assess the adequacy of the machinery for its enforcement.
D.

Standards for the safety and quality of consumer goods and services

33. Member States should, as appropriate, formulate or promote the elaboration
and implementation of standards, voluntary and other, at the national and
international levels for the safety and quality of goods and services and give them
appropriate publicity. National standards and regulations for product safety and
quality should be reviewed from time to time in order to ensure that they conform,
where possible, to generally accepted international standards.
34. Where a standard lower than the generally accepted international standard is
being applied because of local economic conditions, every effort should be made to
raise that standard as soon as possible.
35. Member States should encourage and ensure the availability of facilities to test
and certify the safety, quality and performance of essential consumer goods and
services.
E.

Distribution facilities for essential consumer goods and services

36.

Member States should, where appropriate, consider:

(a) Adopting or maintaining policies to ensure the efficient distribution of
goods and services to consumers; where appropriate, specific policies should be
considered to ensure the distribution of essential goods and services where this
distribution is endangered, as could be the case particularly in rural areas. Such
policies could include assistance for the creation of adequate storage and retail
facilities in rural centres, incentives for consumer self-help and better control of the
conditions under which essential goods and services are provided in rural areas;
(b) Encouraging the establishment of consumer cooperatives and related
trading activities, as well as providing information about them, especiall y in rural
areas.
F.

Dispute resolution and redress

37. Member States should encourage the development of fair, effective,
transparent and impartial mechanisms to address consumer complaints through
administrative, judicial and alternative dispute resolut ion, including for cross-border

9/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

cases. Member States should establish or maintain legal and/or administrative
measures to enable consumers or, as appropriate, relevant organizations to obtain
redress through formal or informal procedures that are expeditio us, fair, transparent,
inexpensive and accessible. Such procedures should take particular account of the
needs of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers. Member States should provide
consumers with access to remedies that do not impose a cost, delay or und ue burden
on the economic value at stake and at the same time do not impose excessive or
undue burdens on society and businesses.
38. Member States should encourage all businesses to resolve consumer disputes
in an expeditious, fair, transparent, inexpensive, accessible and informal manner,
and to establish voluntary mechanisms, including advisory services and informal
complaints procedures, which can provide assistance to consumers.
39. Information on available redress and other dispute-resolving procedures
should be made available to consumers. Access to dispute resolution and redress
mechanisms, including alternative dispute resolution, should be enhanced,
particularly in cross-border disputes.
40. Member States should ensure that collective resolution procedures are
expeditious, transparent, fair, inexpensive and accessible to both consumers and
businesses, including those pertaining to overindebtedness and bankruptcy cases.
41. Member States should cooperate with businesses and consumer groups in
furthering consumer and business understanding of how to avoid disputes, of
dispute resolution and redress mechanisms available to consumers and of where
consumers can file complaints.
G.

Education and information programmes

42. Member States should develop or encourage the development of general
consumer education and information programmes, including information on the
environmental impacts of consumer choices and behaviour and the possible
implications, including benefits and costs, of changes in consumption , bearing in
mind the cultural traditions of the people concerned. The aim of such programmes
should be to enable people to act as discriminating consumers, capable of making an
informed choice of goods and services, and conscious of their rights and
responsibilities. In developing such programmes, special attention should be given
to the needs of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers, in both rural and urban
areas, including low-income consumers and those with low or non-existent literacy
levels. Consumer groups, business and other relevant organizations of civil society
should be involved in these educational efforts.
43. Consumer education should, where appropriate, become an integral part of the
basic curriculum of the educational system, preferably as a component of existing
subjects.
44. Consumer education and information programmes should cover such important
aspects of consumer protection as the following:
(a) Health,
adulteration;

10/18

nutrition,

(b)

Product hazards;

(c)

Product labelling;

prevention

of

food-borne

diseases

and

food

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

(d) Relevant legislation, how to access dispute resolution mechanisms and
obtain redress and agencies and organizations for consumer protection;
(e) Information on weights and measures, prices, quality, credit conditions
and availability of basic necessities;
(f)

Environmental protection;

(g)

Electronic commerce;

(h)

Financial services;

(i)

Efficient use of materials, energy and water.

45. Member States should encourage consumer organizations and other interested
groups, including the media, to undertake education and information programmes,
including on the environmental impacts of consumption patterns and on the possible
implications, including benefits and costs, of changes in consumption, particularly
for the benefit of low-income consumer groups in rural and urban areas.
46. Businesses should, where appropriate, undertake or participate in factual and
relevant consumer education and information programmes.
47. Bearing in mind the need to reach rural consumers and illiterate consumers,
Member States should, as appropriate, develop or encourage the development of
consumer information programmes in the mass media or through other delivery
channels that reach such consumers.
48. Member States should organize or encourage training programmes for
educators, mass media professionals and consumer advisers to enable them to
participate in carrying out consumer information and education programmes.
H.

Promotion of sustainable consumption

49. Sustainable consumption includes meeting the needs of present and future
generations for goods and services in ways that are economically, socially and
environmentally sustainable.
50. Responsibility for sustainable consumption is shared by all members and
organizations of society, with informed consumers, Member States, businesses,
labour organizations and consumer and environmental organizations playing
particularly important roles. Informed consumers have an essential role in
promoting consumption that is environmentally, economically and socially
sustainable, including through the effects of their choices on producers. Member
States should promote the development and implementation of policies for
sustainable consumption and the integration of those policies with other pub lic
policies. Policymaking by Member States should be conducted in consultation with
business, consumer and environmental organizations and other concerned groups.
Business has a responsibility for promoting sustainable consumption through the
design, production and distribution of goods and services. Consumer and
environmental organizations have a responsibility for promoting public participation
and debate on sustainable consumption, for informing consumers and for working
with Member States and businesses towards sustainable consumption.
51. Member States, in partnership with business and relevant organizations of civil
society, should develop and implement strategies that promote sustainable
consumption through a mix of policies that could include regula tions; economic and
social instruments; sectoral policies in such areas as land use, transport, energy and
housing; information programmes to raise awareness of the impact of consumption
11/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

patterns; removal of subsidies that promote unsustainable patterns of consumption
and production; and promotion of sector-specific best practices in environmental
management.
52. Member States should encourage the design, development and use of products
and services that are safe and energy- and resource-efficient, considering their full
life cycle impacts. Member States should encourage recycling programmes that
encourage consumers to both recycle wastes and purchase recycled products.
53. Member States should promote the development and use of national and
international environmental health and safety standards for products and services;
such standards should not result in disguised barriers to trade.
54.

Member States should encourage impartial environmental testing of products.

55. Member States should safely manage environmentally harmful uses of
substances and encourage the development of environmentally sound alternatives
for such uses. New potentially hazardous substances should be evaluated on a
scientific basis for their long-term environmental impact prior to distribution.
56. Member States should promote awareness of the health-related benefits of
sustainable consumption and production patterns, bearing in mind both direct effects
on individual health and collective effects through environmental protection.
57. Member States, in partnership with the private sector and other relevant
organizations, should encourage the transformation of unsustainable consumption
patterns through the development and use of new environmentally sound products
and services and new technologies, including information and communication
technologies that can meet consumer needs, while reducing pollution and depletion
of natural resources.
58. Member States are encouraged to create or strengthen effective regulatory
mechanisms for the protection of consumers, including aspects of sustainable
consumption.
59. Member States should consider a range of economic instruments, such as fiscal
instruments and internalization of environmental costs, to promote sustainable
consumption, taking into account social needs, the need for disincentives for
unsustainable practices and incentives for more sustainable practices, while
avoiding potential negative effects for market access, in particular for developing
countries.
60. Member States, in cooperation with business and other relevant groups, should
develop indicators, methodologies and databases for measuring progress towards
sustainable consumption at all levels. That information should be publicly available.
61. Member States and international agencies should take the lead in introducing
sustainable practices in their own operations, in particular through their procurement
policies. Member State procurement, as appropriate, should encourage the
development and use of environmentally sound products and serv ices.
62. Member States and other relevant organizations should promote research on
consumer behaviour related to environmental damage in order to identify ways to
make consumption patterns more sustainable.
I.

Electronic commerce

63. Member States should work towards enhancing consumer confidence in
electronic commerce by the continued development of transparent and effective
12/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

consumer protection policies, ensuring a level of protection that is not less than that
afforded in other forms of commerce.
64. Member States should, where appropriate, review existing consumer
protection policies to accommodate the special features of electronic commerce and
ensure that consumers and businesses are informed and aware of their rights and
obligations in the digital marketplace.
65. Member States may wish to consider the relevant international guidelines and
standards on electronic commerce and the revisions thereof, and, where appropriate,
adapt those guidelines and standards to their economic, soci al and environmental
circumstances so that they can adhere to them, as well as collaborate with other
Member States in their implementation across borders. In so doing, Member States
may wish to study the Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Context o f
Electronic Commerce of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
J.

Financial services

66.

Member States should establish or encourage, as appropriate:
(a)

Financial consumer protection regulatory and enforcement policies;

(b) Oversight bodies with the necessary authority and resources to carry out
their mission;
(c) Appropriate controls and insurance mechanisms to protect consumer
assets, including deposits;
(d)

Improved financial education strategies that promote financial literacy ;

(e) Fair treatment and proper disclosure, ensuring that financial institutions
are also responsible and accountable for the actions of their authorized agents.
Financial services providers should have a written policy on conflict of interest to
help detect potential conflicts of interest. When the possibility of a conflict of
interest arises between the provider and a third party, that should be disclosed to the
consumer to ensure that potential consumer detriment generated by conflict of
interest be avoided;
(f) Responsible business conduct by financial services providers and
authorized agents, including responsible lending and the sale of products that are
suitable to the consumer’s needs and means;
(g) Appropriate controls to protect consumer financial data, including from
fraud and abuse;
(h) A regulatory framework that promotes cost efficiency and transparency
for remittances, such that consumers are provided with clear information on the
price and delivery of the funds to be transferred, exchange rates, all fees and any
other costs associated with the money transfers offered, as well as remedies if
transfers fail.
67. Member States should adopt measures to reinforce and integrate consumer
policies concerning financial inclusion, financial education and the protection of
consumers in accessing and using financial services.
68. Member States may wish to consider relevant international guidelines and
standards on financial services and the revisions thereof, and, where appropriate,
adapt those guidelines and standards to their economic, social and environmental
13/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

circumstances so that they can adhere to them, as well as collaborate with other
Member States in their implementation across borders. In so doing, Member States
may wish to study the High-level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Group of 20,
as well as the Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion of the Group of 20 and
the Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection of the World Bank.
K.

Measures relating to specific areas

69. In advancing consumer interests, particularly in developing countries, Member
States should, where appropriate, give priority to areas of essential concern for the
health of the consumer, such as food, water, pharmaceuticals, energy and public
utilities, and also address the specificities of tourism. Policies should be adopted or
maintained for product quality control, adequate and secure distribution facilities,
standardized international labelling and information, and education and research
programmes in these areas. Member State guidelines in regard to specific areas
should be developed in the context of the provisions of the present document.
70. Food. When formulating national policies and plans with regard to food,
Member States should take into account the need of all consumers for food security
and should support and, as far as possible, adopt standards from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization
Codex Alimentarius or, in their absence, other generally accepted international food
standards. Member States should maintain, develop or improve food safety
measures, including, inter alia, safety criteria, food standards and di etary
requirements and effective monitoring, inspection and evaluation mechanisms.
71. Member States should promote sustainable agricultural policies and practices,
conservation of biodiversity and protection of soil and water, taking into account
traditional knowledge.
72. Water. Member States should, within the goals and targets set for the
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, formulate, maintain or
strengthen national policies to improve the supply, distribution and quality of water
for drinking. Due regard should be paid to the choice of appropriate levels of
service, quality and technology, the need for education programmes and the
importance of community participation.
73. Member States should assign high priority to the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes concerning the multiple uses of water,
taking into account the importance of water for sustainable development in general
and its finite character as a resource.
74. Pharmaceuticals. Member States should develop or maintain adequate
standards, provisions and appropriate regulatory systems for ensuring the quality
and appropriate use of pharmaceuticals through integrated national drug policies
which could address, inter alia, procurement, distribution, product ion, licensing
arrangements, registration systems and the availability of reliable information on
pharmaceuticals. In so doing, Member States should take special account of the
work and recommendations of the World Health Organization on pharmaceuticals.
For relevant products, the use of that organization’s Certification Scheme on the
Quality of Pharmaceutical Products Moving in International Commerce and other
international information systems on pharmaceuticals should be encouraged.
Measures should also be taken, as appropriate, to promote the use of international
non-proprietary names for drugs, drawing on the work done by the World Health
Organization.
14/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

75. In addition to the priority areas indicated above, Member States should adopt
appropriate measures in other areas, such as pesticides and chemicals in regard,
where relevant, to their use, production and storage, taking into account such
relevant health and environmental information as Member States may require
producers to provide and include in the labelling of products.
76. Energy. Member States should promote universal access to clean energy and
formulate, maintain or strengthen national policies to improve the supply,
distribution and quality of affordable energy to consumers according to their
economic circumstances. Consideration should be given to the choice of appropriate
levels of service, quality and technology, regulatory oversight, the need for
awareness-raising programmes and the importance of community participation.
77. Public utilities. Member States should promote universal access to public
utilities and formulate, maintain or strengthen national policies to improve rules and
statutes dealing with provision of service, consumer information, security deposits
and advance payment for service, late payment fees, termination and restoration of
service, establishment of payment plans and dispute resolution between consumers
and utility service providers, taking into account the needs of vulnerable and
disadvantaged consumers.
78. Tourism. Member States should ensure that their consumer protection policies
are adequate to address the marketing and provision of goods and services related to
tourism, including, but not limited to, travel, traveller accommodation and
timeshares. Member States should, in particular, address the cross-border challenges
raised by such activity, including enforcement cooperation and information -sharing
with other Member States, and should also cooperate with the relevant stakeholders
in the tourism-travel sector.
VI. International cooperation
79.

Member States should, especially in a regional or subregional context:

(a) Develop, review, maintain or strengthen, as appropriate, mechanisms for
the exchange of information on national policies and measures in the field of
consumer protection;
(b) Cooperate or encourage cooperation in the implementation of consumer
protection policies to achieve greater results within existing resources. Examples of
such cooperation could be collaboration in the setting up or joint use of t esting
facilities, common testing procedures, exchange of consumer information and
education programmes, joint training programmes and joint elaboration of
regulations;
(c) Cooperate to improve the conditions under which essential goods are
offered to consumers, giving due regard to both price and quality. Such cooperation
could include joint procurement of essential goods, exchange of information on
different procurement possibilities and agreements on regional product
specification.
80. Member States should develop or strengthen information links regarding
products which have been banned, withdrawn or severely restricted in order to
enable other importing countries to protect themselves adequately against the
harmful effects of such products.

15/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

81. Member States should work to ensure that the quality of products and the
information relating to such products does not vary from country to country in a
way that would have detrimental effects on consumers.
82. Member States should improve their ability to cooperate in combating
fraudulent and deceptive cross-border commercial practices, as that serves an
important public interest, recognizing that cooperation on particular investigations
or cases under these guidelines remains within the discretion of the consume r
protection enforcement agency that is asked to cooperate.
83. The consumer protection enforcement agencies of Member States should
coordinate investigations and enforcement activities to avoid interference with the
investigations and enforcement activities of consumer protection enforcement
agencies taking place in other jurisdictions.
84. The consumer protection enforcement agencies of Member States should make
every effort to resolve disagreements that may arise regarding cooperation.
85. Member States and their consumer protection enforcement agencies should
make use of existing international networks and enter into appropriate bilateral and
multilateral arrangements and other initiatives to implement these guidelines.
86. Member States should enable their consumer protection policy agencies, in
consultation with consumer protection enforcement agencies, to take a leading role
in developing the framework for combating fraudulent and deceptive commercial
practices, as set out in these guidelines.
87. Member States are invited to designate a consumer protection enforcement
agency or a consumer protection policy agency to act as a contact point to facilitate
cooperation under these guidelines. Those designations are intended to complement
and not replace other means of cooperation. Such designations should be notified to
the Secretary-General.
88. Member States should provide their consumer protection enforcement agencies
with the authority to investigate, pursue, obtain and, where appropriate, share
relevant information and evidence, particularly on matters relating to cross -border
fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices affecting consumers. That authority
should extend to cooperation with foreign consumer protection enforcement
agencies and other appropriate foreign counterparts.
89. Member States should consider participating in multilateral and bilateral
arrangements to improve international judicial and inter-agency cooperation in the
recovery of foreign assets and the enforcement of decisions in cro ss-border cases.
90. Member States may wish to consider relevant international guidelines and
standards on protecting consumers from fraudulent and deceptive cross -border
commercial practices, in considering the legal authority to provide to their consumer
protection enforcement agencies, and, where appropriate, adapt those guidelines and
standards to their circumstances. In so doing, Member States may wish to study the
Guidelines for Protecting Consumers from Fraudulent and Deceptive Commercial
Practices across Borders of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
91. To promote sustainable consumption, Member States, international bodies and
business should work together to develop, transfer and disseminate environmentally
sound technologies, including through appropriate financial support from developed
countries, and to devise new and innovative mechanisms for financing their transfer

16/18

Consumer protection

A/RES/70/186

among all countries, in particular to and among developing countries and countries
with economies in transition.
92. Member States and international organizations, as appropriate, should promote
and facilitate capacity-building in the area of sustainable consumption, particularly
in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. In particular,
Member States should also facilitate cooperation among consumer groups and other
relevant organizations of civil society, with the aim of strengthening capacity in this
area.
93. Member States and international bodies, as appropriate, should pr omote
programmes relating to consumer education and information.
94. Member States should work to ensure that policies and measures for consumer
protection are implemented with due regard to their not becoming barriers to
international trade and that they are consistent with international trade obligations.
VII. International institutional machinery
A.

Institutional arrangements

95. An intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy,
operating within the framework of an existing commission of the Trade and
Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
will provide the institutional machinery.
96. Member States should take appropriate steps at the national or regional levels
to implement these guidelines.
B.

Functions of the intergovernmental group of experts on consumer
protection law and policy

97. The intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy
shall have the following functions:
(a) To provide an annual forum and modalities for multilateral consultations,
discussion and exchange of views between Member States on matters related to the
guidelines, in particular their implementation and the experience arising therefrom;
(b) To undertake studies and research periodically on consumer protection
issues related to the guidelines based on a consensus and the interests of Member
States and disseminate them with a view to increasing the exchange of experience
and giving greater effectiveness to the guidelines;
(c) To conduct voluntary peer reviews of national consumer protection
policies of Member States, as implemented by consumer protection authorities;
(d) To collect and disseminate information on matters relating to the overall
attainment of the goals of the guidelines and to the appropriate steps Member States
have taken at the national or regional levels to promote effective implementation of
their objectives and principles;
(e) To provide capacity-building and technical assistance to developing
countries and economies in transition in formulating and enforcing consumer
protection laws and policies;
(f) To consider relevant studies, documentation and reports from relevant
organizations of the United Nations system and other international organizations and
networks, to exchange information on work programmes and topics for
17/18

A/RES/70/186

Consumer protection

consultations and to identify work-sharing projects and cooperation in the provision
of technical assistance;
(g) To make appropriate reports and recommendations on the consumer
protection policies of Member States, including the application and implementation
of these guidelines;
(h) To operate between and report to the United Nations Conference to
Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and
Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices;
(i) To conduct a periodic review of the guidelines, when mandated by the
United Nations Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally
Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Busi ness
Practices;
(j) To establish such procedures and methods of work as may be necessary
to carry out its mandate.
98. In the performance of its functions, neither the intergovernmental group nor its
subsidiary organs shall pass judgement on the activities or conduct of individual
Member States or of individual enterprises in connection with a specific business
transaction. The intergovernmental group or its subsidiary organs should avoid
becoming involved when enterprises to a specific business transactio n are in
dispute.
99. The intergovernmental group shall establish such procedures as may be
necessary to deal with issues related to confidentiality.

18/18
