General A■aembly-Twenty-aeeond Se■■ion

66

2358 (XXII). United Nations International School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral22 and the report of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations International School annexed
thereto, and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon, 28
Noting that the construction of a new school at the
25th Street site leased from the City of New York
has been suspended pending the ·conclusion of feasibility
studies on a new site closer to the United Nations
complex,
Noting the rapid growth in school enrolment and the
urgent need for a solution to the physical problems of
the School,
Noting further the slow growth in the Development
Fund, the achievement of which is a major condition
of the Ford Foundation grant and essential to the
financial viability of the School,
Noting that, without an adequate Development Fund,
the School again faces an operating deficit of $49,000
for the current school year,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
extend his good offices to the Board of Trustees of the
United Nations International School with a view to
reaching a fully satisfactory and speedy solution for
both the interim and the permanent accommodation
problems;
2. Decides to contribute $49,000 to the International
School Fund in 1968 to cover the deficit foreseen for
the current school year ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session on the
status of the Development Fund and any new proposals
designed to achieve the target of $3 million.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2359 (XXII). Composition of the Secretariat
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its resolutions emphasizing the need
to improve the geographical distribution of the staff of
the United Nations Secretariat at all levels,
Reaffirming that the principle of an equitable geographical distribution in the composition of the Secretariat does not conflict with the paramount consideration in the employment of staff, namely, the necessity
of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, as laid down in Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming further that, in view of its international
character and in order to avoid an undue predominance
of national practices, the policies and administrative
methods of the Secretariat should reflect, and profit
to the highest degree from, the assets of the various
cultures and the technical competence of all Member
nations,
Reiterating its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give preference to candidates from inadequately represented countries,
22 Ibid., agenda item 84,

23 Ibid.,

document A/6%2.
document A/6974.

Recognizing the need for a more equitable distribution
of staff among the Member States as between regions,
and within each region, in particular at the level of
senior posts,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to improve the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat,
Concerned, however, that significant imbalances in
the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat continue to exist,
Having considered the Secretary-General's report on
the composition of the Secretariat,24 in particular the
measures recommended for the consideration of the
General Assembly in paragraph 70 thereof,
1. Approves the measures outlined in paragraph 70
of the Secretary-General's report;
2. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to achieve a better geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat at all levels ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
future reports on the composition of the Secretariat a
table, to be prepared on the basis of a system, suitable
in his view, chosen out of the four systems outlined in
annex II, table 11, of his report, showing the geographical distribution of posts by nationality and level ;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2241 B (XXI) of 20 December 1966 on the use of the working languages,
H a-ving examined the relevant part of the report submitted by the Secretary-General in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2241 B (XXI), 26
Noting that inadequate progress has been made in
implementing the above-mentioned resolution,
Considering that the use of several languages by the
United Nations could constitute not a hindrance, but
rather an enrichment and a means of attaining the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms its interest in the question of the use
of the working languages and in related problems of
staff at all levels of the Secretariat ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to take
steps and to strengthen those taken, so that real progress
may be achieved in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 2241 B (XXI), with a view to a
better utilization of the linguistic abilities of the staff
and a better balance among the working languages in
the recruitment of Secretariat staff at all levels, and in
particular at the higher level, without prejudice to the
principle of equitable geographical distribution ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, to this end, to take
in particular the necessary steps to ensure:
(a) A linguistic balance within the Secretariat and
in particular the presence of staff using the different
working languages of the United Nations in the services
24 Ibid.,
25 Ibid.

agenda item 82, document A/6860.
