UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/31
12 November 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4066th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 November 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Somalia dated 16 August 1999 (S/1999/882).
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence and unity
of Somalia, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the increasingly
evident effects of the lack of a functioning central government in Somalia.
It regrets the fact that most children receive no health care and that two
generations have had no access to formal education. It is concerned that
some Somali natural resources are being exploited, mainly by foreigners,
without regulation and monitoring. It expresses its deep distress over
reports that the absence of law and order in the country risks creating a
haven for criminals of all kinds.
"The Security Council welcomes the progress that has been made in the
development of a greater uniformity of approach on the part of the
international community in addressing the crisis in Somalia. It recognizes
that the Standing Committee on Somalia, created a year ago, has been
instrumental in monitoring the evolution of the Somali situation and
working for a greater coordination of efforts by the various external
actors, in order to avoid contrasting influences and to give weight to
common actions. It calls for the strengthening of the coordination of
these efforts aimed at securing peace and stability in Somalia.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts
exerted by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to find a
political solution to the crisis in Somalia. In this context, it welcomes
the initiative of the President of Djibouti aimed at restoring peace and
99-34348 (E)

121199

/...

S/PRST/1999/31
English
Page 2

stability in Somalia, which was outlined in his letter of 23 September 1999
to the President of the Security Council (S/1999/1007). It endorses the
call made by the President of Djibouti to the warlords to recognize fully
and accept the principle that the Somali people are free to exercise their
democratic right to choose their own regional and national leaders. The
Council looks forward to the finalization of the proposals of the President
of Djibouti at the forthcoming IGAD Summit and stands ready to work with
IGAD and the Standing Committee to help bring about national unity and the
restoration of a national government in Somalia. It calls upon the leaders
of the Somali factions and all others concerned to cooperate constructively
and in good faith in the efforts to resolve the crisis.
"The Security Council strongly calls upon all States to observe and
improve the effectiveness of the arms embargo imposed by resolution
733 (1992) of 23 January 1992 and to refrain from any actions which might
exacerbate the situation in Somalia. It urges Member States having
information about violations of the provisions of resolution 733 (1992) to
provide this information to the Committee created pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) of 24 April 1992, with a view to supporting the work of the
Committee.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Somalia. It urges all
States to contribute generously to the appeals of the United Nations to
ensure continued relief and rehabilitation efforts in all regions of
Somalia, including those aimed at the strengthening of civil society. In
this context, it encourages enhancement of the operational capacity of
humanitarian agencies in Somalia through donor support.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation for all United
Nations agencies, other organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in all regions of Somalia. It calls upon the
Somali factions to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all
humanitarian personnel and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
relief. In this context, it strongly condemns attacks and acts of violence
against and the murder of humanitarian workers in Somalia and reiterates
its position that those responsible for these acts should be brought to
justice.
"The Security Council expresses its satisfaction that despite all the
difficulties, approximately half of Somali territory continues to enjoy
relative peace. In this context, it notes the beginning of provision of
some basic services to the people of Somalia by local administrations in
some parts of the country.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts of civil society in
Somalia. It is encouraged by the political initiatives of Somalis, through
regional conferences, often organized by traditional leaders and informal
cross-clan contacts, to find a peaceful solution to the crisis. In this
context, it underlines the active role of Somali women’s groups.

/...

S/PRST/1999/31
English
Page 3

"The Security Council welcomes the continuing efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) in Nairobi.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to review the
role of the United Nations in Somalia, as a prelude to the United Nations
playing an enhanced role, aimed at achieving a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia. This review would include the
possible re-location of some United Nations programmes and agencies, as
well as UNPOS, to Somalia. The review should also consider the security
situation carefully, as well as the resources that would be necessary to
provide a secure environment for United Nations operations in Somalia.
"The Security Council takes note of the recommendation in the report
of the Secretary-General of 16 August 1999 that the international community
should consider establishing mechanisms which would allow financial
assistance to flow into secure and stable areas of Somalia even before a
formal central government and other institutions are re-established, with a
view to promoting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence and unity of Somalia.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
