II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Commitlei-

27

and independence and on the assistance being provided
by the international community towards the elimination
of the remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;

racist regime of South Africa in defiance of the decisions of the Security Council and the General Assembly,

3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue
to take concrete measures through all the media at his
disposal, including publications, radio and television,
to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work
of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and,
inter alia:

Mindful of the special responsibility of the United
Nations to support the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia to exercise their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems
of decolonization through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat and the unit on information relating to decolonization established in pursuance of
General Assembly resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 and, in particular, to continue to publish
the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications,
special articles and studies of the Office of Public Information and to select from among them appropriate
material for wider dissemination by means of reprints
in various languages;

Having approved the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, including in particular the findings of the Ad Hoe Group established
by the Special Committee at its 1029th meeting on
1 April 1976,'''2

(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to above;

( c) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in Western Europe;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;

(f) To report to the Special Committee on the
measures taken in the implementation of the present
resolution;

4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to undertake or
intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
within their respective spheres of competence, the largescale dissemination of the information referred to in
paragraph 2 above.

104th plenary meeting
17 December 1976

31/14.S. International Conference in Support of
the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the situation obtaining in Zimbabw_e and Nami~ia _as a resu!t of the continued oppre~s10n. an~ do~n~atio~ of their peoples by the illegal
racist mmonty regime m Southern Rhodesia and the

Deeply conscious of the urgent and continuing need
to arc:mse world public opinion with a view to assisting
effectively the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia to
~elf-d~termination, freedom and independence, and to
mtens1fy the widespread dissemination of information on
the struggle for liberation being waged by the peoples
of those Territories and their national liberation movements against the repressive, colonialist and racist domination of their countries by the minority regimes concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results of the Inte:n~tional Conft:re?ce of Experts for the Support of
Victims of Colomabsm and Apartheid in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April 1973, 63
_Noting the rec~mmendation by the Special Committee that the United Nations should convene during
1977 an international conference in support of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia 64 and the endorsement
of this recommendation by the United Nations Council
for Namibia,
Noting the statement of the Government of Mozambique that it would welcome a decision by the General
Assembly to hold a conference at Maputo,
l. Decides that the International Conference in
Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia shall
b<: held during 1977 for the purpose of mobilizing worldwide_ su_ppo~ for ~nd assistance to the peoples of those
Terntones m the!f struggle for self-determination and
independence;
2. Welcomes the fact that the Government of Mozambique is prepared to hold the Conference at Maputo;
. 3. Reque~ts the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and th~ United Nations Council for Namibia, to organize
the said Conference at Maputo, in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity, and authorizes the Secretary-General to provide the necessary staff and services
for the Conference;
6 2 /bid.,
63

chap. VII, sect. C, and annex I.
For ~he report of the Conference, see A/9061, annex.

• 64 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Ses-

swn, Supplement No. 23 (A/31 /23/Rev.1), chap. VII, para. 16.

28

General Assembly-111irty-first Session

4. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the Conference through all the
media at his disposal, including press releases, radio
and television;
5. Requests the Special Committee and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session on the results of
the Conference.
104th plenary meeting
17 December 1976

31/155.

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council covering the period from 16 June 1975 to 15 June 1976. 6 ~
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
65 fbid.,

Supp/emrnt No. 2 (A/31/2).
