A/RES/73/1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 October 2018

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 66

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 September 2018
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/73/L.1)]

73/1.

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit
The General Assembly
Adopts the following political declaration:

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit
1.
We, Heads of State and Government and representatives of States and
Governments, are meeting at United Nations Headquarters in New York on
24 September 2018, at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit to reflect on global peace,
in honour of the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela.
2.
We salute his qualities of humility, forgiveness and compassion, his values and
his dedication to the service of humanity, as a humanitarian, in the fields of conflict
resolution, disarmament, race relations, the promotion and p rotection of human
rights, reconciliation, gender equality, the rights of children and people in vulnerable
situations, as well as the upliftment of poor and underdeveloped communities. We
acknowledge his contribution to the struggle for democracy internat ionally and the
promotion of a culture of peace throughout the world.
3.
We commit to redouble our efforts to build a just, peaceful, prosperous,
inclusive and fair world, and to revive the values for which Nelson Mandela stood by
placing human dignity at the centre of our actions. We commit to demonstrating
mutual respect, tolerance, understanding and reconciliation in our relations.
4.
We recognize that the world has changed significantly since the founding of the
United Nations, and acknowledge that global peace eludes us to this day. We, the
leaders of the world today, more than ever assume a special responsibility for our
words and actions in shaping a world free of fear and want. Conflict is born out of the
minds of humanity, and we are the people who can find sustainable solutions to bring
a lasting peace, today and for future generations. We recognize the importance of our

18-16267 (E)

051018

*1816267*

A/RES/73/1

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

addressing threats to global peace and security, including challenges to the primacy
of multilateralism.
5.
We reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 that serve as our common and
universal vision. As we observe the seventieth anniversary of the Declaration, we
recall its foundational principle that all human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights, and are endowed with reason and conscience and should act
towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
6.
We also reaffirm our commitment to uphold the sovereign equality of all States,
respect for their territorial integrity and political independence and the duty of
Member States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force
in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
and to uphold the resolution of disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law, the right to self -determination of
peoples which remain under colonial domination or foreign occupation,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, respect for the equal rights of all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion, international cooperation in solving international problems
of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and the fulfilment in good
faith of the obligations assumed in accordance with the Charter.
7.
We recognize that peace and security, development and human rights are the
pillars of the United Nations system and the foundations for collective security and
well-being, and recognize that development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
8.
We reaffirm the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 2 and recognize that
eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the
greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development. We remain committed to achieving sustainable development in its three
dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated
manner. Sustainable development cannot be realized without peace and security, and
peace and security will be at risk without sustainable development. We reaffirm our
pledge that no one will be left behind.
9.
We recognize that respect for the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable
rights, as well as the fundamental freedoms, of all members of the human family is
the foundation of inclusivity, justice and peace in the world. We declare that racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance represent the very opposite
of the noble purposes of the United Nations. We recognize that tolerance of cultural,
ethnic, racial and religious diversity is essential for lasting peace, understanding and
friendship among peoples, nations, civilizations, cultures and individuals. We all
constitute one human family. We therefore commit to not let our differences limit our
common purpose and universal vision, to build on what unites us and to explore
creative ways to bridge what divides us.
10. We resolve to move beyond words in the promotion of peaceful, just, inclusive
and non-discriminatory societies, stressing the importance of the equal participation
and full involvement of women and the meaningful participation of youth in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security, and to redouble our efforts
to ensure that women, youth and children are free from all forms of violence, fear,
discrimination and abuse.
__________________
1
2

2/5

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 70/1.
18-16267

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

A/RES/73/1

11. We recognize the contribution of women to the advancement of societies and
their contribution to the prevention and resolution of conflicts at different levels. We
are committed to the promotion and protection of, and respect for, the human rights
of all women and girls, working to ensure full gender equality and the elimination of
all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, as well as
empowering them to realize their full potential.
12. We resolve to ensure the protection, rights and well-being of children, especially
in armed conflict, so they can realize their dreams and grow up without fear,
discrimination and exclusion. Protecting children contributes to breaking the cycle of
violence and sows the seeds for future peace.
13. We affirm the responsibility of each individual State to protect its population
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and
recognize the need to mobilize the collective wisdom, capabilities and political will
of the international community to encourage and help States to exercise this
responsibility at their request. We need to strengthen our capacities to prevent, contain
or end conflicts in accordance with the Charter and international law.
14. We acknowledge the incontrovertible truth that conflict is in all ways more
costly than preventive diplomacy. No effort should be spared to settle conflicts
through peaceful means. We therefore express our full support for the work of the
United Nations and strive to support peace processes, conflict preventi on and
resolution efforts, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and development.
15. We encourage parties to armed conflict to take immediate, concrete measures to
end cycles of conflict and to prevent relapse. We recognize the role of multiple actors
in armed conflict, including non-State actors, and urge all parties to comply with their
obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. We
declare our good offices available to those who need them.
16. We recognize that there is no single template for peace, but there is a long and
varied history of the successful and unsuccessful resolution of conflicts that can serve
as best practices for the negotiated settlement and peaceful resolution of conflicts. We
commit to making available our best practice to those who seek different models for
peace. Dialogue is key, and courage is needed to take the first steps to build trust and
gain momentum. We therefore declare our full support to good -faith negotiations.
17. In this regard, we note that the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations have a multitude of tools and mechanisms to support peace, and express
our desire to continue to review the effectiveness of the tools at our disposal to address
the armed conflicts at hand. We commit to ensuring that lines of communication are
maintained between parties during conflict resolution efforts to prevent unnecessary
escalation and loss of trust. We commit to finding credible interlocutors to engage
with all the parties to an armed conflict to ensure a just and lasting peace.
18. We acknowledge that civil society can play an important role in preventing
conflicts, contributing to peacebuilding and advancing efforts to sustain peace. We
also recognize that, depending on the nature of the conflict, a wide range of good
offices exist that can play an important role across the peace continuum, including
current and former Heads of State and Government, groups such as the Elders, the
African Union Panel of the Wise, traditional leaders, religious leaders, cultural
leaders, community leaders, business leaders, women’s and youth representatives,
academics, sports personalities and celebrities. Sports and the arts in particular have
the power to change perceptions, prejudices and behaviours, as well as to inspire
people, break down racial and political barriers, combat discrimination and defuse
conflict.

18-16267

3/5

A/RES/73/1

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

19. We emphasize the importance of a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace,
in particular by preventing conflict and addressing its root causes, strengthening the
rule of law at the international and national levels and promoting sustained and
sustainable economic growth, poverty eradication, social development, sustainable
development, national reconciliation and unity, including through inclusive dialogue
and mediation, access to justice and transitional justice, accountability, good
governance, democracy, accountable institutions, gender equality, and respect for, and
protection of, human rights and fundamental freedoms. We reaffirm the importance
of national ownership and leadership in peacebuilding, whereby the responsibility for
sustaining peace is broadly shared by the Government and all other national
stakeholders.
20. It is clear that lasting peace is not realized just by the absence of armed conflict,
but is achieved through a continuing positive, dynamic, inclusive and participatory
process of dialogue and engagement that resolves all outstanding issues in a spirit of
mutual respect and understanding, cooperation and long-term vision. We recognize
that, to prevent the recurrence of crises and ensure social cohesion, ownership and
inclusiveness, ending impunity and ensuring accountability, including through
international justice mechanisms, transitional justice and r econciliation, are key to
post-conflict nation-building and development.
21. We recognize that peacebuilding and sustaining peace require significant post conflict support for moving towards recovery, reconstruction and development. The
cycle of conflict should not be allowed to continue, including through the unintended
consequences of the premature withdrawal of support and international attention.
Sustainable peace requires sustained attention, commitment and investment.
22. We welcome the example set by South Africa in unilaterally dismantling its
nuclear-weapon programme and recall the firm plea made by Nelson Mandela in
favour of the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
23. Our common humanity demands that we make the impossible possible. We seek
the conversion of hearts and minds that can make a difference for future generations.
We therefore:
(a) Recognize the period from 2019 to 2028 as the Nelson Mandela Decade
of Peace and call upon all Member States to redouble their efforts to pursue
international peace and security, development and human rights in the Decade; 3
(b) Welcome the establishment of the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and encourage its further efforts and contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security and the prevention of armed conflicts, including
through the use of its good offices;
(c) Reaffirm the aims of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize
and the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights, and encourage the
President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to work together to raise
awareness of these prizes in order to strengthen the recognition and celebration by
the United Nations of its values, purposes and principles, which reflect the values for
which Nelson Mandela stood;
(d) Recommend, in the spirit of Nelson Mandela’s legacy and recognizing the
intergenerational pledge of dignity and security which underpins the Charter, that the
United Nations explore means to systematically consider the needs of present and

__________________
3

4/5

Member States are encouraged to continue activities in support of the Nelson Mandela Decade of
Peace through voluntary contributions.
18-16267

Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

A/RES/73/1

future generations, including through intergenerational dialogue, in its decision making processes.
24. As we rise from the General Assembly today, we collectively hold ourselves
accountable to the values and principles of the present declaration, to s trive for a just,
peaceful, prosperous, democratic, fair, equitable and inclusive world. We call upon
our people to celebrate the richness of our diversity and the collective creativity and
wisdom of our elders, and the well-being and survival of Mother Earth, and call upon
our youth, artists, sports personalities, musicians and poets to breathe new life into
the values and principles of the United Nations.
4th plenary meeting
24 September 2018

18-16267

5/5
