46

G<•neral Assembly-Twenty-si,venth Session

and Development, which, inter alia, reaffirms the important role of housing and human settlements in overall national development,
Further taking rwte of the recognition by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development of
the need to establish appropriate national finance institutions to mobilize domestic capital to finance these
activities,
Reaffirming in particular recommendations 1, 15,
16 and 17 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment"0 adopted by the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment,
1. Recommends that all development assistance
agencies such as the United Nations Development Programme and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development should in their development assistance
activities also give high priority to requests from Governments for assistance in housing and human settlements;
2. Recommends that, in its lending policies in this
sector, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development should provide funds on terms and conditions which fully reflect the unique nature and
characteristics of housing and related investments.
3. Recommends that in establishing criteria for
eligibility for loans under more favourable terms and
conditions the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development should take into account, in addition
to economic and monetary criteria, such critical socioeconomic factors as levels of unemployment, rates of
urban growth, population density, and the general condition of the housing stock in the developing countries;
4. Further recommends that as a matter of priority
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in agreement with requesting Governments, should
implement its stated policy of providing seed capital
loans on favourable terms, taking into account the
recommendations in paragraph 3 above, for the establishment of domestic financial institutions and organizations to mobilize and allocate capital for housing and
related investments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

2999 (XXVII). Establishment of an international
fund or financial institution for human seltkments

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, 51
Concerned with the lack of improvement in the
de_p~orable world housing situation, particularly the
cnt1cal shortage of low-cost housing or minimal
standards of housing in developing countries,
A~qre that the environment cannot be improved in
conditions of poverty, one of the palpable manifestations of which is the substandard quality of human
settlements, particularly in developing countries,
50 See

A/CONF.48/ 14 and Corr. I, chap. II.
51 A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1.

Recognizing the need for intensified and more concrete international action to strengthen national programmes in the planning, improvement and management
of rural and urban settlements, thereby narrowing the
growing gap between housing needs and available supply
and improving the environmental quality of human
settlements,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General entitled
Proposals for Action on Finance for Housing, Huilding
and Planning,52
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966 and 1507 (XLVIll)
of 28 May 1970 on a proposed international institution
to support domestic savings and credit facilities in
housing,
Noting in particular recommendation 17 of the Action
Plan for the Human Environment,r.:; adoptcd by the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
that Governments and the Secretary-General should
take immediate steps to establish an international f1111d
or financial institution that would provide seed capital
and technical assistance for the effective mobilization of
domestic resources for housing and the environmcnt:11
improvement of human settlements,
l. Endorses in principle the establishment of an
international fund or financial institution for the purpose
envisaged in recommendation 17 of the Action Plan
for the Human Environment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into
account the views expressed on this subject at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Asscmblv, to
prepare a study on the establishment and operations
of such a fund or institution, together with his recommendations and proposals, and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session through the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Economic and Social Council:
3. Invites the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development to collaborate in the preparation of
the study referred to in paragraph 2 above.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3000 (XXYII). Measures for protecting and enhancing the environment

The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, 54
Cognizant of the effective contribution of the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and the Preparatory Committee for the
Conference,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of
Sweden for acting as host to the Conference,
Convinced that actions at the national level can
complement and perfect the Action Plan for the Human
Environment 55 adopted by the Conference,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 Decemher 1971 entitled "Development and environment" and
,, 2 United

Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IV.4.

r. 3 See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1, chap. IT.

A/CONF.48/ 14 and Corr. I.
,,5 Ibid., chap. II.
~. 4
