iJNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

UN IBRARY

1783”

MEETING:

23 JULY 1974

APR2 9 ye

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1783) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to. the United Nations addressed to’the President of the Security Council
(S/ 11348)

S/PV. 1783

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

._

:

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 July 1974, at 9 p.m.
Mr. Javier PEREZ

President:

de CUELLAR

(Peru).

Romania, India and Mauritius to participate
discussion without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelomssian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

in the

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Panayotacos
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I propose to invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to come to the Council table when it is
their turn to address the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l783

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1335);
k-1 Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11348)

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Petri6
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. Datcu (Romania),
Mr. Budhirqia
(India) and Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius)
took the places
reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
This urgent meeting of the Council has been convened
following a request contained in a letter from the
representative of Greece, which the President received
this evening [S//1366]. In this connexion, I wish to
state that only a few minutes ago I received the two
telegrams from Mr. Panayotacos referred to in the
first paragraph of that document and therefore was not
in a position to inform members of the Council earlier
of their contents. They read as follows:

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
-- .”
(a) Letter dated %5 July 1974 .from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
@I Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348)

“Have honour communicate here below the text
of cable sent by Greek Embassy, Nicosia:
‘* ‘Building been pounded by heavy arms. Women
and children of Embassy members are in basement.
Embassy premises have already suffered great
damage. There is immediate danger for our lives.
Civilian population of Nicosia is at mercy of Turkish
tanks and has been suffering great casualties’.
“I am appealing to you and United Nations
organs to save lives of innocent people and noncombatants. Please consider present cable most
urgent appeal asking for immediate humanitarian
action.“*

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [1779th-1781st meetings], I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey,
Greece, Yugoslavia,

’ Quoted

1

in English

by the speaker.

’ The second telegram reads:

Athens, expressing my concern at the situation. I
have also had a number of conversations with the
Permanent
Representatives
of the Governments
concerned. This evening I made a general statement
expressing my anxiety at the state of observance of the
cease-fire. I also addressed messages to the Prime
Ministers of Turkey and Greece and to the Acting
President of Cyprus, the text of which reads as
follows:

“Further my first cable have honour bring to your
knowledge the tex of following cable sent by Greek
Embassy, Nicosia:
“‘Greek Embassy is being pounded by Turkish
mortars. We have protested to political adviser of
UNFICYP
and expressed serious fear for lives of
families of embassy staff concentrated in basement’.
“Please consider this cable as ultimate
to United Nations to save innocent lives.“’

“I have with the greatest anxiety been following
the situation in Cyprus since the coming into force
of the cease-fire. I fully realize that the first days
of a cease-tire after a bitter contest are always
difficult.
However, I am deeply concerned at
information reaching me from my representatives in
Cyprus that serious violations of the cease-fire
are still taking place. I therefore ask you most
urgently to give instructions to your military forces
that no further violations of the cease-fire should
take place and that, where territory has been taken
over after the time of the cease-fire, that is
1600 hours, Cyprus time, on 22 July, troops should
return to the positions which they occupied when
the cease-tire came into effect. I feel that the
possible repercussions of further violations of the
cease-fire are sufficiently grave to warrant my
making this appeal to you as Prime Minister, and
I must ask you to take the most immediate action
for the complete observation of the cease-fire in
Cyprus.“[lhid.]

appeal

4. In addition, members of the Council are aware
that the Secretary-General
addressed an appeal this
afternoon to the Prime Ministers of Greece and
Turkey and to the Acting President of Cyprus
[S/11368].
5.

I call on the Secretary-General.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Reports which
I have received from my Special Representative in
Cyprus and the Force Commander give rise to grave
anxiety about the observance of the cease-fire. The
cease-fire held fairly well during the night of 22 to
23 July, but after daylight on 23 July violations
occurred around the edge of the Turkish enclave.
Later in the morning fighting developed in the vicinity
of the airport and continued until 12.30 p.m. when
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
arranged a cease-fire. The airport was
declared a United
Nations-controlled
area and
occupied by UNFICYP
troops after the National
Guard troops had agreed to withdraw.

9. In Cyprus, in addition to the activities described
above, my Special Representative
and the Force
Commander have met, in the meantime, with Acting
President Clerides and were present during a most
useful meeting between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas.
This is an encouraging development.

7. Fighting also developed along the green line, which
separates the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
sectors of Nicosia, particularly
in the west of the
Old City near the golf course. There were further
violations of the cease-fire in the Kyrenia district,
where Turkish troops captured the village of Dhikomo
during the night and attacked the village of Sykhari.
In the Lamaca district the National Guard attacked
and captured Kophinou.
Throughout
the island,
UNFICYP
has tried to re-establish observation posts
and to patrol the lines of confrontation
wherever
possible. It is also, to the maximum of its capability,
investigating complaints and rendering assistance to
the victims of the fighting, both Cypriot and foreign
nationals. Further details will be given in the regular
reports on the situation. In fact, this report has been
distributed in the meantime.

10. I have instructed UNFICYP
to make all possible
efforts to stabilize the cease-fire and assure its
observance in full co-operation with the parties. In
this connexion, I may inform the Council that, at my
request, the Prime Minister of Turkey has appointed
a senior liaison officer between the Turkish forces
and UNFICYP.
There was the problem that our
Commander-in-Chief
did not have the necessary
contacts with the Turkish forces, so this will be
corrected by the appointment
of a Turkish liaison
officer by the Turkish Government.
I have been
informed by the Turkish Prime Minister
in the
meantime
that a high-ranking
officer has been
appointed as liaison officer.
11. I have also instructed UNFICYP
to make the
maximum effort to prevent intercommunal
strife and
to intervene wherever possible to protect members
of the civilian population who are in danger from
such strife.

8. In view of the evident instability of the cease-fire
and the possibilities of further serious violations of the
cease-fire tomorrow, 24 July, I have been in contact
during the day with various Governments
and
representatives. I have spoken over the telephone with
the Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Ecevit, and with
the Secretary-General
of the Foreign Ministry in

12. Yesterday afternoon, 22 July, I met wish the
Permanent
Representatives
of the Governments
2

Greece and Turkey, as well as all the rest of us, want
an end to the fighting, and that we want it now.

providing contingents for UNFICYP
.and made an
urgent request to them for reinforcements for their
contingents in Cyprus. As a result, of that appeal,
Denmark, Finland, Sweden and the United Kingdom
have already undertaken to provide reinforcements
to a total of approximately
1,400 men-in
addition
to the 2,300 men whom we have in Cyprus already.

19. Nothing
is more difftcult,
nothing requires
greater political leadership and courage, than to stop
hostilities once they have started. I call on the parties
to exercise that leadership and that courage now. I
call on the parties to stop the blood-letting and ttim
to the negotiating table. The cease-fire has to be the
first step towards peace. It must be the basis for
other efforts towards conciliation
and for other
developments which can lead on to a brighter future
for the people of Cyprus.

13. Other Governments are giving favourable and
urgent consideration to my appeal. I very much hope
that as reinforcements arrive and as the observance
of the cease-tire allows for more extensive observation
and patrol activity by UNFICYP,
the Force will be
able to carry out its great responsibilities with everincreasing effectiveness.

20.

Mr. de GUIRIhIGAUD
(France) (interpretation
French): At the very time when the cease-fire
was going into effect in Cyprus I expressed regret
yesterday that violence was continuing
to beget
violence. Almost 36 hours have now elapsed and,
unhappily, as I now speak, the murderous skirmishes
are far from having ceased. The statement just made
by the Secretary-General and the appeal that, this very
evening, he has addressed to the parties were inspired
by facts that can scarcely be disputed, the alarming
account of which is now coming in from the press
agencies. In these circumstances it was our duty to
meet.

from

14. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
As a result of the talks and consultations it has been
possible to distribute a document containing a draft
resolution (S/11369]. In view of the urgency of this
question, I hope that it can be put to a vote immediately.
Since I understand that no representative wishes to
speak now at this stage, I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

was adopted unanimously.2

21. I shall not expatiate on the events which
continue to cause bloodshed in the island of Cyprus.
Let me simply note that the political developments
of the past two days had aroused hopes that the
situation might be brought under control.

15. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Sphnish):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
explain their votes.
16. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): I
think that little needs to be said here. The facts’ as
we know them and as we have just heard them from
the Secretary-General speak for themselves, and they
are sombre enough for all of us. The cease-fire in
Cyprus, agreed to yesterday by all the parties, is not
being observed. The guns are still firing, the innocent
are still dying.

22. The Ankara Government,
yesterday morning,
declared that it “would respect Security Council
resolutions”.
It announced-and
I quote again-that
“peace would now prevail in Cyprus’*. Today it might
have heeded the appeal of the European Community,
issued in Brussels yesterday evening, calling on the
parties for an effective implementation
of the ceasefire and full co-operation with the United Nations
Force. in the discharge of its mission vis-a-vis the
two’communities.
It has repeatedly reiterated today,
through diplomatic channels, and at the highest levels,
its willingness to accept a cease-fire.

17. The resolution
which the Council has just
unanimously adopted, as the resolution we adopted
on 20 July was unanimous, is short and to the point.
In this resolution we demand that the parties, all the
parties, comply immediately
with the cease-fire
provisions of resolution 353 (1974) and cease the
hostilities in Cyprus-hostilities
which have brought
suffering and death to countless innocent people, and
which so clearly threaten international
peace and
security.

23. From the Greek community of the island we have
news of an encouraging development: the appointment
of an interim President, whose experience and whose
representative nature confer upon him new authority.
24. No one can now allow blood to go on flowing,
death to be piled upon death, and destruction to be
added to destruction, in circumstances that are of
crucial concern to the populations to whom, purportedly, the intention was to bring peace.

18. The United States has joined in supporting the
resolution adopted by this Council because of our
determination
that the cease-fire ordered by the
Council on 20 July should be made fully effective
at the earliest possible moment. My Government
believes that the Governments and peoples of Cyprus,
z See resolution

25. May I say here very solemnly that the fund of
confidence that. my country accords to the Ankara
Government, whose interests in Cyprus were affected
by the coup d’etat of 15 July, would be jeopardized

354 (1974).

3

if strict orders were not given to the Turkish armed
forces to act in such a way that all acts of violence on
their part cease.

the fact that not a single one of the paragraphs of
resolution’353 (1974), except paragraph 4, of course,
has been implemented by Turkey.

26. The same thina mav be said of the confidence
which we should like to-place in the Greek Cypriot
authorities, who must return to the paths of peaceful
coexistence with the Turkish civilian population. We
hope that those authorities
will understand the
importance of the urgent appeal we address to them
so that all the populations answerable to them may
refrain from further violence.

31. Paragraph 1 calls for respect of the sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity of Cyprus.
Territorial integrity has been violated after the ceasefire. And not only this, but Mr. Ecevit has saidthat
the Turkish presence on the island is now irrevocably
established. In plain English this means that partition
is an accomplished fact.
32. Paragraph 2 calls upon all parties to exercise
the utmost restraint and to refrain from any action
which might further aggravate the situation. That
paragraph also has been ignored.

27. The tragic circumstances still prevailing today in
Cyprus cannot be a matter of unconcern to the Council.
It is our duty to reiterate the cease-fue decision that
we took Saturday last and to make it still more urgent.
My delegation has felt that the Council in the very
discharge of its functions under the United Nations
Charter was in duty bound to call for an end to the
firing immediately
in conformity
with operative
paragraph 2 of resolution 353 (1974). We are therefore
gratified that the draft resolution introduced this
evening has been unanimously adopted and we look
to its earliest possible implementation
by the
authorities to which it is addressed.

33. Paragraph 3 demands an immediate end to foreign
military intervention in the Republic of Cyprus and
so forth. That call for an “immediate
end” has been
disregarded.
34. Paragraph 5 calls on Greece and Turkey to
enter into negotiations without delay for the restoration
of peace in the area and constitutional
government
in Cyprus. Those negotiations were scheduled to start
tomorrow in Geneva. We agreed immediately to enter
into those negotiations
as soon as possible. The
Turkish Government postponed them-1 do not want
to say sine die, but for an indefinite time.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Greece.
29. Mr. PANAYOTACOS
(Greece): Because of the
urgent convening of this meeting, I did not have the
time to prepare any written statement. Therefore,
I shall be very brief. It would, after,all, ‘be a pure
waste of time to indulge in words when immediate
acts are needed. After all, the documents already
circulated speak for themselves. Unfortunately,
one
of my letters has not yet been circulated, so may I
be permitted to read an-excerpt from this letter, which
was sent yesterday:

35. I do not want to waste any more time, but I
should like to say this. The Security Council, living up
to its mission as a guarantor of international peace
and security, as well as being conscious of its
responsibilities
vis-a-vis history itself, must take
urgently all necessary steps to achieve effective
respect of the cease-tire. That has already been done.
But I think that there is something missing how this
resolution, and that missing link is a reference to the
Secretary-General’s
appeal to the three Governments
concerned to withdraw their armed forces to the.
positions they were occupying on 22 July at 4 p.m.
local time.

“At 0710 hours local time today a Turkish unit
attacked with ‘mortar shelling and flat trajectory
arms and occupied two Greek outposts east of
Trakhonas, itself a location north of Nicosia.
“After this occupation was completed, the same
Turkish unit concentrated all the women and children
of the Trakhonas area, obliged them to walk in
front of it as a protective screen and advanced
in this way towards the interior of the Greek ’
positions.” [S/11362]

36. The PRESIDENT
(interprefafionfiom
I call on the representative of Cyprus.

Spanish):

on this act, a dastardly one to

37. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): We have now a new
situation again tonight, and we have to comment on
it. It is a fact established by the Secretary-General
that there were very grave violations of the cease-fire
yesterday, and today there are more.

30. Furthermore, I also want to refer to Mr. Ecevit’s
assertion that after the acceptance by Turkey of the
cease-fire there would be peace, there would be
freedom and equality in Cyprus. Unfortunately,
those
promises did not materialize. In the same context 1.
should like to draw the attention of the Council to

38. The representative. of Greece has sent a list of
the violations, and they have been borne out by the
Secretary-General.
It is obvious that there has been
a considerable
extension of the territory
under
occupation by the Turkish forces. The details are
given and they are here-namely,
that there has been
violent fighting, and the Turkish forces have occupied

There is no comment
say the least.

4

“Mr. Milea, east of Nicosia, advanced ,westward
from .Yerolakkos as well as from Karavas in the
direction of Lapithos, aiming at enlarging their
bridgehead on the northern coast of the island.
Heavy fighting is also going on in various other
locations.” [S/11366]

45.. Now, the Security Council has a very heavy
duty, a very heavy*&ponsibility.
It must not merely
express disapproval-not
condemnation,
of course,
that was never thought of-but must act in an effective
way. What is the effective way? May I explain?
46. We already had a resolution providing for a ceasefire. We have seen before, in other cases--not in all,
but certainly in a sufficient number to provide a
warning-that
these resolutions
are not always
respected. And why are they not always respected?
Because one side or the other wants to take advantage
and occupy more territory, believing that that will
serve its ultimate purposes in what happens after
that, whether it be negotiation or anything else. We
have seen that done repeatedly, although of course,
in some cases resolutions have been respected.

39.. The Secretary-General
has recognized these
violations of the cease-fire. I do not say that there
is no mention of any violations on the Greek side,
but they are obviously very minor violations. The
net effect of all this is the enlargement of the area of
the Turkish occupation.
40. Now, considering that the Turkish occupation
is a flagrant violation of the territorial integrity of
Cyprus, it is important to look at the picture, and
behind it is the idea of partition. That is borne out
by what is happening. It is vital to see the picture as
it continues unfolding today.

47. And how do we counter that?’ Is not the Security
Council to find ‘a way to counter that? Is the best
way of countering it to allow the,side that has gained
territory by violating
a cease-fire to retain that
territory? Is that the best way?

41. The Prime Minister of Turkey, in a sweetly
worded document he issued at the time of the invasion
of Cyprus, made it a point to say that he was doing
it-and I quote his words-“as
a service of peace for
humanity*‘. And then he said,. ‘!We are not going for
war. but to bring peace to the island; not only to the
Turks, but to the Greeks as well.”

48. In his note ‘of today,
clearly states:

the Secretary-General

“I therefore ask you most urgently to give instructions to your military forces [that the] troops should
return to the positions which they occupied when
the cease-fire came into effect.” [S/11368]

42. So here we are. We have this picture..And what
happened afterwards? He made it clear that he was not
going for war, nor for conquest, of course, nor for
occupation,
nor for partition.
That was at the
beginning, so that world opinion would not obstruct
him or any Powers interfere with him. He also made
it clear that he wanted to help restore the constituted
authority in Cyprus. And some people might have been
misled into believing that.

The United Nations Force is there. The SecretaryGeneral knows very well that the United Nations
Force is able to ascertain the positions which were
held by the respective sides on the date of the ceasefire, and therefore it would be easy to demand that the
side which is violating the cease-fire-or
if they are
both doing so, this would apply to them bothwithdraw to the position held at the time of ‘the
cease-fire. That would be a lesson for the future: not
to waste tire-arms and kill people in occupying territory
that will .not be held because the Security Council
will not allow it to be held. But if the Council assists
in the violation of its resolutions, it merely gives
inducement for disrespect. Whether it says “demands
immediately”
or not, it must ensure that the party
which disobeys returns the unlawful fruits of its
disobedience. If it does not, that will make for an
ineffective Security Council. If the world is suffering
today, it is not from an over-effective Security Council
but from an ineffective one.
:
_.

43,. I&t what we see now is very clear-not
that
we did not know it before; but, it might have been
misleading to ‘other people. What we see is very clear:
once they got over Cyprus. there was a fury of
destruction, destruction by every possible means;
wanton killing by planes, as I have said before, in
violation of international conventions, and by napalm
bombs;’ and the deliberate destruction of property.
According to information we have received tonight, in
Famagusta alone hotels and buildings and places having
nothing to do with military operations are reckoned
to have sustained damage amounting to over f 300 million. There has been destruction of antiquities-the
history of Cyprus might be destroyedAestruction
of
the forests; and deliberate violation of the cease-tire,
taking advantage of the fact that the other side believed
there was a cease-fire, in order to gain and occupy
more territory.

49. Therefore, Mr. President, as I had occasion to
tell you when I saw you privately tonight, what is most
important vis-a-vis this resolution is following up on
what the Secretary-General
has practically asked of
the Council-he
has asked this directly of the parties,
but indirectly of the Council-and
that is provision
for a return to the positions held previously.

44. The sudden contrast’in the events of the past two
or three, days is characteristic of what is happening
in Cyprus, ,and itis regrettably characteristic of the
I
way the world is going.

50. That might be unpieasant; it.might be easier not.
to ado it.,.But that is not the best. way.. It might be
5

late now to ask for that. It was too late when I arrived
here, because the resolution had already been agreed
upon. But I say this for the future, and I hope the
suffering voice of Cyprus now may help some other
countries in the future to be saved by a more effective
resolution.

unpleasant to ask the parties to return to those
positions, but is the Council merely to be pleasant?
Or is it to be effective?
51. I am very sorry that I, the representative of a
small, unimportant country, must say these words to
the Council. But, as representative of a Member of
the United Nations, and as a citizen of the world, I am
interested in the progress of the world towards peace
and security. Therefore I have to speak thus.

56.. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Turkey.
57. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President, I am indeed
grateful to you for convening this meeting at 9 p.m.
instead of 8 p.m., because it would have been most
difficult for me and the other members of my delegation
to come here earlier-despite
the most efficient
assistance offered by the United States Mission, for
which I publicly thank it-in view of the harassment
by Greeks who have since yesterday made my office
a rallying point where they chant obscenities while
expressing certain political views. On one point all
these Greeks seem to be in agreement. But there was
not such agreement the other day between the factions
that were fighting each other on First Avenue, where
those who were for Makarios were on one side and
those who were for his successor were on the other
side. Those who are gathering in front of my office
are all agreed on the solution. It is in fact displayed
on their placards: “Death to Turks” and “Enosis”.
These Greeks represent faithfully their kinsmen in the
Mediterranean,
and their behaviour explains my
presence in this Council chamber.

52. Cyprus aside, in any case in which the Security
Council calls for a cease-fire, if that cease-fire is
violated the violator must return the profits of its
violation. Only thus can the Council become a real
security council.
53. Now the Council has demanded what it asked
of the parties earlier: that they comply immediately.
But that is practically what they were asked to do
before, and they did not listen. And they have not
suffered at all by not obeying. On the contrary, the
side that wanted to obtain property has obtained it.
Why should that country listen now? And why should
any other country that comes before the Council and
is called upon to cease fire when it does not want to
do so-or thinks it does not want to do so because it
wishes to occupy more territory-obey
the Council
in the future, since the practice is not to call for
a return to the previous positions? 1 think that that has
been called for on past occasions, but not on manyindeed on so few that they may be forgotten.

58. Like all the others around this table, I have seen
the resolution that has just been adopted. Some
consider it insufftcient and have said so. I will merely
say that I hope that this will be interpreted by
Ambassador Rossides’ authorities, whoever they are
now, as an injunction to prevent further atrocities
being directed towards what is left of the Turkish
villages, hom.es and civilians on the islands.

54. I do not want to waste more time, because we
have a fait accompli; a resolution has already been
adopted, and we can only hope for the best. I do not
think this resolution has sufficient teeth, but never
mind. It is a resolution of the Security Council, and
we of course respect it. What I am saying is not said
out of disrespect for the Council but because of my
concern that the Councii receive more respect. That is
why I make these observations.

59. The accusations which are contained in the
various documents that have been circulated and the
accusations which have been voiced seem to reverse
totally the prevailing situation in Cyprus. Defenceless
Turks all around the island are being subjected by
Greeks to extremely inhuman treatment. As opposed
to what the media can see in the open war-and we
deplore. it, but, after all, there. is a war-what
is happening in the hidden part of Cyprus is also a
tragedy. I am afraid that in a few days? when mass
graves are discovered, as has been the case in the
past, when photographs are taken in the villages, world
public opinion will once more shed tears, this time
exclusively for Turks. In many areas Turks have had
to surrender, since fighting would have been suicidal
for the women and children. In all these areas the
women’and children who have surrendered have been
separated from the, men and sent to concentration
camps or taken as, hostages. That is exactly the way
Turks in Cyprus have been treated for the past 11 years,
each time the intercommunal
feuds have degenerated

55. It has to be remembered that although two sides,
Greece and Turkey, are directly interested in this
matter, the victim is Cyprus. The people dying are
Cypriots. The property destroyed is Cypriot property,
whether Greek or Turkish. Those from outside are not
the sufferers. The sufferers atethe Cypriots. This is the
voice of Cyprus complaining of the situatipn in Cyprus,
for which many are responsible or may be responsible.
I do not say that the Cypriots too are not responsible.
Of course they are; everybody is responsible. But only
the Cypriots are the sufferers. Therefore the Security
Council should help them by adopting an effective
resolution to stop the blood-lettig and the suffering.
As the representative
of the United States very
emphatically said, this is a sombre situation. People
are continuing to die. There is suffering and death.
International peace and security are threatened. Could
we not have a more effective Council resolution to
deal with these violations? Of course, I know it is too
6

into active warfare. The vacated villages have been
plundered and later burned by Greeks. These Turkish
villages, these Turkish enclaves which were attacked
were attacked as a result-it
seems now when we
follow the pattern-of
a strategic as well as a tactical
aim, and I will explain in a moment what I mean by
that. When Turks are requested to stop and when
Turkish forces are requested to cease advancing while
the Greeks are most brutally wiping out Turkish
existence on the island, this can only be described as
the blackest kind of humour.

65. I now come back to the question of constitutionality on the island. We have brought constitutionality to the Greeks-I
mean, of course, the Greeks
of Cyprus. If Mr. Clerides is now in power with a
quasi-constitutionality,
Mr. Rossides, that is the direct
result of Turkish intervention. I suppose that it will be
difficult to deny that point, at least.
66. One ironic aspect of the whole situation is the
strange collusion in this chamber, when it comes to
attacking Turkey and its actions, between the Greek
representative of Athens and Ambassador Rossides,
whose presence among us is certainly due more to my
modest efforts than to the efforts of the representative
of Greece.

60. We have been told that Turkey has violated the
territorial integrity of Cyprus. Today Turkey is being
singled out, as opposed to what was said a few days
ago in this same room. But the territorial integrity of
Cyprus was violated years ago&facto
by the presence
of Greek officers-first
at the invitation and then
against the will of the then leaders of the Greek
Cypriot administration
on the island. In saying this I
do not condone any form of violation of territorial
integrity. What we said the first day we continue to
say today: Turkey went on to the island on the basis of
internationally
recognized agreements.

67. I said a moment’ago that in Cyprus the situation
of the civilian populations and whatever action they
were subjected to had a different meaning; I used the
words “strategic as well as. It is hard to use such
words when one thinks of human beings. But in Cyprus
human lives correspond, in a way, to territories in
other areas. They have a strategic meaning as well-it
is unfortunate, but I have to say that. ‘Who is going
to restore to life the Turkish villages that have been
wiped out, the people who have been physically
eradicated? Land can be the object of negotiations;
it can be returned-but
not human lives, Mr. Rossides.

61. The representative of Greece said that Turkey
was postponing a reply concerning its participation in
the Geneva meeting. Again, I can only suppose that
something is wrong with his information. Indeed, the
only reason why it is difficult to decide when the
Geneva meeting can take place is that we still do
not know who will represent whom with regard to
Greece-contrary
to the case of Turkey, which has
representatives ready to go to Geneva.

68. We have often heard about the relative
percentages of the populations on the island and of
the way in which those populations are dispersed.
Mr. Rossides refers to these figures in his various
speeches here. And he usually ends his speeches by
saying, “Do not forget that the Turks are only
18 per cent of the total population”.
I would now
ask him whether the Greek community in Cyprus is
after a further alteration of this demographic situation
by mass murder. I cannot help wondering about that.

62. Mr. Rossides questioned what has happened
and what has been proclaimed with regard to the
developments in Cyprus. He said that we had spoken
of peace, of constitutionality,
but that what we were
doing was contrary to what we were saying.
63. With regard to peace, of course it takes more
than one to make peace. As I had the opportunity to
explain yesterday, as I have explained today and as I
shall explain, if necessary, each time the Council
meets, it is difficult to speak of peace when there are
not only troops facing each other but a defenceless
population subjected to the most dastardly attacks by
armed civilians of an opposing side. As I have already
said, firing will cease the moment the killing of civilians
ceases. It is inconceivable
to leave a defenceless
population-the
defence of which has also been an
object of the Turkish action-to
the mercy of people
whose action against their own kind we witnessed
only. a few days ago.

69. This is a most unpleasant meeting for me. I would
have. hoped that it would not take place. It is not,
unfortunately, through resolutions-and
we all want to
abide by resolutions-that
the situation in the area
can be resolved: it is through the goodwill of
responsible people. And, unfortunately,
when we
speak of responsible elements, when we speak of a
constituted authority, we see a void in front of us,
we Turks, in whatever direction we look. At least
that was the situation a few. hours ago.
70. Now, despite all that, today the Turkish Cypriot
leader, Vice-President Denktas, made an appeal on the
radio. I have the text of that appeal in Turkish,
but, although Turkish is one of the official languages
of Cyprus, I imagine that no one but me and those
sitting behind me in this chamber understand it.
Therefore, I am going to try to translate it now into
English. It is not a very long text, and I hope members
will bear with me while I read it out, for it is important.

64. It stands to reason that something should be
.done. I remember having appealed to Mr. Rossides,
I remember having asked him if it was possible for
him to try to convey to whoever represents any kind
of authority on the island the need to stop the merciless
killing of defenceless Turks. That would be the greatest
step towards genuine peace in Cyprus.
7

apportion blame as between the parties. It is certainly
not an attempt to judge which side in the present
fighting is behaving in a way which we would all
condemn as being uncivilized. What it is is a simple
and a clear call. It is saying to the people in Cyprus,
“Stop .fighting, because if you do not stop fighting
there is no opportunity for talks to take place which,
hopefully, may bring about a settlement”.

71. Addressing the Turkish Cypriots, Vice-President
Denktag said:
“We have had conversations today with
Mr. Glafcos Clerides; who has come to the post of
the presidency of Cyprus on the basis of a lawful
authority. We have discussed with him the details
and the ways of putting the cease-fire agreement into
effect. We hope to be able, he and I, to achieve this.
That is why I urgently request all my fellow Turkish
Cypriots to refrain from any action against the
Greek Cypriots. Despite the fact that for 11 years
you have had to endure much suffering, I still
appeal to you .not to create any irreversible
situation.”
Of course, .that is just a free translation. I hope that
tomorrow-if we have finished the discussion around
this table by tomorrow-I shall be ‘able to provide
the Council with a more faithful translation of the text
of Vice-President Denktag’s appeal.
72. -I shall not take up much more of the time of
the Council. I have just one word that I should like
to address to the representative of France in his own
language, if I may, of course.
[The speaker continued

77. It does no good for a Government to say that it
accepts a resolution unless its acceptance is effective,
unless the fighting actually stops. But if a Government
says that it accepts resolution 353 (1974) which we
adopted last Saturday, or if it says that it will accept
the resolution that we have just adopted tonight, and
its forces do not stop firing, there is only one of two
conclusions available to us: either that Government is
not in control of its own armed forces or, alternatively,
its acceptance was not an honest one. Neither of those
conclusions is one that I think we should lightly come
to. But, on the other hand, neither of those conclusions
is one we should necessarily shrink from.
78. But all we can say here is that the Security
Council,,on behalf of the world community, expects
those nations most concerned, namely Turkey and
Greece, to live up to the obligations which they have
assumed under the Charter and to accept this second
unanimous call of the Council, for otherwise it would be
a display of open and flagrant contempt by those
Governments of this the highest organ of the United
Nations itself.

in French.]

73. My Government attaches the greatest importance
to its relations with France, and any appeal from that
source has special meaning for us. Nevertheless,
Mr. representative of France, I would have wished that
you had also addressed an appeal for moderation and
respect for the cease-fire to the Government of Athens,
which continues to exercise control at the present time,
either directly or through an intermediary, since the
man of its choice, Mr. Sampson of sad memory,
and his team still have, it is said, the power conferred
upon them by Athens.

79. I do not propose to go into the details of what is
happening on the ground in Cyprus. I do not know the
details of what is bppening on the ground in Cyprus.
None of us round this table can know those details.
But it does seem that the cease-fire is, to say the least
of it, unstable. One of our great difficulties in all these
cases is that accurate information of what is actually
happening on the ground is almost impossible to
obtain. Moreover, such evidence as one gets is usually
committed in the sense that it is inevitably given by
human beings and is perhaps therefore committed on
one side or the other.

74. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I fear this
debate is perhaps taking a. somewhat- predictable
form. We had from the Secretary~General this evening
a sombre and an unsettling report. We have had from
the representatives of Greece and Cyprus, and Turkey
itself, charge and counter-charge, accusation and
counter-accusation. It is perhaps for the Council now
to grasp hold yet again of the central facts of the
situation as we are faced with them this evening.

80. May I give one example? The^ letter from the
Greek representative which was sent to the President
of the Security Council talked today about “heavy
shelling” of his Embassy’s premises [S//13661. I have
in front of me a telegram from the British High
Commissioner in Nicosia, of which, if you will permit
me, Mr. President, I shall read. a paragraph to the
Council.

75. It is good that the Council has acted quickly,
comprehensively and as firmly as it has. I think we
should emphasize that today’s resolution, whatever
defects there may be in it-and views on it have been
expressed by the representatives of Cyprus and of
Turkey, and I think to a lesser detail by the representative of Greece-and whatever else one says about it,
it is, by a majority of 15 to none, a very clear and
unmistakable call to the parties concerned in the area
to stop the fighting.

81. The representative of Greece described it. as
“heavy shelling” of the Embassy’s premises. The
British High Commissioner in Nicosia says: “There
was some mortar tire today around the Greek
Embassy”. He then goes on: “But there was much
more here”-that is, at the British High Commission--” with Greeks and Turks fighting a running

76. It is not a blueprint for a’ political settlement
of the whole issue of Cyprus. It is not an attempt to
8

..:-

.,

i.

;.

_/.

.-

.k

,.
.‘,Y.
.
,/

.

*s.
‘8

Union’s position on the question of the events in
Cyprus was set forth in .detail in the, statements made
by the Soviet Government
on 18 and 20 : July
[S/l1340 and S/11367], and I need not now go into
detail regarding that position, the more so as I have
had the opportunity to explain it to the Council at
previous meetings. I shall merely recall that in our
statements we decisively condemned ‘the organizers
of the military putsch in Cyprus against the legitimate
Government
headed by President Makarios.
We
decisively condemned
those who supported and
inspired the putschists-the
military junta in Athens;
judging by press reports, one can apparently say-the
former military junta in Athens. Unfortunately
we
have not yet heard any reports from the representative
of Greece to the effect that the Greek offtcers of the
National Guard, whose flagrant intervention
in the
internal affairs of the Republic of Cyprus was in fact
the original cause of the whole crisis and also of the
subsequent tragic developments,. have been recalIed
from Cyprus.

battle through the High Commission cornbound for
two hours,-leaving
one dead behind?. -Then he
concludes, if you will forgive me reading the sentence:
“All of this had quite an explosive effect on us”.
82. So that the point I am making is that it is
extremely diflicult to get accurate evidence of precisely
what is happening. But it would appear, regrettably,
that the cease-fire is not holding as well as we all
would have wished. And there is, of course, the great
danger, as has been’ pointed out this evening already,
that one side thinks it may be able to continues to
fight in the belief that thereby it is improving its
possible future negotiating position, and there is some
evidence that this may be happening in Cyprus today.
83. May I say one brief word about two other aspects
of the matter? In the last two or three days there
has been a massive operation in Cyprus to remove
foreign nationals from the scene of the immediate
fighting. I am happy to tell the Security Council that
perhaps 6,000 to 6,500 people-I
am afraid I have not
sot the exact figure-have
been removed from out of
the immediate danger areas. Over 4,000 of those have
already been flown to England and there are among
those people the nationals of no less than 36 different
nations. We were very happy, too, to be able to respond
as rapidly ‘as ‘we -did to the appeal made by the
Secretary-General yesterday .for reinforcements to the
UNFICYP
contingent. Not ,only were’ we happy to
respond to it, but it seemed to us then and seems to
us now that if a cease-fire takes place in Cyprus, the
size and the effectiveness of the UNFICYP contingent
is going to be crucial to the future well-being of the
island.

86. We proposed in- our statements that the Security
Council should take early and decisive measures to put
an end to foreign military intervention in the affairs
of Cyprus and to secure the, withdrawal of foreign
military personnel so that the Cypriot people might
themselves decide their future. We supported resolution 353 (1974) which contained appropriate provisions.
It is true that in order to solve the crisis which has
arisen, a cease-fire is necessary. But it is essentiel not
only to have a cease-fire, but also to implement the
other very important provisions of resolution 353
(1974).
87. The Soviet delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council,
regarding it as an important
step towards the
implementation
of the main resolution-resolution
353
(1974)-in all its parts and provisions.
,’
.
88. The PRESIDENT
(inter&etatiolifrom
Spatiish):,
The representatives of Greece’and Cyprus have asked
to be allowed to speak and I ‘shall call on them, but I
believe that I should recall that there are two successive
Security Council ‘resolutions calling for the utmost
restraint, and I ‘should like to see that restraint
reflected in the debate. On the other hand, I should
like to point out that the time indicated by that clock
is not “a.m.” but “p.m.”

84. In conclusion, let me just say this. What may
be profound political developments may have taken
place today both in Cyprus and in Greece itself. Again,
the precise nature and the precise extent and the precise
result of those developments cannot yet be known or
even clearly’foreseen.
No doubt we shall see in the
next few days how events are going to .move. But
despite those developments we~are very hopeful that
talks will take place this week. Yet, if they are to
start, let alone if they are to succeed, the firing must
stop. It is idle to pretend that negotiations in a situation
like this can conceivably have achance of success while
the lighting is still going on. It .is therefore right, in
our view, that this resolution should have’ been
introduced as an emergency matter even at this late
hour-perhaps
particularly at this late hour-to
the
Security Council so <hat immediate
and urgent
measures could be taken to ensure that the prerequisite
for a successful start and, hopefully, a successful
conclusion to those talks could exist; It was right
that the Council should make a clear and an
unmistakable
call, -which I hope this time will be
heeded.
‘.
85. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Umon of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation
from Russim):
The, -Soviet

89.

I call on the representative‘of
Greece.
. ..
90. Mr. PANAYOTACGS
(Greece): I do not want to
make a long speech; I just want to make a few remarks
regarding my Turkish
colleague’s
assertion that
Turkish invasion ensures a return to constitutionality.
I really wonder how this could happen under foreign
occupation, reminding one of methods followed in the
early nineteenth century by the so-called Concqrt
esrropten . Or could it be through r the de facto.
9

enlargement

of the existing enclaves,
of the island?

99. The timeliness and urgency of this action has been
amply underscored by the Secretary-General’s report,
which was furnished to us this evening. What we are
now concerned with is, however, more than the mere
technicalities of resolutions and of a cease-fire between
opposing military forces. What we are concerned
with equally and above all is the immensity of human
suffering which has beset the people of Cyprus-its
Greek and its Turkish communities.

which are a

de facto partition

91. After Mr. Ecevit’s statement that the Turkish
presence on the island is now irrevocably established
and that so-called constitutionality
can be achieved,
I would appreciate it if my Turkish colleague could
give me an explanation of this point.
92. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Cyprus.

100. Every line of the Secretary-General’s
report
speaks of the suffering of innocent people, of bloodshed
and of the loss of human life. And throughout the
report another spectre looms, much larger and much
more dangerous for the future of the island: the
spectre of communal strife which has been unleashed
by the events of the last week.

93. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): The purpose of my
intervention here is, first of all, to express my deep
appreciation
to the representatives
of the United
Kingdom and of France for their very relevant and
constructive statements in the debate.
94. The purpose of my original intervention was not
to level any accusations against Turkey-other
than the
fact that it has broken the cease-fire. And, in that
connexion, we did not hear any explanation from the
representative of Turkey, but only a whole myth of
cruelties committed-without
any proof, without any
evidence, with no reference to anything in the reports
of the Secretary-General. He just said that the reason
for the attacks and the occupation of the territory
was the cruelty of the Greek Cypriots, of which there
is no proof whatsoever. If that were the reason they
came and invaded Cyprus it would have been stated.

101. There can certainly be no peace, no stability
and no justice in this most sensitive area of the eastern
Mediterranean
unless communal
strife, the most
powerful root-cause of the present crisis, can be
eliminated; unless the Greek and Turkish communities
of Cyprus and, to a larger context, the peoples of
Greece and Turkey can live and coexist in harmony.
102. This immense task of reconciliation can only be
achieved by the Greek and Turkish nations, by the
Greek and Turkish
communities
of the island
themselves, and little can be done from the outside to
achieve the profound changes in attitudes that are
necessary.

95. Before the Turkish invasion of Cyprus the
Turkish Cypriots were not suffering at all, according
to their own admission. They now say that they are
suffering, but they are suffering as a consequence of
the Turkish invasion. They and their villages have
been bombed, as has already been reported, but those
details have no importance now.

103. However,
in showing both concern and
goodwill, in abstaining from all acts which can disturb
and aggravate the situation, an important contribution can be made; and I believe the resolutions
the Council adopted on Saturday and tonight are a
sign of such goodwill and such deep human concern.

96. This meeting is concerned with the cease-fire
and my intervention was designed to point out how
the cease-fire could be made obligatory and effective
by merely adding words saying that they have to return
the territory which was occupied. That was within
the context of this resolution, and not in any sense by
way of recrimination.

104. We now feel that the time has come when all
parties-when
all forces opposing each other-should
heed the unanimous appeal of the world community
acting through the Security Council. There could
hardly be a body more representative of world opinion,
but also of the world conscience, than this Council,
acting unanimously and with such harmony as it did
last Saturday and tonight. No doubt the establishment
of a cease-fire can only be the first step on the way
back to peace and to peaceful constitutional
order
in the Republic of Cyprus. Resolution 353 (1974)
points to the way to be followed, and to the means
to be adopted. The next steps are talks which should
begin between the parties with the least possible
delay, to be followed by implementation
of all the
other provisions of resolution 353 (1974).

97. I wish to say, therefore, that I am grateful for
the statements made by the representatives of the
United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union.
98. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): A few moments
ago, in the same spirit of unanimity and also with the
same sense of urgency as last Saturday, the Council
-with
a brevity which I believe is indicative of its
determination-reaffirmed
resolution 353 (1974). It has
addressed another urgent appeal to all parties to the
present fighting to comply immediately
with paragraph 2 of that resolution calling for an immediate
cessation of all firing in the area and requesting all
States to exercise the utmost restraint and refrain
from any action which might further aggravate the
situation.

105. The time has now come, no doubt, for peaceful
action by all concerned. This action should not and
must not be prejudiced
by any further acts of
violence or any further military action, for whatever
motives. The effects of such action can only cloud
10

the chances of peace and make it more difficult,
more unattainable.
We are confident
that the
Governments and the parties concerned will do their
utmost to respond to this renewed and urgent appeal
of our Council and offer their full co-operation for

the implementation
of our resolutions,
UNFICYP,
to the Secretary-General
representatives in Cyprus.
The meeting

rose nt il.35

especially to
and to his
p.m.

&%~~r#bft68~#BWnU~~~~U~

*hftB~WBSB%~mBH~~B~~~~~~

. .
,'

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

6E PROCURiR

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies aont en vents dans lea librairies
et les agencea
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprAs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenAve.
KAK

IIOJIYWiTb

H3AAHHSi

OPrAHNBA~BH

OE%EAHHEHHbIX

HAUHR

Hsnauaa
Opraunsauuu
06nensserm~.1x
HaueB
~oxoio
xynur=
s II~H~~~~~IX uaraariuax
II areux=sax
so ecex patioaax
uupa.
HaBOAHTe
cnpaaru
06 xsxanuax
a
samen PHH~KAO?~ araraamie
rum nrmmre
no anpecy:
Oprauusauua
06-beJWIeHRbIX
Haunit.
Cexsun no nponaxce as~asuR,
Hero-Hops
mm HCexesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIB

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
eaten en venta en librerfas
y casas diitrlbuidoras
en todas partea de1 mundo.
Cons&e
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
U&as,
Secci6n de Ventes, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

74-82001-Aprill983-2,200
