UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES ..VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 86

198th and 199th meetings
28 August 1947

( 38 p.)

198eme et 19geme seances
28 aout 1947

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and ninety-eighth meeting

Cent-quatre-vingt-dix-huitleme seance

Page

Pares

346. Provisional agenda
. 2283
347. Adoption of the agenda. "" "
" . 2283
348. Continuation of the discussion on the
Egyptian question
~ 2283

346. Ordre du jour provisoire
. 22t:3
347. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
. 2283
348. Suite de la discussion sur la question
egyp*nne
:"
. 2283

Hundred and ninety-ninth meeting
349. Continuation of the discussion on the
Egyptian question
2305

349. Suite de la discussion sur la question
egyptienne .............."....... 2305

2305
S'abstiennent: Colombie, Syrie, Union des
Abstentions: Colombia, Syria, Union of Soviet
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Socialist Republics.
Conformement a I'Article 27 de la Charte,
The United Kingdom representative did not
take part in the voting, in accordance with Ar- le. representant du Royaume-Uni ne prend pas
part au vote.
ticle 27 of the Charter.
The PRESIDENT: Although it is late, I shall
ask the representative of Colombia to present
his draft resolution at this time, so that the
members of the Council may have an opportunity to consider it between now and the next
meeting at 3 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Malgre
l'heure tardive, je demanderai au representant
de la Colombie de presenter maintenant son
projet de resolution, afin que le Conseil puisse en
prendre connaissance avant 15 heures, heure a
laquelle il se reunira a nouveau.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I reserve the right
. to speak at the next meeting. I just want to present my draft resolution (document S/530) at
this time. I hope it will be favourablJ received
by the Council.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
J e me reserve le droit de prendre la parole eet
apres-midi. Pour le moment je desire simplement
presenter mon projet de resolution (document
S/530) qui, je l'espere, recevra un accueil favorable de la part du Conseil.

The resolution reads as follows:
"The Security Council,

Le texte de cette resolution est le suivant:
"Le Conseil de securite,

"Having considered the dispute between the
United Kingdom and Egypt, brought to its
attention by the letter of the Prime Minister of
Egypt, dated 8 July 1947,

CCAyant examine le differend existant entre le
Royaume-Uni et l'Egypte, soumis a son attention par une lettre du Premier Ministre d'Egypte
en date du 8 juillet 1947,

"Calls upon the Governments of the United
Kingdom and Egypt:

"Demande aux Gouvernements du RoyaumeUni et de l'Egypte:

"1. To resume direct negotiations with a view:

"1. De reprendre les negociations directes en
vue:
"( a) To completing at the earliest possible
"a) D'achever des que possible l'evacuation
de l'Egypte par toutes les forces de terre, de
date the evacuation of all United Kingdom
mer et de l'air du Royaume-Uni en premilitary, naval and air forces from Egyptian
voyant une aide mutuelle, afin de garantir en
territory, mutual assistance being provided
in order to safeguard in time of war or imtemps de guerre ou en cas de menace immiminent threat of war the liberty and security
nente de guerre la liberte et la securite de la
of navigation of the Suez Canal; and
navigation sur le canal de Suez; et
"( b) To terminating the joint administra"b) De revoquer le regime administratif
tion of the Sudan with due regard to the
commun en vigueur au Soudan, compte do.principle of self-determination of peoples
ment tenu du principe du droit des peuples
and their right to self-government;
a disposer d'eux-memes et a choisir leur
propre forme de gouvernement;

"2. To keep the Security Council readily in- "2. De tenir le Conseil de securite au courant
formed of the progress of their negotiations."

du progres de cea negociations."

The PRESIDENT: The Council will meet at 3
p.m. to continue the discussion on the Egyptian
question.

Le PRESIDENT ( traduit de l'anglais): Le
Conseil se reunira a. 15 heures pour poursuivre
l'examen de la question egyptienne.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 45.

HUNDRED A.lm NINETY-NINTH
MEETING

CENT.QUATRE.VINGT.DIX.NEUVIEME

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Thursday, 28 August 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Sutcess, New-York,
le jeudi 28 ao(U 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

President: M. F. EL-KHOURI (Syrie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Au.~trili~, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
ates of America.
.

SEANCE

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des RepubliquCs
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni" EtatsUnis d'Amerique.
~"",,,",,,,,"""""_'~ .V,
"'< _. ~ ..~-~ _ .....~.'""""=<""'=__=_~_ .........
....

""?

,;.;,>;:

",_,

b i,_i:
. .lM........

2306

349. Continuation of the discussion on
the Egyptian question

349. Suite de la discussion sur la
question egyptienne

At the invitation of the President, Mahmoud
Sur l'invitation du President, }Jahmoud
Fahmy Nokrashy Pasha, Prime Minister and Fahmy Nokrachy Pacha, Premier Ministre et
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, took his Ministre des affaires etrangeres d'Egypte, prend
place at the Council table.
'
place ala table du Conseil.
M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
J'aimerais exposer I'attitude de la delegation
du Bresil a l'egard du projet de resolution sou·
mis par le representant de la Colombiel •
Je suis heureux de declarer que nollS voterons
pour ce projet de resolution et j'exprime l'espoir
que la majorite du Conseil en fera autant. En
appuyant le projet de resolution presente par la
Colombie, nous restons logiques avec nous
memes et conservons I'attitude que nous avons
adoptee des le debut a l'egard de cette question.
Nous estimons en effet que des negociations dim
rectes entre les pal\ties interessees constituent le
meilleur moyen d'aborder la solution de ce dif·
ferend. Tel, etait I'objectif que cherchait a at·
teindre notre projet de resolution2 et te1 est
precisement le sens de la resolution soumise par
le representant de la ColClmbie.
The difference between the two resolutions
La difference entre ces deu:x: textes reside dans
lies chiefly in the fact that the resolution sub- le fait que la resolution soumise par le repremitted by the Colombian representative explains sentant de la Colombie mentionne ey.plicitement
the two issues on which the parties are to nego- les deux points sur lesquels doiven t porter les
tiate, namely, the withdrawal of troops and the negociations envisagees, a savoir le retrait des
administration of the Sudan. Since these are the troupes et I'administration du Soudan. Ces deux
only two issues in the dispute, it goes without points etant les deux seuls e!emtnts de discorde,
saying that they were to be the object of the il va sans dire qu'ils devaient necessairement
negotiations contemplated by our resolution. The constituer I'objet des negociations qu'envisageait
other difference consists of some important de- notre resolution. Certains details importants, qui
tails which are present in the Colombian draft figurent dans le projet de resolution soumiS par
and which had been omitted in" ours. In other le representant de la Colombie, et que nous
words, where our resolution was vague, the Co- avions omis dans le notre, constituent· une autre
difference. En d'autres termes, la resolution de
lombian resolution is precise.
la Coiombie precise ce qu'il y avait de vague,
dans notre texte.
Although it is true that we should rather
Nous aurions prefere, certes, que la question
have the matter referred to the two parties in a fUt soumise aux parties de fa~on plus generale
more general and flexible manner, we cannot et plus souple, mais nous n ~ pouvons pas ne pas
but support a resolution conceived in the same donner notre appui a une resolution con~ue dans
spirit as ours and aiming at the same objective. le meme esprit que la notre et se proposant le
We feel it to be our duty to vote for the resolu- meme but. 11 est en effet de notre devoir de
tion, with the spirit of which we are in full voter pour un projet de resolution que nollS
accord, in order that the Council may make 2l approuvons entierement afin que le Conseil
just decision, whether the resolution is vague or puisse prendre une decision equitable, que la
precise.
resolution soit vague ou precise.
Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I wish to explain the
position of the Brazilian delegation on the draft
resolution presented by the representative of
Colombia.l
We are glad to state that we shall vote in
favour of that resolution, and we express the
hope that the majority of the Council will do
likewise. In supporting the Colombian resolution, we are consistent with the stand we have
taken on this question from the very start, namely, that direct negotiations between the two
parties offer the best approach for the solution
of this dispute. That was what our draft resolution2 intended to convey, and that is precisely
the meaning of the Colombian resolution.

NOKRACHY Pacha (Egypte) (traduit de l'an, NOKRASHY PASHA (Egypt): I must begin by
expressing my thanks for the genuine sympathy glais): Tout d'abord, je tiens a exprimer mes
and support expressed in this Council for the remerciement~ pour la sympathie veritable et
l'appui que le Conseil a bien voulu accorder a
Egyptian point of view.
la these egyptienne.
However, on behalf of the Egyptian GovernCependant, au nom 'du Gouvernement egypment, I object to the resolution presented by the tien, je m'oppose a la resolution soumise par le
representative of Colombia.
'
representant de la Colombie.
S See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 86, 198th meeting.
~ Ibid., No. 80. The voting on the Brazilian draft
resolution took place at the 198th meeting.

S Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
, i
Deuxieme Ar.nee, No 86, 198eme seance.
~
I Ibid., No 80. Le projet de resolution dUBresil.·.. a ete ..
., .
mis awe voix a la 190eme seance.
"
'

•

2307
First of all, it makes the evacuation subject

En premier lieu, elle subordonne la question
de l'evacuation a la negociation d'un trait-e. Je
Security Council wants to put us in a position ne pense pas que
le Conseil de secunte veuille
where we shall have to negotiate a treaty that nous placer dans une
situation qui nous obligehas been conditioned by evacuation. We cer- rait a lier le traite a la
questio
tainly object to that. Without complete evacua- Nous nous y opposons formel n de l'evacuation.
lement
tion of the Suez Canal area, no progress can be faire aucun progres sans l'evacu . On ne 'peut
ation complete
made.
de la zone du canal de Suez.
Secondly, this resolution deals with "mutu al
Deuxiemement, la resolution prevoit "une
assistance being provided in order to safeguard aide mutuelle afin de
garantir, en temps de
in time of war or imminent threat of war the guerre ou en cas
de menace imminente de guerre,
liberty and security of navigation of the Suez la liberte et
la securite de la navigation sur le
Canal". The liberty and security of navigation canal
de Suez". La liberte et la securite de la
of the Suez Canal devolve' upon the Egyptian navigation
sur le canal de Suez relevent de la
Government, and upon the Egyptian Govern- , competence
du Gouvernement egyptien et de
ment alone.
'
lui seu!. '
The Council will not, I hope, force us to acLe Conseil, je l'espere, ne nous obligera pas
cept a pact or any arrangement which departs a accepte
r un pacte ou un arrangement qui
from the principle of leaving Egypt solely re- s'eloign
e du principe selon lequel l'Egyp te seule
sponsible for the defence of ~ts territory, includ- doit avoir
la responsabilite de defendre son terning the Suez Canal.
toire, y compris le canal de Suez.
Thirdly, I am surprised that any support
Troisiemement, je suis surpris de voir qu'il se
should be given in this Council for 'such a thing trouve au
sein
as "mutu al assistance . . , in time of war or la these d'une du Conseil des gens pour appuyer
"aide mutuelle . . . en temps de
imminent threat of war".
guerre ou en cas de menace imminente de
guerre".
With regard to mutua l assistance in time of
Pour ce qui est de
imminent threat of war, if the Council is refer- menace imminente l'aide mutuelle en cas de
de guerre, les membres du
ring to the 1936 Treaty,! it will find the same Conseil n'ont qu'a
consulter le Traite de 19361
phrase there. Therefore, I strongly object to the pour se rendre
compte que c'est precisement
dause: "mutu al assistance being provided in cette expression
qui y figure. Par consequent, je
order to safeguard jn time of war, or imminent m'oppose energiq
uement a la clause qui prevoit
threat of war the liberty and security of navi~ "une aide mutuel
le afin de garantir, en temps
gation of the Suez Canal" . I do not think that de guerre ou en
cas de menace imminente de
the Council is disposed to approve of this.
guerre, la liberte et la securite de la navigation
sur le canal de Suez". Je pense d'ailleurs que ~e
Conseil n'est pas non plus dispose a approuver
une telle clause.
Fourthly, we welcome the phrase "To termiEnfin, je me felicite de la formule "revoquer
nating the joint administration of the Sudan ..." , le regime administratif
commun en vigueur au
We have to negotiate the termination of the Soudan . . .". Nous
avons a negocier la, rev'present administration of the Sudan ; there is no cation de ce regime admini
stratif, il n'y a pas le
doubt about it. I have maintained on more than moindre doute a ce sujet.
]'ai affirme plus d'une
one occasion that we shall be glad to have the fois queno us serions
heureux
Sudanese express their views. We shall safeguard danais exprimer leurs opinion de voir les Sous. Nous leur garantheir freedom to express their views. However, tirons la liberte d'exprimer
leurs vues. Je crains
I am afraid that paragr aph 2 of the Colombian cependant que le paragr aphe
2 du projet de
draft resolution conveys the idea that we shall resolution de la Colom
bie implique que nous
have to discuss with the United Kingdom the devrons discuter avec
le Royaume-Uni l'aveni r
future of the Sudan.
du Soudan.
We maintain that this is a domestic issue and
Nous maintenons que cette question re1(:ve
that we shall solve it to the mutua l 'satisfaction de notre politique interieu
re et que nous devrons
of the Sudanese and the Egyptians, with full la resoudre a la satisfac
tion reciproque des Sou~
regard to the democratic principles of the danais et des
Egyptiens, en tenant. dfunent
Charter.
compte des principes democratiques de la
Charte.
These are my objections, and I am sure this
Telles sont les objections que j'avais a forCouncil, after expressing its views and its sym- muler et je suis
certain que le Conseil, apres
pathy for Egypt, which appears before it as a avoir exprime ses
opinions et la sympathie qu'il
victim of foreign occupation, will not put us in ressent pour l'Egyp
te, qui comparait devant lui
this situation. I think, as the representative of comme la victime
d'une occupation etrangere,
to the negotiation of a treaty. I do not think the

1 See Treaty of Alliance between the
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Egypt.
Signed at London 26 August 1936. League of Nations
Treaty Series. Vol. 173, No. 4031, pages 401-424.

1 Voir le TraiU d'alliance entre
le Royaum e-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irland e du Nord et l'Egypte , signe
a Londres le 26 aout 1936. Societe des Nations, Recueil
des Traites, Volume 173, No 4031, pages 401 A 424.

the United States has put it nicely, tha~ the rep- ne nous placera pas dans la situation que je viens
resentatives know very well what foreign tute- d'exposer. Je pense, comme l'a egalement exlage means. The presence of United Kingdom prime le representant des Etats-Unis, que les
troops, or the existence of such a treaty, is tute- membres· du Conseil savent tres bien ce que
lage.
.
signifie la tutelle etrangere. Or, la presence de
troupes du Royaume-Uni sur notre sol ou l'exis.
tence d'un semblable traite constitue une tutelle.
The.PRESIDENT: Does any other member wish
to express his views on this subject?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Que1.
qu'un desire-t-il se prononcer sur cette question?

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I should like
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (tTaduit de
to hear the views of the representative of Co- l'anglais): J'aimerais entendre l'opinion du re·
lombia, since he is the author of the resolution. presentant de la Coloinbie, puisque c'est lui qui
a presente la resolution.
Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): I should like to say
a few words in reply to the remarks of the representatives of Brazil and Egypt. Aside from what
I say now, it seems to me that the resolution is
more or less self-explanatory.
In the first place, I want to thank the Brazilian representative for the support he has so
generously offered to our resolution and for the
way in which he expressed his support. He said
the Colombian resolution was substantially in
agreement with the Brazilian resolution, one of
the main differences being that we had seen fit
to mention the basic elements of the dispute as
the object of the negotiations.
We cannot follow the Egyptian Prime Minister's interpretation of paragraph 1 reglU'ding the
negotiations. He understands that paragraph to
mean that the negotiations should be carried out
in order that the United Kingdom may complete
the evacuation of troops from Egyptian territory.
That could be read into the resolution, but I
submit that the text of the resolution simply
reads as follows: "To resume direct negotiations
with a view . . . to completing at the earliest
possible date the evacuation of all United Kingdom military, naval and air forces from Egyptian territory . . ."
It may be that the United Kingdom and
Egypt will sigr! a new treaty, but the resolution
does not necessarily call for such. action, if the
parties agree otherwise. They are called upon to
negotiate, and, once they start negotiations, it
is up to them to decide the scope of the negotiations and the definite form they should take. I
think that is quite clear.
The same reasoning applies to the provision:
"mutual assistance being provided in order to
safegUard in time of war or imminent threat of
war the liberty and security of navigation of the
Suez Carial". I do not believe that that passage
in any way implies that there should be military
occupation or that it derogates in any sense from
Egyptian sovereignty. On the contrary, many
treaties provide for mutual assistance in case of
war or imminent threat of war without being
considered, as the Egyptian Prime Minister considers the provision in question, to be a violation

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'ang1ais) :
Je voudrais rcpo~ldre en quelques mots aux representants du Bresil et de l'Egypte. Indepen.
damment de ce que je vais dire, il me semble
que la resolution est suffisamment c1aire en
elle-meme.
En premier lieu, je tiens a remercier le repre.
sentant du Bresil de l'appui qU'il s'est si gene.
reusement offert a donner a notfe resolution,
ainsi que de la maniere dont il a exprime son
accord. n a declare que la resolution de la Co·
lombie etait, quant au fond, conforme a la
resolution du Bresil, l'une des differences princi·
pales etant que nous avions juge necessaire de
mentionner les elements fondamentaux du dif·
fcrend comme but des negociations.
Nous ne pouvons pas faire notre l'interpreta.
tion qu'a donnee le Premier Ministre d'Egypte
du paragraphe 1, relatif aux negociations. SeIon
lui, ce paragraphe implique que les negociations
doivent etre poursuivies afin que le RoyaumeUni puisse achever l'evacuation de ses troupes
du territoire egyptien. n est libre, bien entendu,
de l'interpreter de cette fa~on; quant a moi,
j'affirme que le texte de la resolution dit simple.
ment: "De reprendre les negociations directes
en vue ... d'achever des que possible l'evaeua~
tion de l'Egypte par toutes les forces britanniques
de terre, de mer et de l'air."
11 se peut que le Royaume-Uni et l'Egypte
signent un nouveau traite, mais la resolution ne
l'exige pas necessairement si les parties se mettent
d'accord par un autre moyen. Elles sont invitees
a entrer en negociations et, lorsque ces negociations seront commencees, les parties devront
decider elles-memes de la portee de ces pourparlers et de la forme precise qu'ils devront revetir.
Je pense que cette question est tres claire.
Le meme raisonnement s'applique a la dispo·
sition concernan "une aide mutuelle afin de
gaiantir, en .tem s de guerre ou en cas de me·
nace imminente de guerre, la liberte et la seeurite de la navig tion sur le canal de Suez". Je
ne pense pas qu ce passage implique, de quelque maniere qu ce soit, une occupation militaire ou une atteinte quelconque a la souverainete egyptienne. Au contraire, de nombreux
traites prevoient, en cas de guerre ou de menace
imminente de guerre, une aide mutuelle sans
etre consideres pour cela, ainsi que.1e Premier

2309
of the dignity of a country or of its rights as a
sovereign nation. I submit that that is a question
of interpretation.
Paragraph 2 does not refer to the future of
the Sudan but very specifically to "terminating
the joint administration of the Sudan ..•" That
cannot be negotiated or carried out either without "due regard to the principle of self-determination of peoples and their right to self-government" or, in the opinion of my delegation,
without due regard to the treaty rights of the
United Kingdom. As I think I made clear in
my first statement, l we cannot accept the contention that the Treaty can be declared invalid
unilaterally because it is thought to have outlived its purpose or because it is thought to be
inconsistent with the Charter. My delegation
therefore takes the position that respect for the
treaty rights of the Government of the United
Kingdom is the very reason for the negotiations
which we are calling upon the parti~s to resume.
Leaving aside the question of the interpreta. tion of our proposals, I can only say that I am
rather inclined to regret the action of the Egyptian Prime Minister, however sympathetic I may
be to the national aspirations of Egypt. I believe
we should have good reason to feel rather pessimistic about the outcome of these future negotiations, if they are to be approached in the spirit
which the Egyptian Prime Minister has manifested.
We have tried to find some common ground
of approach to this discussion, and we very sincerely hold the view that it is the duty of the
Security Council, in cases such as this, to do its
utmost to act as a kind of friendly mediator.
But if the Security Council is to succeed, it
has to have the co-operation of the two parties
to the dispute, because it goes without saying
that the efforts of the Council will prove unavailing unless such co-operation is forthcoming. I earnestly hope that upon reconsideration
the Egyptian Prime Minister will, as I wish, find
not only that this proposal is intended to help
towards a friendly adjustment of the AngloEgyptian dispute, but that it will also make the
Security Council an active instrument of international co-operation.

Ministre egyptien considere la disposition en
cause, comme violant la dignite ou lea droits
souverains d'un pays. Je pretends qu'il s'agit la
d'une question d'interpretation.
Le paragraphe 2 ne traite pas de l'avenir du
Soudan. n ne concerne que "la revocation, du
regime administratif rCommun en vigueur au
Soudan". On ne peut pas negocier cette revocation sans "dfunent tenir compte du principe
du droit des peuples a disposer d'eux-memes et
a choisir leur propre forme de gouvernement"
ou, de l'avis de ma delegation, sans dument
tenir compte des droits du Royaume-Uni awe
termes de traites en vigueur. Ainsi que je l'ai
clairement exprime dans ma premiere declaration l , nous ne pouvons pas accepter que 1'0n
denonce le Traite d'une fas;on unilaterale, sous
pretexte qu'il n'a plus de raison d'etre ou qu'il
est incompatible avec la Charte. Ma delegation
pretend done que le respect des droits du
Royaume-Uni aux termes du Traite en vigueur
est la raison meme des negociations que nollS
demandons aux parties interessees de reprendre.
Laissant de cote la question de l'interpretation
de nos propositions, je me bornerai a dire que je
suis plutot enclin a regretter l'attitude adoptee
par le Premier Ministre d'Egypte, queUe que
soit la sympathie que je puisse ressentir a l'egard
des as~irations nationales de l'Egypte. Je crois
que nous aurions de fortes raisons d'eprouver
un certain pessimisme quant a l'issue des nego·
ciations envisagees, si nollS les abordions dans
1'esprit qui anime le Premier Ministre d'Egypte.
Nous nous sommes efforces de trouver un terrain
commun pour aborder cette discussion et nollS
pensons tres sincerement que dans des cas comme
celui-ci, le Conseil de securite doit s'efforcer
d'agir en mediateur bienveillant et amical.
Mais pour que le Conseil de ·securite reussisse
dans sa tache il faut qu'il puisse compter sur
la cooperation des deux parties en cause, car
il va sans dire que sans cette cooperation les
efforts du Conseil resteront vains. J'espere sinceun nouvel
rement que, apres avoir procede
examen de la question, le Premier Ministre
d'Egypte s'apercevra, ainsi que je le desire, que
non seulement cette proposition a pour but de
faciliter un ajustement amical du differend
anglo-egyptien, mais aussi qu'eUe contribue a
faire du Conseil de securite un instrument efficace de cooperation internationale.

a

The PRESIDENT: As there are no further
speakers, I should like to take this opportunity
to state my delegation's position with regard to
this resolution.
In the first place, I should like to bring to
the attention of the Council the fact that the
maintenance of United Kingdom troops on
Egyptian territory, in the vicinity of the Suez
Canal, is not. an obligation on the part of the
United Kingdom. It is simply an authorization
by His Majesty the King of Egypt to His Bri-

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Comme
il n'y a plus d'orateurs inscrits, je voudrais profiter de cette occasion pour exprimer l'attitude
de ma delegation a l'egard de cette resolution.
Tout d'abord, je desire attirer 1'attention du
Conseil sur le fait que le maintien !ie troupes
du Royaume-Uni sur le territoire egyptien awe
environs du canal de Suez n'est pas une obligation pour le Royaume-Uni. C'est seulement une
autorisation, que Sa Majeste le roi d'Egypte a
accordee a Sa Majeste britannique, de maintenir

• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 86, 198th meeting.

• Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slCMritl.
Deuxieme Annee, No 86, 198eme seance.
•

·2310
tannic Majesty to maintain some of his forces

tine partie de ses forces armees au voisin~\ge du
Canal.
Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni n'est nullement oblige de faire usage de cette autorisation
et d'agir en consequence. Le Royaume-Uni a
toute liberte de maintenir des troupes dans cette
region ou de les en retirer. S'il retire ses troupes
du voisinage du Canal, il ne violera le Traite
en aucune maniere. 11 ne fera rien a son encontre.
n est libre d'agir comme ill'entend.
J'ai deja, fait observer dans ma precedente
declaration1 que sa Majeste le roi d'Egypte avait
accorde cette automation dans des circonstances
tres speciales, qui en faisaient une necessite. Certaines de ces circonstances ont cesse d'exister et
rien ne peut empecher le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni de retirer les forces reduites qu'il
a placees la, et dont la presence n'a eu pour resultat que de constituer une menac;; contre la
paix, d'irriter le Gouvernement egyptien, d'entrainer de part et d'autre des depenses supplementaires et de ereer une atmosphere defavorable a l'amitie que les deux parties interessees
auraient desire faire naitre et conserver.
Je suis certain que si les troupes etaient retirees, de nouvelles negociations prendraient une
tournure encourageante et utile et que l'on obtiendrait des resultats satisfaisants pour les deux
parties.
Le paragraphe 1 de cette resolution declare
qu'it y a lieu de reprendre les negociations en
vue de proceder des que possible ou faisable a
l'evacuation de l'Egypte par toutes les forces
britanniques de terre, de mer et de l'air. Ainsi
que je l'ai declare auparavant, l'evacuation ne
necessite aucune negociation. On peut l'accomplir sans negociations.
La seconde partie du paragraphe 1 est ainsi
redigee: ". . . une aide mutueIle afin de garantir, en temps de guerre ou en cas de menace
imminente de guerre, la liberte et la securite de
la navigation sur le canal de Suez".
Je tiens a rappeler aux membres du Conseil
que c'est precisement pour cette raison que les
negociations anterieures ont echoue. Si nous invitons maintenant les parties interessees a engager de nouvelles negociations, il suffit de leur
poser cette condition pour que ces negociations
ne commencent meme pas; mais memes si dIes
sont engagees, e1les ,seront bientot rompues.
Une aide mutuelle, ainsi que le declarent les
Egyptiens, n'est plus necessaire a la protection
du Canal. L'armee egyptienne est assez forte
pour se charger de cette tache sur son propre
territoire et eIle a le droit absolu d'assurer la
protection du Canal. C'est a dIe seule qu'incombe ce devoir. Si la necessite s'en faisait sentir, le Gouvernement egyptien pourrait s'adresser
au Conseil de securite, car ce Canal est une
grande route maritime. Il est international et a
la disposition de toutes les nations du monde.
Conformement aux dispositions de la Charte,
le Conseil de securite est tenu de prendre les

in the vicinity of the Canal.
The Government of the United Kingdom is
not under any obligation to fulfill this authorization and act upon it. The United Kingdom is
altogether free to keep troops there or not to
keep them there; If it withdraws its troops from
the vicinity of the Canal, it would not be violating the Treaty in any way. It would not be doing
anything against the Treaty. It is free to do so.
This authorization gr"cJIted by His Majesty the
King of Egypt, as I said in my previous statement,l was given under certain circumstances
which were compelling and pressing. Some of
these circumstances have ceased to exist and
there is nothing to prevent the Government of
the United Kingdom from withdrawing the small
force it has placed there, which force has
achieved no result or effect except a threat to
the peace, vexation to the Egyptian Government,
extra expenditure for both sides, and the creation of a bad atmosphere with regard to the
friendship both parties would have liked to
establish and keep.
If these troops were to be withdrawn, I believe further negotiations would be useful and
hopeful, and would attain results satisfactory to
both sides.
In this resolution, paragraph 1 states that
negotiations should be resumed for the evacuation of all United Kingdom military, naval and
air forces from Egyptian territory as soon as
possible or practicable. As I said before, evacuation does not require any negotiation. It may be
accomplished without negotiation. '
The second part of paragraph 1 reads: "
mutual assistance being provided in order to
safeguard in time of war or imminent threat of
war the liberty and security of navigation of the
Suez Canal ..."
I remind the members of the Coun.cil that
the previous negotiations broke down for this
reason. If we now invite the parties to the dispute, or recommend to them, to go on to new
negotiations and attach such a condition, that
will be one of the reasons why these negotiations will not be initiated; and if they are they
will break down very soon.
Mutual assistance, as the Egyptians say, is not
necessary now for the protection of the Canal.
The Egyptian Army is strong enough to cope
with this duty which lies within its territory, and
it has the ft.ill right to protect the Canal. This
duty falls upon it alone. In time of necessity,
the Egyptian Government could, resort to the
Security Council, for this Canal is a naval highway; it is international and for the use of all
the world. The Security Council, by the provisions of the Charter, is bound to take upon
itself measures for collective security. This is one
of them. Therefore, it is not necessary for the SeS

See Official R.cords of

;(l;"'~'" Year. No. 84.

,la. S.curi', Council. Second

1

Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil d. sleuritl,

,;.;<p''!fT~'";<'9!''T'':f",."~"":,:: """,D<,e""UX1,:,,,·,,,em::,,e,{".Ann",ee, No 84.
__

,_»,~

pt

mesures necessaires pour assurer la securite collective. C'est la l'une cl'entre elles. Il n'est done
pas necessaire que le Conseil' de securite impose
aux parties interessees cette clause imperative
de cooperation pour la protection du Canal, car
cela equivaudrait a indiquer que le Traite de
1936 continue a etre valable et doit rester en
vigueur; Le Traite de 1936 contient une disposition d'aide mutuelle en ce qui concerne le
Canal. C'est precisement sur cet aspect duprobleme que le Gouvemement egyptien 'attire
aujourd'hui l'attention du Conseil de securi-.:e.
Le Conseil de securite se mettrait dans son
The Security Council would not be doing the
right thing if it committed itself by prejudging tort s'il prejugeait le resultat des negotiations
the negotiations in such a direction-laying en subordonnant le retrait des troupes a la condown -a condition that no withdrawal will take clusion d'un accord prevoyant l'aide mutuelle
place unless mutual assistance is provided to en vue de garantir la navigation sur le Canal.
safeguard the navigation of the CanaL This Une telle decision le mettrait dans l'obligation
would place the Security Council in the position de demander ou d'imposer au Gouvernement
of asking or imposing upon the Egyptian Gov- egyptien la conclusion d'une alliance militaire
ernment the condition that it should conclude a avec le Royaume-Uni pour la cle£ense du Canal;
military alliance with the United Kingdom for or des alliances militaires de ce genre ne peuvent
the defence of the Canal; and military alliances pas etre obligatoires. Elles doivent resulter cl'une
of that sort cannot be obligatory. .They should libre decision des parties interessees. On a fait
be optional. It has been mentioned that there remarquer qu'il existait actuellement entre les
are now many alliances of this sort between nations de nombreuses alliances de ce genre.
. nations. It is true there are such alliances, but C'est exact, mais elles n'ont pas ete conclues sur
they were not concluded by order of the Security ordre du Conseil de securite, et contrairement
Council or in spite of one party; they were op- aux desirs de l'une des parties; eUes ont resulte
tional. Any party that wishes to conclude a d'une libre decision des parties. Tout pays qui
treaty of alliance with another party is free to desire conclure un traite d'alliance avec un autre'
do so, ~ut .the tre~ty cannot be imposed upon pays est libre de le faire, mais le traite ne saurait
the partles Imperatlvely. For this reason, I think etre impose aux parties de fa~on imperative.
the insertion of paragraph 1 of this draft resolu- C'est pourquoi je pense que le' maintien du
tion would do more harm than good to the paragraphe 1 du present projet de resolution
sex:ait plus ne£aste qu'utile au succes des negonegotiations.
tiations.
eurity Council to direct this imperative collaboration for the protection of the Canal, as much
as to say that the Treaty of 1936 was valid and
would have to remain ill force. The Treaty of
1936 contains a provision for mutual assistance
in respect of the Canal. This is the point on
which the Egyptian Government is now bringing
this case to the attention of the Security Council.

S~ A1exa~der CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
I WISh at thIS stage to deal only with one ques- (traduit de l'anglais): Pour le moment je ne'
tion of fact.
vetix m'occuper que cl'une question de fait.
The President has directed the attention of
Le President a attire l'attention du Conseil
the Council to the second part of' paragraph 1 sur la deuxieme partie du paragraphe 1 de la
of the Colombian resolution, which reads: ". . . resolution soumise par le representant de la Comutual assistance being provided in order to lombie. Ce texte se lit comme suit: " ... en presafeguard in time of war or imminent threat of voyant une aide mutuelle afin de garantir, en
war the liberty, and security of navigation of the temps de guerre ou en cas de menace immi~uez Canal." He seemed to deprecate the inclu- nente de guerre, la liberte et la securite de la
SIon of that phrase, because he said it was on navigation sur le canal de Suez". Il semble
that point that the negotiations of 1946 broke desapprouver I'insertion de cette phrase dans le
d~wn. In point of fact, I am bound to point out, texte, puisqu'il dit que c'est ce point qui a enWIth all respect, that this is not the case. The traine la rupture des negociations en 1946. En
1946 negotiations led to the initialing by both fait, tout bien considere, je suis dans I'obligation
Governments
of the Evacuation Protocol
.
.
. ' the de faire remarquer que tel n'est pas le cas. Les
mam Treaty providing mutual assistance, , negotiations de 1946 ant amene les deux Gouand the Sudan Protocol.! All three docu- vernements a parapher le Protocole relatif a
ments were initialled, and it was only later l'evacuation, le Traite principal qui prevoit une
!hat the negotiations broke down on a disputed aide mutuelle et le Protocole re1atif au Soudan1 •
mterpretation of a single phrase in the Sudan Ces trois documents ont ete paraphes et ce n'est
Protocol. That is the history of the break- que plus tard que les negociations ont ete romdo~n of the negotiations, and' I should like to pues a la suite d'une controverse portant sur
l'interpretation cl'une seule phrase du Protocole
remmd the Council of that fact.
re1atif au Soudan. Telle est l'histoire de la rupture des negociations que je tenais a rappeler
au Conseil.
1

See Papers regarding the Negotiations for a Revision

o the Anglo-Egyptian Trea.ty ()f 1936, United Kingdom

Command Paper 7179.
'

I', '

1 Voir Papers regarding the Negotiations for a Revision
of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, Unit,d KinKdom
,
Command Paper 7179.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The Colombian representative's ne'W proposal was submitted only today. We have not yet had enough
time to study it.· It raises some new questions,
which have not figured in the proposals hitherto
made in the Security Council. Therefore I would
suggest that we resume consideration of the
Colombian representative's proposal at 3 p.m.
tomorrow and at this point close today's discussion.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du 1'Usse): C'est
aujourd'hui seulement que la nouvelle proposition du representant de la Colombie a ete de~
posee. Nous n'avons pas encore eu le temps de
l'etudier. Or, cette proposition souleve certaines
questions nouvelles qui n'etaient pas traitees dans
les propositions dont le Conseil de securite avait
ete saisi precedemment. C'est pourquoi jeJ propose de suspendre la discussion et de reprendre
demain a 15 heux-es l'etude de la proposition du
representant de la Colombie.

M.. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traMr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
It is true that none of us has had very much duit de l'anglais): Il est vrai qu'aucun de nous
time to study this new resolution or its implica- I n'a eu le temps d'etudier cette nouvelle resolutions, but the more one examines it, the more tion ou ses incidences. Toutefois plus on l'exaone is impressed with the comment made by the mine et plus on a conscience du bien-fonde des
representative of Brazil that it has very little new observations formulees par le representant du
material in it; it is a precision of the principles Bresil qui a dit que ce texte ne contenait que
of his own resolution.
peu d'eIements nouveaux; on y retrouve en efIet,
quoique sous une forme plus precise, les prin.
cipes qui inspiraient la resolution soumise par
le representant duBresil lui-meme.
I prefer the Brazilian text, because I think the
Je prefere le projet de resolution du Bresil, car
resolution should be expressed in general terms. je pense qu'une resolution de ce genre doit etre
Our main object is to draft a resolution which exprimee en termes generaux. Notre but prinwould commend itself to the loyal co-operation cipal est de rediger un projet de resolution qui
of the two parties, and on which the Council s'impose a la cooperation loyale des deux parties
could read! a majority opinion. I must say that, et au sujet de laquelle le Conseil puisse reunir
while I do not see arq particular objection to une opinion majoritaire. Je dois dire que:, bien
the Colombian resolution, I do not see any reason que je ne sois nullement oppose a la res'.:>lution
why the second phrase of paragraph 1, starting de la Colombie, je ne vois pas de raison d'y faire
with the words "mutual assistance" should be figurer la seconde phrase du premier paragraphe
included, or why the Security Council should qui commence par les mots "En prevoyant une
think it necessary to put such a mandatory stipu- aide mutuelle"; je ne vois pas non plus pourquoi
lation in recommendations to two sovereign le Conseil de securite jugerait necessaire de mettre
States. It seems to me that this phrase might deux Etats souverains en presence d'une stipuvery well be omitted. The resol~tion would then lation aussi imperative. Je pense qu'on pourrait
tres bien supprimer cette phrase. Ma delegation
be acceptable to my delegation.
considererait alors la resolution comme acceptable.
Unless it is absolutely necessary, I strenuously
A moins que cela ne soit absolument necesobject to carrying over the discussion of this saire, je refuse de renvoyer a demain la discussion
matter until tomorrow. I think it would be al- de cette question. Je pense qu'il serait· ,presque
most better to adjourn for ten days or two weeks preferable d'ajourner les debats pour di.'l:.ou
quinze jours si nous ne pouvons pas les termmer
if we cannot finish this afternoon.
cet apres-midi.
The PRESIDENT: I have a motion before me
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis
which has priority under rule 33 of the rules of saisi d'une motion qui a la priorite conformement
procedure, that is, to postpone the discussion of a l'article 33 du reglement interieur. En efIet,
the question either until tomorrow afternoon, or on nous propose de renvoyer la discussion de la
until after our vacation. I shall have to put these question soit a clemain a~res-midi, soit a .notre
proposals to the vote.
rentree de vacances. Je valS mettre aux VOIX ces
propositions.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I have
pointed out ~hat this is a new proposal which we
have not discussed. It raises some new questions
which have not figured in the proposals previously introduced. I suggest adjourning the
meeting till 3 p.m. tomorrow. I regard my request as a matter of ordinary courtesy.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'ai dit
qu'il s'agit la d'une proposition nouvelle que ~OU5
n'avons pas encore etudiee. Elle souleve certames
questions nouvelles qui n'etaient pas traitees dans
les propositions presentees jusqu'ici. Je propose
de remttre la seance a demain, 15 heures. Je
fais appe1 a la courtoisie la plus eIementaire.

The PRESIDENT: Is there any opposition or
objection to the suggestion that discussion of the

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Quelqu'un s'oppose-t-il a la suggestion demandant
.,-~

Colombian proposal should, be adjourned until que la discussion de la proposition de la Colomtomorrow at 3 p.m.?
bie soit ajoumee jusqu'a demain 15 heures?
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I have no objection whatever to coming back
tomorrow, provided the majority of the Council
wants to do so. However, I do not think it is
necessary to discuss this question every day; it
might be useful to have a period of time to think
about it and .to cool down a little. I would just
as soon wait two weeks before resuming discussion of this question.
I shall accept whatever decision the President
and the Council take. I am merely expressing
an opinion. I fully respect the desire of the representative of the USSR or anyone else not to
continue the discussion today.
I think we should adjourn the discussion now
as a matter of common courtesy. However, I do
not think it is a matter of courtesy whether we
resume the discussion tomorrow, the day after
tomorrow, or two weeks from now; it is for the
Council to determine when it wishes to resume
the debate.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne vois aucun inconvenient
a revenir id demain si la majorite du Conseil
le desire. Cependant je ne pense pas qu'il soit
necessaire de discuter chaque jour cette question;
il" Pflllrrajt s',averer utile de se menager un certain temps pour y reflechir et laisser les passions
s'apaiser que1que peu. J'aimerais autant attendre
deux semaines avant de la reprendre.
J'accepterai toute decision que le President
et le Conseil pourront prendre. C'est un simple
point de vue que j'expose. Je suis parfaitement
dispose a respecter le desir du representant de
l'URSS ou de tout autre representant de voir
renvoyer la discussion.·
Par simple politesse, je pense que nollS devrions suspendre la discussion pour aujourd'hui
Cependant, je ne pense pas que la question de
savoir s'il faut reprendre la discussion demain,
apres-demain ou dans deux semaines soit aussi
une question de politesse. C'est au Comeil de
fixer la date a laquelle il reprendra ce debat.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I merely wish to call
the attention of the United States representative
to the fact that the Prime Minister of Egypt is
here waiting for a decision on this matteT, and
a delay -of two weeks may be a very long one
for him, in view of the fact that he has important
business in his own country.
I would therefore ask the United States representative to reconsider his proposal, in order to
facilitate a decision on this question at the earliest possible date.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais seulement attirer l'attention du representant des Etats-Unis sur le fait que le Premier Ministre d'Egypte attend id une decision
et qu'un delai de deux semaines peut etre tI'es
long pour lui, etant donne qu'il a, dans son
pays, d'importantes affaires a regler.
Je demande donc au representant des EtatsUnies de revenir sur sa proposition, afin que le
Conseil puisse prendre aussitot que possible une
decision au sujet du probleme dont il est saisl.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I have not made any proposal.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai fait aucune .proposition.

The PRESIDENT: Has the representative of the
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le reUSSR made a motion to adjourn the discussion presentant de l'URSS a-t-il propose de renvoyer
la discussion a demain?
until tomorrow?
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociaMr. GROMYKO: (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Vous pouvez considerer ma proposition comme ·une
President may consider it a motion.
motion.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Si les
The PRESIDENT: If the members of the Counmembres
du Conseil acceptent de se reunir
cil agree to meet tomorrow at 3 o'clock, I have
no objection at all. I am ready, but I understand demain a 15 heures, je n'y vois pas d'inconvethat some representatives may have to consult nient. Je suis pret, mais je crois comprendre que
their Governments, and I am afraid it may not, certains I'epresentants aimeraient avoir la possibe possible to do anything tomorrow afternoon bilite de consulter leurs Gouvernements. J e crains
and that it will again be necessary to postpone done qu'il ne soit· impossible de faire quoi que
ce soit demain apres-midi et qu'il ne soit· a nouthe discussion until some other time.
veau necessaire de renvoyer la discussiua a que!que date ulterieure.
Cependant, je demande aux :membres du
However, I shall ask the members of the
Council whether or not they wish to meet to- Conseil s'ils desirent se reunir demain; dans ~a
~orrow afternoon; if not, I shall not fix any negative, je ne fixerai aucune date, car mes
tun.::, because my authority does not extend be- pouvoirs de President expirent demain. Passe
yond tomorrow. Aiter tomorrow, ·1 shall leave ce jour, je laisserai a mon successeur, le represenIt~ to the new President, the representative of the tant de l'URSS, le soin de fixer la prochaine
USSR, to fix a date for the next meeting at seance a la date qu'il lui plaira.
whatever time he wishes.

2314
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
When making my remarks I had in mind the
idea which the President has just expressed. I
do not see the point of meeting tomorrow unless
all the members of the Council are prepared
to ta~e action and vote on the Colombian resolutic.., What is the use of coming here unless
we are ready to vote and finish discussion of
the question?

..........

I

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tTaduit de l'anglais): Au moment Oll j'ai fait mes
remarques, je pensais a ce que le President vient
d'exprimer. Je ne vois pas de raison de nous
reunir demain, a moins que tous les membres
du Conseil ne soient prets a prendre une decision
et a voter sur la resolution de la Colombie.
Pourquoi venir ici, a moins d'etre prets a voter
et a mettre fin a l'examen de cette question?

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I am not
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
quite clear as to whether the motion for adjourn- l'anglais): Je ne vois pas tres bien si la motion
ment is to enable the representatives to consider demandant l'ajournement doit permettre aux
this resolution further or to give them dme to representants de proceder a un examen plus
consult their respective Governments. If it is the approfondi de la resolution ou de lenr donner
latter, I do not know how the USSR representa- le temps de consulter leurs Gouvernements.
tive's communications are with Moscow. I sup- Dans cette seconde hypothese, je ne sais rien des
pose he is going to send his telegrams off and get moyens de communication du representant de
his Government to consider them and reply to l'URSS avec Moscou. Je suppose qu'il enverra
them, so we can proceed to a vote tomorrow des telegrammes et qu'il priera son Gouvemeafternoon. However, I am not sure whether the ment de les etudier et d'y repondre, afin que le
motion for adjournment is to enable Mr. Gro- Conseil puisse proceder a un vote demain apresmyko to consider the resolution, or to permit his midi. Cependant, je ne comprends pas nettement
Government to do so. I think it is important to si la motion d'ajournement doit permettre a
know what precisely is the intention, because, as M. ~rom~ko ou a son .Gouv,~rneme?t d?examiner
far as my delegation is concerned, we prefer to la r~solutIOn. Je C~olS q~ il est unport~nt de
proceed this afternoon.
savorr exactement a quO! tend la motIOn en
question, etant donne que la delegation de l'Australie pr~fererait pour sa part poursuivre ces
debats cet apres-midi.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I confirm my suggestion to postpone the discussion of
this question until 3 p.m. tomorrow:

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (tTaduit du russe): Je repete
que je propose d'ajourner l'examen de ceUe
question a demain, 15 heures.

Mr. TSIANG (China): I should ,also welcome
M. TSIANG (Chine) (tTaduit de l'anglais):
a certain amount of time to consider the pro- Je serais moi aussi heureux de disposer d'un cerposal of the Colombian representative. The reso- tain laps de temps pour examiner la proposition
lution does ,contain new elementl;. There are du representant de la Colombie. Cette resolution
consequences which I do not qt,{ite: understand. contient effectivement des elements nouveaux.
I hope, however, that the representative of the RUe comporte des incidences que je ne suis pas
USSR will not insist upon an immediate ad- sur de bien saisir. J'espere cependant que le rejournment. I do not think we should come to a presentant de I'URSS n'insistera pas pour obtedecision on the Colombian resolution until some nir l'ajournement immedi:it de la discussion. Je
time later. But it may be that we could very ne pense pas que nous devions prendre immediaprofitably use our time to consider other sug- tement une decision relative a la resolution de
gestions and other approaches to the problem.
la Colombie. Mais il est possible que nous utilisions avec profit le temps dont nOllS disposons
pour examiner d'autres suggestions et d'autres
fa~ons d'aborder le probleme.
If th~ Council is not adjourned immediately,
Si le Conseil ne decide pas de s'ajourner immeI myseif should welcome an opportunity to ask diatement, j'aimerais, en ce qui me concerne,
it to consider the problem from another angle.
avo;r la possibilite de lui demander d'examiner
la question sous un aspect different.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques soda.Mr. GRIJMYK<l (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I very listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je suis
much appreciate the Australian representative's tres reconnaissant au representant de l'Australie
cC!ncem about my means of communication with de s'etre preoccupe de mes moyens de communiMoscow. I have no objection to deciding this cations avec Moscou. Je n'ai pas d'objection a
matter tomorrow, if the Security Council is ready ce que nollS prenions demain une decision sur
to do so; but, as I have already pointed out, cette question, si le Conseil est en mesure de le
this new resolution demands a certain amount faire. Mais, comme je l'ai deja indique, il y a
of fresh study. Twenty hours would probably be lieu d'examiner cette nouvelle proposition plus
sufficient for the USSR delegation to study tbis a fond. Un delai de vingt heures environ suffira
new resolution. I think, therefore, we might well a la delegation de I'URSS pour etudier cette nouclose the discussion now, simply .because we shall. velle proposition. Donc, si j'estime qu'il serait

have more time to study this proposa' U""
able to discuss it more usefully t~morr

'y , bon de clore maintenant nos debats, c'est "i:out

I simplement parce que nous pourrions etudier la

I question plus a loisir et que, demain, notre discussion serait plus fructueuse.
I should like to add that if others think it
Je voudrais ajouter que si les autres membres
possible to carry on with the discussion today, du Conseil estiment possible de poursuivre la
postponing the voting and the continuation of discussion aujourd'hui, tout en ajournant a dethe discussion till tomorrow, I shall have no main la suite de ce debat ainsi que la decision
-objection. I should have thought it more advis- a prendre, je ne m'y opposerai pas. Toutefois
able to postpone the matter till tomorrow, as j'estime qu'il serait preferable de remettre" la
that would give us more time to study this reso- discussion a demain, etant donne que cela nous
lution, and our discussion tomorrow would be permettrait d'etudier cette proposition plus a loimore profitable.
sir et que, demain, notre discussion serait plus
fructueuse.

The PRESIDENT: I have to put to the vote the
motion for adjournment until tomorrow afternoon at 3 p.m. If it is not adopted, we shall
continue our discussion for a short time, and
adjourn later.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je dois
mettre aux voix la motion demandant l'ajournement du Conseil jusqu'a demain 15 heures. Si
elle n'est pas adoptee, nous continuerons la discussion pendant quelque temps et nous ajournerons plus tard.

Mr. GROMYKO: (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I have
already said that if the other representatives
think we can continue the discussion today, and
then adjourn the discussion and the adoption of
the decision until tomorrow, I shall raise no
objection; that course would be acceptable to
me. I think that it would be advisable to close
the discussion in order to have more time for
study. If there are any representatives who
would like to speak today on condition that we
continue the discussion tomorrow, I have no objection.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'ai deja
dit. que, si les autres delegues estiment possible
de continuer la discussion aujourd'hui et de remettrea deniain la suite des debats ainsi que la
decision a prendre, je n'y verrais pas d'inconvenients; je suis pret a l'accepter. J'estime qu'il
serait preferable de clore la discussion afin de
pouvoir etudier la propos~tion a loisir. Toutefois,
si certains deIegues desirent prendre la parole
des aujourd'hui, je ne m'y opposerai pas, pourvu
que nous reportions la suit~ des debats a demain.

- The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative of the USSR prefers to postpone his
motion for adjournment until after we have
heard any others who wish to speak on the subject this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'an!;lais): Je crois
comprendre que le representant de l'URSS prefere retirer sa motion d'ajournement jusqu'au
moment ou nous aurons entendu tous ceux qui
desirent prendre la parole cet apres-midi.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): I, too, should like an adjourn-

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Jesouhaite
egalement un ajournement, mais un ajournement
ment, but for more than twenty-four hours. In de plus de vingt-quatre heure~, Pour la fixation
deciding the length of the adjournment, the d'un delai, le Conseil devrait evidemment tenir
Council should, of course, take into considera- compte des convenances du chef du Gouvernetion the convenience of the Head of the Egyptian ment egyptien.
Government.
Mr. TSIANG (China): I think it is our agreed
M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais):
aim to get a resolution which can be passed by J e crois que notre dessein a tous est de preparer
this Council. In the second place, we hope we une resolution que le Conseil puisse adopter.
can get a resolution which (the two parties, while _J'espere, d'autre part, que nous aboutirons a
not completely satisfied, will try to carry out une resolution que les deux parties, sans etre
with loyalty and hearty co-operation.
parfaitement satisfa.ites, s'efforceront de respecter loyalement et dans un esprit de cooperation
cordiale.
In view of the statement which the Prime
Etant donne la declaration qu'a faite le Pre'Minister of Egypt made after 'the introduction of mier Ministre d'Egypte apres la presentation de.
the Colombian resolution, I am compelled to la resolution de la Colombie, je suis oblige
think we should probably revert to the line of d'admettre que nousdevrions probablement en
approach proposed by the Brazilian representa- revenir a la methode preconisee par le representive.
tant du Bresil.
Au cours de la discussion relative a la resoDuring the course of our debate on the Brazilian resolution, there was a very important lution du Bresil, nous avons constate que cette
point implicit in the resolution most desired by resolution contenait implicitement une idee tres
~=c~f the. members of the Council, bU~. it was importante qui ralliait les suffrages d'un grand

2316
not explicit. I refer to this point: many members
recognize the legitimacy of the Egyptian Government's desire for the early evacuation of United
Kingdom troops from Egypt. If my memory does
not fail me, I heard quite a number of members
of this Council strongly support that desire ana
recognize it as legitimate.

nombre de membres du Conseil mais qui n'etait
pas exprimee d~une fa~on explicite. Je veux dire
que de nombreux membres reconnaissent la
legitimite du desir du Gouvernement egyptien
de voir les troupes britanniques evacuer rapidement l'Egypte. Si mes souvenir sont exacts, j'ai
entendu plusieurs membres du Conseil appuyer
vivement ce desir et le reconnaitre comme
legitime.

In reflecting upon these-matters, I am inclined
to believe that the course of action adopted by
the United· Kingdom Government also indicates
that it recognizes that the desire of the Egyptian
Government is both legitimate and natural. The
United Kingdom Government agreed to negotiate with Egypt on that question, and both Governments came to an agreement. For some
reason not connected with evacuation itself, that
agreement failed to reach completion. Nevertheless, the United Kingdom proceeded to withdraw part er its troops from Egypt.

En reflechissant a ces questions, je suis porte a
croire que l'attitude adoptee' par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni indique egalement qu'il
reconnait a la fois comme legitime et nature! le
desir du Gouvernement egyptien. Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni a accepte d'entreprendre
des negociations avec l'Egypte et ces deux Gouvemements ont abouti a un accord. Pour une
raison qui n'est pas en relation directe avec la
question de l'evacuation elle-meme, cet accord
n'a finalement pas ete realise. Neanmoins, le
Royaume-Uni a commence a retirer d'Egypte
une partie de ses troupes.

That course of action indicates to me that the
United Kingdom Government itself recognizes
the legitimacy and naturalness of the Egyptian
Government's desire for early and complete
evacuation of its troops from Egypt.

Ces mesures me' semblent indiquer que le
Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni lui-meme reconnait comme legitirne et naturel le desir du
Gouvernement egyptien d'assister bientot a une
evacuation, complete de l'Egypte par les troupes
britanniques.

L'amendement que j'ai propose en vue d'inMy amendment to insert an additional clause1
in the Brazilian resolution also implied that serer une clause suppIementaire1 dans la resoEgypt's desire was legitimate. Therefore, I have lution du Bresil implique egalement que le desk
come to the conclusion that, on the one hand, de l'Egypte est legitime. En consequence, j'en
many members would like to give public recog- suis venu a la conclusion que, d'une part, de
nition to the legitimacy of the Egyptian Govern- nombreux membres seraient disposes a reconment's desire for the early evacuation of United naitre publiquement la legitimite de ce desir
. Kingdom troops from its territory, 'and that, on d'evacuation rapide de l'Egypte et que, d'autre
the other hand, the resolution introduced by the part, la resolution soumise par le representant
representative of Brazil implied that this was a du Bresil implique qu'il s'agit d'un desir legitime.
legitimate desire.
I wonder whether, if we make that fact explicit in the resolution, we could not get it passed
by this Council and also loyally accepted by both
parties to the dispute. If my analysis is correct,
I would suggest-I am not ready to make a
formal motion at this time-that we should return to the Brazilian resolution and add a further
paragraph to it, which would read as follows:
"Recognizing the legitimacy of the Egyptian
Government's desire for the early and complete
evacuation of United Kingdom troops from
Egypt".

Je me demande si, en rendant la resolution
explicite sur ce point, nous ne pourrions pas la
faire adopter par le Conseil et accepter loyalement par les deux parties au differend. Si mon
interpretation des faits est exacte, je proposerais
- bien que je. ne sois pas pret en ce moment a
deposer une proposition formelle - que nous
revenions a la resolution du Bresil et que nous
y ajoutions un paragraphe ainsi con~u: "Reconnaissant la legitimite du desir du Gouvernement egyptien de voir une evacuation rapide et
complete des troupes britanniques du territoire
egyptien."

I have put this amendment as a suggestion in
order to get a resolution which will be passed by
this Council and loyally agreed to by the two
parties in the dispute.

Je presente cet amendement comme une sim:
pIe suggestion afin d'aboutir a une resolution qUI
soit adoptee par le Conseil et loyalement acceptee par les deux parties.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of France
has proposed that the next meeting of the Se-

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Le representant de la France a propose que la pro-

. 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year. No. 80.

- 1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl,
Deuxieme Annee, No 80.

p

curity Council should be on Tuesday of next
week. However, in order not to interfere with
the vacation of the members of the Council and
the Secretariat, the Council will meet tomorrow
afternoon at 3 p.m., at which time we may be
able to :finish our work.

chaine seance du Conseil de securite ait lieu
mardi, la semaine prochaine. Cependant, afin de
ne pas troubler les vacances des membres du
Conseil et du personnel du Secretariat, le Conseil
se reunira demain apres-midi a 15 heures, ce qui
nous permettra peut-etre de terminer notre
travail.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

La seance est levee a16 h. 50

ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
:H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messllgeries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persi!
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercicl Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA.
COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DENMARK--DAN~RK

Einar Munksgaard
NJilrregade6
K~BENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Lihreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
ClUDAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT-EGYPTE
Lihrairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAmo
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P. O. Box 8
ADDIS·ABEBA
Printed in

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FIANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Suuftlot
PARIS, ye
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI
Mu Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfuear Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEWDELm
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-L1BAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLAND5-PAVS·BAS
N. Y. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Yoorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE
NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON
NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Puhlicacione6
MANAGUA, D. N.
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Foriag
Kr.Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

PERU-PEROU
Libreria intemacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZA!.
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdziema Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska .
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kung!.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANN~ GENEVE, YEVE~
MONTRElJX" NEUCHATEL,
BERN~ BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
KirchgaS'!e 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE
Lihrairie universelle
DAMAS
TURKEY-TURQUIE
Lihrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWIi
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHE5TI
CARDIFF, BELFAST, Bmr.:.:rwGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA"";
eTATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Pinango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE!
Drzavno Preduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska U1. 36
BEOGRAD
~

i

the'''~·~:~~;'~_~_'''~_",,",,i.:~~_~~~~~.:~==,,~<c,,~".>_~~_~~W~~~~:;:~
~tO;J
