A /73/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

91st plenary meeting

Thursday, 20 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gertze
(Namibia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/73/L.92)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.92.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Recalling the fraternal ties and
age-old traditions shared by our indigenous peoples,
we would like to introduce the draft resolution entitled
“International Day for the Celebration of the Solstice”
(A/73/L.92).
My country, Bolivia, together with Chile, Ecuador
and Peru, decided to present this initiative in order to
reaffirm, as stated in the draft resolution, that indigenous
peoples have the right to practice and revitalize their
cultural traditions and customs, including the right
to maintain, protect and develop the past, present
and future manifestations of their cultures, traditions
and histories.
The draft resolution specifically considers the
celebration of the natural phenomenon of the solstice as
an expression of the unity of cultural heritage and ancient
traditions that contributes significantly to strengthening
ties between peoples on the basis of mutual respect and

the ideals of peace and good-neighbourliness. We must
now be much more aware that solstices and equinoxes
are events of particular importance to indigenous
peoples, for whom they symbolize land fertility,
agricultural and food production systems, cultural
heritage and their traditions.
By asking the General Assembly to recognize
21 June as the International Day of the Celebration of
the Solstice, in its various manifestations, we seek to
recognize this celebration as an expression of the unity
of cultural heritage and ancient traditions, since many
indigenous peoples have demonstrated throughout
history that the symbiosis between human beings and
nature promotes a mutually beneficial relationship. For
that reason, we highlight the draft’s invitation to the
States Members of the United Nations to participate
in the events organized by the States themselves,
or by indigenous peoples or communities where the
solstice is celebrated, in order to raise awareness of
this celebration.
Tomorrow, 21 June, starting very early, millions of
people, regardless of borders or nationalities, indigenous
or not, will celebrate the beginning of the new AndeanAmazonian year. In the case of our region, the AndeanAmazonian cultures, from thousands of years ago to the
present day, have celebrated the winter solstice on this
date, which in Bolivia is called Willkakuti in the Andes
and Yasitata Guazu in the lowlands.
In that regard, by submitting this draft resolution to
the plenary of the General Assembly, Bolivia, under the
leadership of President Morales, seeks to disseminate

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18541 (E)

*1918541*

A/73/PV.91

20/06/2019

the importance of a culture of living in harmony with
nature, which is inherent to all civilizations of the
modern world. We will therefore continue to fight for
the recognition of the interculturalism and traditions of
our peoples.
Finally, in addition to highlighting the active
participation of the four Andean countries throughout
the negotiation process of this text, as well as that of
delegations from other regions of the world that also
celebrate this important event, we request the support
of the entire membership of the United Nations for the
adoption of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.92, entitled
“International Day of the Celebration of the Solstice”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.92: Argentina,
Benin, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala,
Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, the Philippines, Suriname,
Turkmenistan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.92?
Draft resolution A/73/L.92 was adopted (resolution
73/300).
The Acting President: I now call on those
delegations that wish to make statements of position on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the Assembly’s adoption today
of resolution 73/300, establishing 21 June as the
International Day of the Celebration of the Solstice. My
country had the honour of promoting and facilitating
the negotiations on the text. With the adoption of the
resolution, we mark a new international milestone in
the recognition of the individual and collective rights
of indigenous peoples, and specifically their right to
participate in and revitalize their traditions and customs.
Ecuador is a multicultural and plurinational
country that recognizes and guarantees the collective
2/9

rights of indigenous peoples at the constitutional level.
The indigenous peoples and nationalities of Ecuador
have a right to build and preserve their own cultural
identity, access their cultural heritage and express their
culture. Ecuador’s Constitution also grants the right to
freely maintain, develop and build one’s identity, sense
of belonging, ancestral traditions and forms of social
organization, as well as the right to maintain, recover,
safeguard, develop and preserve one’s cultural and
historical heritage as an indivisible part of the heritage
of Ecuador.
My country is home to a wealth of traditional
celebrations, many of which have already been declared
to be intangible heritage by the Ministry of Culture,
and appear as such in our National Institute of Cultural
Heritage. The celebration of Inti Raymi is one of them.
The Government of Ecuador is committed
to recognizing and celebrating diversity, as well
as respecting the right of indigenous peoples and
nationalities to preserve their own ways of life. As such,
it has taken important measures to safeguard collective
rights, forms of social organization, the exercise of
legal systems, the protection and promotion of wisdom
and the practice of rituals.
Ecuador ushers in its summer solstice with the
harvest of the first dry grains. For our indigenous
communities, this is a sacred time that is dedicated
to finding new seeds that will ensure their continuity
and survival as peoples. It is the time when the
Andean people celebrate Inti Raymi, the Sun Festival.
Inti Raymi is an ancient astronomical and spiritual
celebration for expressing gratitude to the Sun Father
for the harvest. For some peoples, Inti Raymi marks the
start of a new cycle, a new beginning. Many indigenous
peoples and communities of Ecuador even begin
their celebration before 21 June through a cultural
and spiritual expression imbued with ancestral signs,
symbols, colours, music and dance. What is more, Inti
Raymi incorporates a series of events that speak of
the existence of a form of diplomacy among peoples.
It contains a protocol based on the age-old tradition
of the original communities, which, in addition to
affirming their communal energy and belonging, is
a space conducive to celebrating diversity. As such,
this type of experience could help build diplomacy
with a community spirit that recognizes and welcomes
cultural diversity.
19-18541

20/06/2019

We present this initiative along with Bolivia, Peru
and Chile in recognition of the ancient traditions of
the indigenous peoples and of the fact that for them,
solstices and equinoxes symbolize the fertility of the
Earth, systems of agricultural and food production
and cultural heritage, and help strengthen links among
peoples. International recognition of the celebration
of Inti Raymi is a fundamental step that will help
build peoples’ identities and meet their challenges of
coexisting and cohabiting anywhere in the world while
expressing their cultural manifestations.
I would like to thank all the countries that joined
this effort, collaborated on drafting this document and
sponsored the text. We trust that the declaration of this
International Day will enable us to strengthen spaces
for exchange and interaction between the international
community and indigenous peoples, in particular, and
society, in general, and that through these actions
we can broaden intercultural dialogue and enhance
cooperation and solidarity among indigenous States
and peoples.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the
support of the membership for resolution 73/300, on
the International Day of the Celebration of the Solstice,
which we have just adopted. This celebration, in its
various forms and manifestations, is a tradition of the
Andean countries, including my own. The General
Assembly’s adoption of this resolution strengthens the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, which stresses our right to practice and
revitalize our culture, traditions and customs.
Chile believes that the celebration of the winter
solstice, which takes place tomorrow, is an important
date for indigenous peoples. Tomorrow is the shortest
day of the year in the southern hemisphere. Not only
does it mark the official start of winter, it also represents
the beginning of the process of the Sun’s coming closer
to the Earth.
Chile has a strong connection with observing
the universe. As we are in an excellent position for
astronomical observation, my country has become a
global reference point for scientific activity in the field.
A few days after the solstice, Chile will witness
a total eclipse of the Sun that will be visible from the
northern part of my country and that will also mark the
beginning of eclipse season.

A/73/PV.91

Lastly, in addition to reiterating our appreciation
for the support of the United Nations for this initiative,
we would urge all interested members and specialized
agencies, in particular UNESCO, to participate in
events organized by Member States, indigenous peoples
and communities in which the solstice is celebrated.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the adoption of resolution 73/300, which
recognizes 21 June as the International Day of
the Celebration of the Solstice in its different
manifestations. For many of our indigenous peoples,
this date is of particular relevance since it marks the
beginning of the Andean New Year, whose celebrations
were declared by Peru’s Ministry of Culture in 2013
to be of national cultural interest. These celebrations
are associated with festivities that our peoples, which
belong to millenary civilizations, have nurtured and
maintained for centuries as an expression of our cultural
legacy to humankind.
One of these festivities is Inti Raymi, which is
celebrated by the Inca around this time of year and
marks the beginning of a new seasonal cycle, the basis
of their production and economic system. Hence the
importance of this time of the year for our indigenous
peoples. The festivities, celebrated to this very day, are
one of the most important events in the city of Cuzco,
the ancient Inca capital, which attracts thousands of
tourists every year. The Declaration is a recognition by
this forum of the ancestral knowledge of our indigenous
peoples, which is a positive factor for their development.
Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to the
delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its
initiative, along with the delegations of Chile, Ecuador
and Peru, and to all States that sponsored the resolution.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the
delegations of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Ecuador, Chile and Peru for submitting resolution
73/300, which officially recognizes 21 June as the
International Day of the Celebration of the Solstice,
which we believe will contribute to greater recognition
of the cultural diversity and richness of our peoples.
Guatemala, as the heart of the Mayan world,
shares in this celebration and is deeply proud of the
contributions that Mayan civilization has made in the
areas of science, astronomy, mathematics, architecture,
medicine and the understanding of the cyclical nature
of time, directly influenced by the relationship between

19-185413/9

A/73/PV.91

the movements of the stars, the Sun and the Moon. On
that basis, the Maya civilization developed precise
calendars that recognize the two solstices and equinoxes
as part of a perfect cycle that affects forestry- and
agriculture-related activities and the celebrations of our
indigenous peoples. The Mayan vision of the cosmos
also has a cyclical concept of life, based on balance,
that acknowledges the mutually beneficial relationship
between human beings, nature and spirituality.
As recognized in many of the international
instruments adopted by the General Assembly,
indigenous cultures possess incalculable, priceless
knowledge, which they have shared throughout history
for the benefit of life itself and humankind. We are
aware of the significant challenges involved for States
in the process of protecting this knowledge, and of the
importance of stepping up our efforts as an international
community to ensure the transmission and protection
of ancestral knowledge.
That historical knowledge must be transmitted to
children and young people so that they can understand
their cultural heritage and feel proud of their identity.
The promotion of culture and identity and of respect
for natural cycles is also very important for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, for action on climate and for the promotion
of a culture of peace at the international, national and
local levels. That is why it is important to support the
promotion and protection of such celebrations as well
as the preservation of tangible and intangible heritage.
We are convinced that we can continue working
together to celebrate and revitalize cultural diversity at
all levels, because it promotes unity and mutual respect
among our civilizations and countries as well as among
all of us.
In conclusion, I would like to convey the support of
Guatemala for continuing to work towards our objective
of leaving no one behind and celebrating cultural
diversity at all levels. Guatemala, as a natural and
cultural destination, waits with open arms throughout
these celebrations.
As it says in the Popol Vuh, the sacred book of the
Maya, dawn broke for those peoples who on more than
one occasion throughout history had to endure periods
of darkness. May dawn illuminate us, and may we
continue working together to build a history of peace
for present and future generations.
4/9

20/06/2019

Mr. Lawrence (United States of America): The
United States joined the consensus on resolution
73/300 today on the express understanding that the
Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity and the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples are not legally binding on Member States, and
to the extent that it is implied in this decision and in
these declarations, the United States does not recognize
the creation of any new right that we have not previously
recognized, the expansion of the content or coverage of
existing rights, or any other change in the current state
of treaty or customary international law.
We also understand the resolution’s reaffirmation
of prior documents to apply to those who affirmed
them initially. With respect to operative paragraph 3,
we understand that the cost of all activities that may
arise from the implementation of this resolution that
are not met by existing resources should be met from
voluntary contributions.
With respect to the second preambular paragraph,
the United States was an observer State when the
UNESCO General Conference adopted the Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Because the
United States therefore did not vote in favour of the
Declaration’s adoption, the United States declines to
affirm the Declaration and dissociates itself from the
second preambular paragraph.
Lastly, the United States would like to put on record
its concern about the proliferation of International Years.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now invite the attention
of the General Assembly to draft resolution A/73/L.93,
circulated under agenda item 70, entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”.
Members will recall that at its 3rd plenary meeting,
on 21 September 2018, the General Assembly decided
to allocate this item to the Third Committee. To enable
the Assembly to proceed expeditiously on the item in
this meeting, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
19-18541

20/06/2019

to consider agenda item 70 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution entitled
“Commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child”,
issued as document A/73/L.93.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.93?
Draft resolution A/73/L.93 was adopted (resolution
73/301).
The Acting President: On behalf of the President of
the General Assembly, I would like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Georgi Velikov Panayotov of
Bulgaria and Ambassador Maleeha Lodhi of Pakistan,
the co-facilitators of the informal consultations on the
modalities for the high-level plenary meeting on the
thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, who demonstrated great ability and patience
in their conduct of the discussions and complex
negotiations on the text. I also thank Member States for
their valuable contributions to reaching an agreement
on the draft resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 70.
Agenda item 132
Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/744)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.90)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.90.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my pleasure at participating
in this meeting of the General Assembly under the
presidency of Ms. María Fernanda Espinosa Garcés in
order to debate an item of high priority and importance

A/73/PV.91

to all States Members of the United Nations, that is,
“Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a zerotolerance policy”.
My country is keen to introduce procedural draft
resolution A/73/L.90 at our meeting today, owing
to our continuing commitment to supporting United
Nations efforts to implement a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to crimes of sexual exploitation and abuse,
and to complete the role played by Egypt in placing
this item on the agenda of the General Assembly, in
accordance with resolution 71/278, entitled “United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse.” That
resolution, adopted by consensus based on an Egyptian
initiative, addressed the issue from a comprehensive
perspective with a view to combating that scourge
within the United Nations system at large, including
its agencies, funds, programmes, peacekeeping
missions and special political missions, and non-United
Nations forces that have a Security Council mandate.
The resolution gave the victims of such crimes high
priority by calling for strengthening the Organization’s
reporting procedures and remedial measures in order to
increase accountability and ensure justice for victims.
I hope that members will agree with me on the
importance of maintaining this momentum and
continuing efforts to achieve this lofty goal. That is
why today’s draft resolution is important for us to renew
our commitment to making every effort to prevent and
combat sexual exploitation and abuse, continuing the
dialogue to assess the progress made in this regard and
consulting on how to promote such efforts.
Egypt held two rounds of informal consultations
on the draft resolution in order to involve all Member
States in drafting and enriching it. Indeed, many
proposals have been responded to based on the
constructive approach taken by Egypt and Member
States in this regard.
I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to the 25 Member States sponsoring
the draft resolution: Bangladesh, Benin, the Central
African Republic, China, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, the Gambia, Indonesia, Morocco, the United
Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Argentina, Djibouti, Ecuador, Jordan, Lebanon, Mali,
Nigeria, Pakistan, South Africa, Thailand and Uruguay.
The number of States and the variety of regions to which
they belong represent the best possible testimony to the

19-185415/9

A/73/PV.91

strong political support given to the issue of combating
sexual exploitation and abuse from a comprehensive
perspective, whether at Headquarters or in the field.
I would like to welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse (A/73/744), issued on
14 February. The report includes important information
on the Secretariat’s efforts to implement the zerotolerance policy within the United Nations as a whole.
The report makes clear that although the number of
sexual exploitation and abuse cases in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions decreased in
2018 compared with 2017, it has significantly increased
within United Nations bodies, agencies and programmes.
The United Nations also found also cases of sexual
abuse among non-United Nations forces. Those are
indicators that we must be fully aware of so as to avoid
any unilateral attempts to stigmatize troop-contributing
countries based on individual cases or to call for unfair
collective punishment of participating units. The
enormous sacrifices made by the personnel of troopand police-contributing countries in peacekeeping
operations should not be forgotten, as they work in
extremely difficult environments. That requires a great
deal of attention and continued work in order to ensure
that all the necessary measures are taken to combat and
prevent such crimes within the international system as
a whole, while continuing to provide victims with the
support they need.
In his report, the Secretary-General also
encourages Member States to provide information on
their national initiatives against sexual exploitation and
abuse, and refers to the message he addressed to the
States members of the 2018 Circle of Leadership on the
Prevention of and Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse in United Nations Operations in that regard, and
to the seven States, including Egypt, that responded
to that message through their national measures
and initiatives.
Based on its responsibility as a major contributor
of troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and on its commitment to a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, Egypt has
joined the Secretary-General’s initiative on the Circle
of Leadership. Egypt has also joined the voluntary
compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have also taken a number
of important preventive and curative national measures
in this area, including courses on combating and
6/9

20/06/2019

preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in our basic
training programmes for Egyptian troops who are
participating in international peacekeeping operations.
A national investigations officer is appointed for every
Egyptian unit participating in peacekeeping operations
to deal with reported cases according to national laws.
Egypt’s role does not stop there. We have been
working to build African and Arab capabilities through
training courses organized by the Cairo International
Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and
Peacebuilding, in addition to developing relevant
training materials. According to reports by the
Secretary-General, Egypt’s efforts are some of the best
practices of Member States in preventing and combating
crimes of sexual exploitation and abuse.
There is an urgent need for national and international
efforts to eradicate the scourge of sexual exploitation
and abuse, and Egypt will continue to work with all
Member States to that end. We stress the importance of
providing every kind of assistance to the victims of such
crimes, including through a victim support fund for
providing legal, psychological and medical support and
addressing the psychological and social consequences.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation for the holding of this important meeting
and to thank the sponsors of the draft resolution.
I call on all other States to join them and to support
the important principles and values it is based on. I
am confident that they will garner consensus and the
support of all Member States.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): Peacekeeping
remains the flagship enterprise of the United Nations.
It is therefore imperative that issues that undermine that
agenda, such as sexual exploitation and abuse, receive
renewed attention.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his team to improve the United Nations response to
sexual exploitation and abuse so as to curb this scourge
and rebuild the trust of the communities affected. The
purpose of peacekeeping is to prevent the humiliating
abuses that go with conflict. When peacekeeping
itself promotes such abuses, the endeavour defeats its
own purpose.
This issue not only undermines the values and
principles of the United Nations, it erodes the trust
of the peoples we have vowed to protect. When those
committed to bringing peace and safety inflict the
19-18541

20/06/2019

worst features of war, they commit the worst possible
betrayal of United Nations missions. It is inexcusable
and unacceptable, and it is a disgrace. It has no place in
the United Nations system.
Viewed in the context of the protection-ofcivilians mandate of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, this critical issue must be addressed
aggressively through various methods, including
robust predeployment and in-mission training
programmes that underscore leadership responsibility
and accountability throughout the chain of command;
appropriate information exchange on context-specific
responses to sexual exploitation and abuse cases; and
innovative capacity-building initiatives based on best
practices for overcoming cultures of impunity.
The Philippines is proud of its more than 50-year
peacekeeping tradition in 19 countries and territories,
and reiterates its strong and unequivocal support for
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations
and missions. One case of sexual exploitation and abuse
is one too many. It tarnishes the Organization’s image
and does a great disservice to our brave and honourable
peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice for
the cause of peace.
The Philippines is strongly committed to ending
sexual violence whenever and wherever it occurs, and
we hold our troops accountable to the highest standards
of conduct. We assure the United Nations that our
personnel will be following very strict standards of
conduct and behaviour in the performance of their
peacekeeping duties. We have also adopted more
stringent criteria for selecting peacekeeping candidates.
The Philippines stands with the States Members of the
United Nations in protecting the good name of United
Nations peacekeeping and upholding the trust of
our people.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the President of the General Assembly, as well
as Egypt and Ethiopia, which promoted the holding
of this debate, for giving us the opportunity to speak
about a challenge whose solution is vital to the future
of peacekeeping missions as well as to the image of the
Organization as a whole.
Argentina affirms its continued strong support
for the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse and its implementation in
all peacekeeping operations by its military, police and

A/73/PV.91

civilian participants. The cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse that continue to take place are appalling,
and we therefore believe that we must equip the
Organization with effective ways to prevent and punish
such acts, which, when committed by personnel against
people whose protection has been entrusted to them,
represent a flagrant contravention of the mandates of
the Organization.
In this regard, we should continue to implement
the action plan proposed by the Secretary-General in
his recent reports on sexual exploitation and abuse,
as reflected in the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly. Those measures must be harmonized with
those of the Security Council, which we also support.
The Organization must have a coherent, coordinated
and seamless vision on this sensitive issue.
Argentina once again commends the efforts of the
Organization in this important task. In that regard,
we welcome the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute as
Special Coordinator on improving the United Nations
response to sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as the
establishment of the Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
We want to highlight the fact that at the national
level, our country signed the voluntary compact on
preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse on 29 September 2017. In September 2018, the
President of Argentina joined the Secretary-General’s
Circle of Leadership on the Prevention of and Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in United Nations
Operations. Argentina has two national focal points that
specialize in combating sexual abuse and exploitation.
The focal point for military personnel serves on the
national directorate for human rights in the Ministry
of Defence. The most recent appointment is our focal
point for police personnel, who serves on the national
directorate for international cooperation in security
matters within the Ministry of Security.
For Argentina, this topic is of critical importance.
That is why we sponsored draft resolution A/73/L.90,
which is being considered today. The fight against
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions
is a fundamental task that is incumbent on us all and
that can in no way be left to the mercy of the logic of the
various organs or negotiating groups of the Organization.
We therefore call for increased cooperation and mutual
understanding among the Secretariat, the Security
Council, the General Assembly and especially the

19-185417/9

A/73/PV.91

troop- and police-contributing countries, with a view
to devising and supporting the measures necessary to
ensure its success.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to mention that
Uruguay welcomes the holding of this plenary debate
under agenda item 132, “Sexual exploitation and abuse:
implementing a zero-tolerance policy”, which offers
the membership an opportunity to discuss a topic of
great importance to the Organization.
As a State Member of the Organization and as a
troop- and police-contributing country with a long
history of participation in various peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay attaches the utmost importance
to combating cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
In that regard, my country reiterates its unwavering
commitment to the Organization’s zero-tolerance policy.
Without going into detail, I would like to mention
some of the actions that Uruguay is taking, both
domestically and within the framework of the United
Nations, to advance the fight against sexual exploitation
and abuse. At the national level, every member of
national contingents must pass a predeployment course
taught by professionals from outside the armed forces,
with the participation of the United Nations country
office. That course includes topics such as human
rights, international humanitarian law, specific policies
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse, gender and
child protection. Each member must sign an affidavit
prior to deployment acknowledging that he or she
has received instruction in those subjects, assumes
full responsibility for compliance, and authorizes any
disciplinary repatriation and associated costs to be
deducted from his or her salary.
Uruguay has established a focal point in the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, to which victims or their
legal representatives of cases of sexual exploitation or
abuse committed by Uruguayan troops can reach out
for advice on the procedures to be followed in order to
exercise their rights under Uruguay’s legal system. Our
Ministry of National Defence has established a protocol
that provides guarantees for the procedures to be
followed from the time a case of sexual exploitation and
abuse comes to light to when it is resolved, including
the corresponding measures to be taken against
perpetrators and the support offered to the victims.
At the level of the United Nations, Uruguay is a
member of the Secretary-General’s leadership circle,
8/9

20/06/2019

represented by the President of Uruguay, and participates
actively in its work. My country has signed the
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse and has also strongly supported
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and signed
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which highlights
the commitment to supporting the Organization’s zerotolerance policy. Finally, our delegation maintains an
excellent cooperative and collaborative relationship
with the Conduct and Discipline Unit of the Secretariat,
working to resolve pending cases.
There is no doubt that the United Nations and its
States Members have made significant progress in
combating this scourge, but much remains to be done
to continue strengthening the fight against sexual
exploitation and abuse, with a focus on prevention and
assistance to victims. Uruguay will continue to support
all efforts in that regard, as well as the consideration of
this issue in all the relevant organs of the Organization.
For all those reasons, we have agreed to sponsor
draft resolution A/73/L.90, introduced a few minutes
ago, and we trust that it will receive the broadest
possible support of member States.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.90,
entitled “United Nations action on sexual exploitation
and abuse”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.90: Argentina,
Bhutan, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Costa
Rica, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guinea, Jordan, Lebanon, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, South Africa,
Thailand and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.90?
Draft resolution A/73/L.90 was adopted (resolution
73/302).
19-18541

20/06/2019

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations for explanations of position on the resolution
just adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Conroy (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this opportunity to affirm its
commitment to effectively addressing the scourge of
sexual exploitation and abuse and its collective support
for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and the
Secretary-General’s related efforts to strengthen
its implementation.
Sexual exploitation and abuse inflict significant
harm on marginalized populations already vulnerable to
violence, the very communities that look to the United
Nations for protection and assistance in some of the
world’s most dangerous places. When those responsible
are not held accountable for their deplorable actions,
the commission of sexual exploitation and abuse also
undermines the legitimacy and effectiveness of the

A/73/PV.91

United Nations, particularly in its field operations,
agencies, funds and programmes.
The United States welcomes future engagement
with Member States on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse and strongly supports the
authority of Secretary-General Guterres to implement
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. Today we reaffirm that we must all continue
to do our utmost to address this scourge wherever it
may exist within the United Nations system and to
promote accountability for the perpetrators of such
unacceptable acts.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 132?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

19-185419/9
