United Nations

A/RES/68/265

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 April 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 139

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 April 2014
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/690/Add.1)]

68/265. Mobility framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/255 of 12 April 2013 and 68/252 of 27 December
2013 as well as its decision 68/549 of 27 December 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards a
global, dynamic and adaptable workforce: mobility”, 1 the letter dated 22 October
2013 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chair of the Fifth
Committee 2 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 3
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards a
global, dynamic and adaptable workforce: mobility” 1 and the letter dated 22 October
2013 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chair of the Fifth
Committee;2
2.
Recalls its resolutions expressing support for staff mobility in the
Organization, in particular section IV of its resolution 67/255, and welcomes the
efforts made by the Secretary-General in submitting his refined managed mobility
framework, as well as an alternative proposal, to the General Assembly;
3.
Approves the refined managed mobility framework, subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
Emphasizes that the managed mobility framework should ensure a fair
4.
sharing of the burden of service in hardship duty stations;
5.
Recalls regulation 1.2 (c) of the United Nations Staff Regulations, and in
this regard underlines that the calculation of post occupancy for staff members
under the managed mobility framework shall include time served in their current
posts;
_______________
1

A/68/358.
A/C.5/68/10.
3
A/68/601.
2

13-45535

*1345535*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/265

Mobility framework

6.
Decides that staff members who have reached the maximum occupancy
limit when managed mobility comes into effect for their job network will not be
subject to reassignment in the first year of operationalization in that job network;
7.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement the refined mobility
framework with a view to commencing mobility for one job network in 2016 and
one in 2017, followed by two job networks each year thereafter;
8.
Decides that the number of geographic moves for the job networks in
2016 and 2017 shall be no greater than the average number of geographic moves in
those networks in 2014 and 2015;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that managed mobility shall not
have a negative effect on mandate implementation under the peace and security,
development and human rights pillars of the United Nations;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, when considering applicants for
vacancies, to give equal treatment to internal and external candidates;
11. Acknowledges that additional information is required on the managed
mobility framework, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his first
annual report, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
inter alia, data and information on the following:
(a) Current staff mobility statistics and an analysis of trends, including the
tracking of actual costs related to geographic and non-geographic moves and of
vacancy rates by job network and other potential costs that may arise;
(b) The number of posts open to external candidates and the number of
external candidates selected in 2013 and the first quarter of 2014;
(c) The number of staff moves within and among duty stations and the direct
and indirect costs of each move by job network in 2013 and the first quarter of
2014;
(d) An explanation of the criteria to be applied in the implementation of
paragraph 8 above should the number of staff reaching the post occupancy limit
exceed the average number of geographic moves in 2014 and 2015;
(e)

The comprehensive list of non-rotational positions;

(f) The terms of reference and operating guidelines of the job network
boards and the special constraints panel;
(g) An analysis of the link between the recruitment and selection
recommendations of the job network boards and the future workforce planning
agenda for the Organization;
(h) An analysis of how the recommendations of the job network boards
would incorporate the Organization’s gender balance and geographical
representation targets and ensure the equal treatment of internal and external
candidates;
(i) The training and knowledge management plans associated with the
refined framework;
(j) The structure and reporting lines involved in the functioning of the job
network boards, including all expected numbers, configurations and roles of staff
members involved in the semi-annual staffing exercises;

2/3

Mobility framework

A/RES/68/265

(k) Transitional measures to ensure the sustainable implementation of
mobility for staff;
12. Decides that the job network boards shall include a staff representative in
an observer capacity;
13. Also decides that the minimum post occupancy limits for duty stations
classified as D and E will be one year and for all other duty stations will be two
years, with the exception of special circumstances in which the movement of staff
members earlier than the minimum post occupancy limit is necessary for their health
and safety or for the prompt delivery of mandates;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the fair treatment of all staff
members in the context of the reassignment pool related to the managed mobility
framework;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways of
assisting spouses and children of staff members in resolving family issues arising
from mobility requirements;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to identify the number of posts
open to external candidates and the number of external candidates selected in 2014
and the first quarter of 2015 and to report thereon in his second annual report, to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to identify the number of staff moves
within and among duty stations and the direct and indirect costs of each move by
job network in 2014 and the first quarter of 2015 and to report thereon in his second
annual report;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide a full estimate of and
rationale for the financial resources required for mobility in 2016 and 2017,
including requests for any additional geographic moves necessary to achieve the
strategic objectives of mobility, in his regular and peacekeeping-related budget
requests over the course of that period;
19. Recalls paragraph 78 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 3 and, in the context of the managed
mobility framework, emphasizes the importance of a thorough reform of
performance management, to be implemented at the same time as the framework,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main
part of its sixty-ninth session an update on progress and further proposals in this
regard;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
annual reports on mobility until its seventy-second session, a five-year
comprehensive review of the mobility framework at its seventy-third session and
biennial reports on mobility thereafter.
81st plenary meeting
9 April 2014

3/3
