A/70/357–S/2015/682

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
2 September 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Items 56, 57 and 123 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Seventieth year

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Comprehensive review of special political missions
Strengthening of the United Nations system

The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Background
1.
On 31 October 2014, I commissioned a High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations to conduct a comprehensive assessment of United Nations peace
operations today and how they can be made more effective, efficient and responsive
in a changing world. On 16 June 2015, the Panel delivered its report ( A/70/95S/2015/446). I thank and congratulate President José Ramos-Horta and the rest of
the Panel for the excellent report that they have produced, after extensive
consultations with Member States, other organizations and civil society groups. The
present report constitutes my response to and agenda with which to take forward the
recommendations of the Panel.

II. Introduction
2.
“To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”: the opening words
of the Charter capture the purpose of the United Nations. Seventy years later, that
objective has never appeared as urgent or as challenging. Since 2008 the number of
major violent conflicts has almost tripled. Long-simmering disputes have escalated
or relapsed into wars, while new conflicts have emerged in countries and regions

* A/70/150.

15-14893 (E)

100915

*1514893*

A/70/357
S/2015/682

once considered stable. Labels assigned to conflict, such as “internal”, “inter-State”,
“regional”, “ethnic” or “sectarian”, have become increasingly irrelevant as
transnational forces of violent extremism and organized crime build on and abet
local rivalries. Environmental degradation and resource deprivation are not
contained by borders. Exclusion at home is driving tension abroad. The number of
people displaced by war is approaching 60 million, and global humanitarian needs
for 2015 amount to close to $20 billion.
3.
Violent crises are drawing unprecedented levels of international engagement.
United Nations special political missions and peacekeeping operations today deploy
more than 128,000 people in 39 missions, more than at any time in their history.
African and European regional organizations are undertaking crisis management
operations across, and on occasion beyond, their continents. Multiple mediators,
envoys and observers range the globe. International and national non -governmental
organizations are deploying to conflict zones to help to de -escalate and monitor
violence. Many of those efforts are contributing to saving lives and to mitigating the
impact of violence.
4.
However, the proliferation of conflict is outpacing our efforts. Millions of
people continue to live in fear and misery. Failure to prevent or halt war in the
Syrian Arab Republic, in South Sudan and elsewhere dominates public
consciousness. In an era of social media, the horrifying excesses of violent
extremism visit our homes daily. Divisions and competition between States are
hindering coherent international responses where they are most needed. A profound
uncertainty is emerging among our populations over the adequacy of global,
regional and national institutions at a time when demands placed on them are
greater than ever.
5.
Since its founding, the United Nations has worked to preve nt, mitigate and
resolve violent conflict through a range of actions, from support to human rights and
inclusive development to prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and longer-term recovery and reconstruction. Too often, however, efforts ha ve been
fragmented and unequal to the task. The limits of our engagement are reflected in
United Nations peace operations, the most visible face of the Organization. Over
six decades, they have shown a remarkable capacity to adjust to evolving situations
and new demands, guided by well-established principles. However, missions are
struggling to cope with the spread and intensity of conflicts today, and the lack of
unity among Member States over their scope and application is thwarting their
adaptation. Within peace operations, the shameful actions of some individuals are
tarnishing the efforts of tens of thousands. I am convinced that we can and must do
more to tackle such profound challenges.
6.
The report of the Panel provides a solid foundation to do so. The Panel
considers different environments and tasks that diverse peace operations confront
today and offers bold and balanced recommendations to strengthen them. It urges us
to restore the search for peaceful political settlement to the centre of United Nations
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts and protect civilians. It emphasizes
partnerships with regional organizations, host Governments and local communities
to achieve this. It calls for the “full spectrum” of peace operations to be used more
flexibly, “a continuum of responses and smoother transitions between different
phases of missions” enabled by a “field-focused administrative framework”. The

2/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

Panel stresses the urgent need for new approaches to preventing conflicts and
mediating disputes before violence erupts.
7.
Those messages are complemented by other reviews before Member States in
the coming months. The Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture points to fragmentation that weakens international
efforts, and contends that sustaining peace must be a core task of the United
Nations. The global study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
examines progress in placing women at the centre of the United Nations peace and
security agenda. The upcoming World Humanitarian Report and Summit will focus
on the impact of conflict and exclusion on the safety and dignity of the most
vulnerable. Later in 2015, I will introduce a plan of action that includes practical
measures to prevent violent extremism.
8.
There is a collective call for urgent change in how we conceive of our peace
and security instruments, how we apply them and how we work together to
maximize impact. Drawing on the Panel’s recommendations, the present report sets
out priorities and the key actions required to bring them about. My action plan
centres on three pillars: renewed focus on prevention and mediation; stronger
regional-global partnerships; and new ways of planning and conducting United
Nations peace operations to make them faster, more resp onsive and more
accountable to the needs of countries and people in conflict. Some actions refl ect
my long-standing priorities, including the strong preventive focus of my Human
Rights Up Front initiative. Others build on lessons, sometimes painful, from efforts
to respond to conflict over the past eight years of my tenure. Some steps I have
already initiated, while others require longer-term efforts and sustained attention.
Together, they represent a comprehensive effort to strengthen United Nations peace
operations and the Organization’s ability to address conflict.
9.
To reflect the Panel’s recommendations, and to capture the holistic and
tailored way in which United Nations peace and security tools must be used if we
are to achieve better and more sustained effect, I use the term “peace operations”
throughout the present report. The term refers to all field -based peace and security
operations mandated or endorsed by the Security Council and/or the General
Assembly, including peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well
as the envoys and regional offices carrying out my good offices.

III. Priorities for United Nations peace operations in today’s world
Pursuit of political settlements
10. The Panel reminds us that a negotiated political settlement is the fundamental
objective of United Nations peace operations. The type of political settlement
matters. Widespread violations of human rights often trigger a United Nations peace
operation, and progress in the protection of those rights is a basis for its exit. The
United Nations thus advocates for political settlements that promote peaceful and
inclusive societies and help to advance human rights. This is not a lofty ideal ; it
makes hard practical sense, and is at the heart of the operational aspects of Human
Rights Up Front. Societies with effective, inclusive and accountable institutions are
more likely to withstand crises and peacefully manage disputes. Communities that
recognize the dignity of each individual stand less chance of fue lling resentments
that can manifest in extremism.

15-14893

3/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

11. Political solutions to conflict rest, ultimately, on a country’s people and
leaders. Effective conflict response, as the Panel notes, needs to take account of
national and local priorities and needs. It must be directed at building domestic
capacity to protect and strengthen inclusive peace. However, we must be honest
about the challenges that this involves. Countries in conflict are de facto divided
communities, reflecting a breakdown of consensus about which priorities and whose
needs matter. Finding solutions may mean bringing in multiple voices and
competing claims. It must mean that the United Nations speaks to all parties and all
those exerting influence on them.
12. The ability of United Nations missions to engage all partners in crafting and
maintaining political solutions is determined by their political weight. Peace
operations do not deploy without significant international backing. However,
support is not always sustained or accompanied by coordinated pressure on warring
parties or those assisting them. In Darfur, United Nations peacekeepers work in a
vacuum of political negotiations. In the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, my
Envoys search for ways to initiate political processes, even as Memb er States and
regional actors reinforce military and financial support to opposing sides. I fully
endorse the Panel’s call for the Security Council to bring its collective political
leverage to bear on behalf of political solutions.
13. Many of our missions grapple today with the consequences of political failure
and the preference for quick fixes. In many cases, international efforts reproduce
earlier formulas for conflict resolution: disarmament, elections, infrastructure and
institutions, which are critical for a country’s recovery, as seen in Guinea-Bissau
and Liberia. However, they must be built on political foundations and result in
mechanisms that can accommodate diversity and differences. Technical
interventions alone cannot replace the difficult task of assisting parties in finding
political solutions.
14. The Panel’s call to place the search for political solutions at the heart of
United Nations peace operations means that our engagement must be designed and
implemented in ways that help conflict parties to arrive at and sustain a political
settlement. Where short-term prospects are limited and support from parties,
particularly the host State, for a United Nations peace operation is partial or
wavering, I will provide frank assessments and recommend ations to the Security
Council as to what peace operations can be reasonably requested to deliver and
where priorities should lie.
15. Political efforts must be backed by firm resolve, including, where required, the
use of force. As we learned in Côte d’Ivoire, this can be essential to deterring and
responding to violence against a political process. In some cases, the Security
Council may request a United Nations peace operation to undertake specific and
clearly delineated enforcement tasks in support of a political settlement that has
broad international and domestic backing. However, a United Nations peace
operation is not designed or equipped to impose political solutions through
sustained use of force. It does not pursue military victory. As the Panel rightly
recognizes, United Nations peace operations are not the appropriate tool for military
counter-terrorism operations. They do deploy in violent and asymmetric threat
environments, however, and must be capable of operating effectively and as safely
as possible therein. In situations of grave risk to civilians, peace operations must be
able to respond promptly and capably. Troop and police contributors should commit

4/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

to and be ready to meet these requirements in operations with Chapter VII
mandates. They must know and be consulted from the start on what will be expected
of them and the responsibilities and risks entailed.
Protection of civilians
16. I am proud of the progress that we have made in putting human rights at the
centre of our peace and security efforts. They are an integral component of every
United Nations peace operation and a core consideration for United Nations
development and humanitarian activities. We have improved our ability to assess the
potential of disputes turning violent and to draw the attention of national
Governments and the Security Council to human rights violations. The success of
such efforts relies on working closely with local communities and
non-governmental organizations with deep knowledge of challenges and
opportunities to advance people’s rights.
17. All United Nations peace operations today have the obligation to advocate the
protection of civilians. This is a mission-wide task. Many non-military tools are
available, including strong political advocacy, credible reporting and liaison with
communities. Many missions support national authorities in carrying out their
protection responsibilities, including through support to police, rule of law and
security institutions and national action plans to better protect children and address
sexual violence. I have directed that mission-wide strategies and coherent
monitoring and reporting arrangements be put in place to reinforce the collective
impact of critical protection activities.
18. Where missions have an explicit mandate to protect civilians, uniformed
personnel must play their part, including, where necessary, through the use of force.
This has been defined to mean preventive, pre-emptive and tactical use of force to
protect civilians under threat of physical violence. The source and the nature of
violence are not the determinant for action. Guns, machetes, rape, improvised
explosives: these and more are used against civilians by all manner of armed actors.
Missions must have the capabilities and command structures required to respond
effectively, and uniformed personnel must comply with orders to prevent, deter and
protect civilians against attacks.
19. Improvements made over the past 15 years to policies, rules of engagement
and training are helping missions to protect civilians. However, as the Panel argued,
wide and universal participation in missions is also vital to their effectiveness and
credibility. Within Member States lie capabilities that can improve mission presence
on the ground, risk assessments, communication, mobility and engineering. I call
upon all Member States to contribute to peace operations by providing practical and
political support.
20. I reaffirm my commitment to informing the Security Council of situations of
escalating risk to civilians or serious shortfalls in the capability of missions to fulfil
protection mandates. I stand ready to provide regular briefings to the Council on
high-risk situations. I will investigate and inform the Council and Member States of
any incident in which a mission, military unit or police contingent fails to act. In
turn, I call upon the Council to respond actively and consistently to my requests for
political and operational support, particularly in contexts where State parties are
involved in attacks against civilians.

15-14893

5/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

Tailored and appropriate responses
21. Peace operations offer a unique platform to draw together a wide range of
United Nations capacities, serve as catalysts for bilateral and non -governmental
attention and facilitate actions by United Nations and non-United Nations partners.
This may be their greatest potential to address today’s complex crises, but we are
failing to fully realize it.
22. One reason is our well-meaning attempt to neatly characterize conflicts and
develop specific tools for each. However, conflicts rarely comply with categories.
Violence erupts and subsides, stalemates persist for years, and lapses and relapses
occur. Rebel groups may use terrorist tactics; national forces may prey on the
populations that they exist to protect. An effective peace operation must be able to
look ahead and constantly adjust its response using all United Nations instruments.
23. Similarly, we continue to frame mission mandates and postures in national
terms, when the transnational nature of today’s conflicts threatens entire regions.
Transforming peace operations into instruments that can address the regional
dimensions of conflict requires a change in mindset across the Organization.
24. Today, as the Panel notes, more than half of United Nations Secretariat staff
work in field operations, yet our administrative and financial policies and
procedures, as well as intergovernmental processes, are not systematically
configured to support dynamic field environments. As Secretary -General, I have
tackled that disconnect. The establishment of the Department of Field Support was
designed to accelerate our ability to deliver rapidly and effectively. That work needs
to be completed. With the support of Member States, much can be done to design
more appropriate responses, accelerate deployment, better prepare our personnel,
adapt support to field conditions and needs and empower missions to make
operational decisions in a timely manner.
25. A number of initiatives are under way to help to improve the global
management of the Organization, including Umoja, the introduction of a career
development and mobility framework and forthcoming proposals for a global
service delivery model. I am committed to ensuring that those initiatives meet field
needs. In the following section, I set out additional steps to better craft and tailor
United Nations peace operations.
Accountability
26. A United Nations peace operation must reflect the values that it promotes. If
we are not capable of interacting with our hosts, their citizens and their resources
with respect, our actions will have little consequence. Strong leadership and
accountability are essential. As the Panel emphasizes, a single act of misconduct can
undermine the support of local populations and sully the internati onal reputation of
the United Nations. It is essential that United Nations personnel, both civilian and
military, conduct themselves in a manner consistent with our values. The human
rights record and performance of contributing countries is an integral pa rt of this.
27. Sexual exploitation and abuse by a small minority of United Nations personnel
continues to shame our Organization. Such abuse scars the lives of men, women and
children. It is one of my greatest disappointments. I will continue to do everyt hing
within my authority to stamp out this scourge, and I set out below the additional
steps that I am taking to do so. Member States must also assume their

6/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

responsibilities. The Security Council must signal the importance that it assigns to
high standards of accountability, and contributors must ensure that allegations of
misconduct are investigated promptly and criminal accountability is enforced.
Global-regional partnerships
28. The Panel’s call for stronger global-regional partnerships is central to effective
international peace and security engagements. Chapter VIII of the Charter provides
the foundation, but its operationalization depends on our collective will and ability
to put in place predictable and efficient responses from diverse partners. We have
made significant progress over the past 15 years: cooperation frameworks have been
instituted between the United Nations and the African Union, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the European Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American
States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, and regular secretariat-to-secretariat dialogue is held with a similar
set of partners.
29. The structures, mandates and operations of our regional partners vary widely.
Our interests and approaches sometimes differ. Our roles also vary. Sometimes the
United Nations is called to convene and lead a peace and security response. Other
times, it supports and enables the actions of others. A pragmatic and case -by-case
approach is needed, starting with early communication and procedures for crisis
consultation.
30. We also need to move away from improvisation in how we work together.
Political strategies are left unaddressed at times or not pursued and coordinated
consistently. People, troops, police, equipment and capabilities and support
cooperation are generated and negotiated anew by each organization. We must build
on our experience to establish standing arrangements and procedures that can be
applied flexibly when operations are sequenced or parallel and support collaboration
when the United Nations and regional organizations engage in the same mediation
processes.
31. In situations of major conflict and mass violations of human rights, as the
Panel notes, national, multinational and regional responses are often faster to deploy
and more capable of combating well-equipped and determined belligerents. I
welcome African Union efforts to fully operationalize the African Standby Force
and the commitment by the European Union to engaging European Union
Battlegroups, where appropriate, for crisis management. I intend to explore with
those key partners how said capacities may serve as bridging forces pending the
mobilization and deployment of a United Nations mission.
32. The international peace and security responsibilities shouldered by the African
Union and regional economic communities and regional mechanisms in Africa have
grown enormously in recent years. They represent a significant human and financial
burden for African countries. We need to look for ways to share that burden. I am
committed to strengthening arrangements that enable effective delivery by the
African Union for our collective benefit and, where United Nations peace
operations deploy alongside or after African Union missions, to reinforcing the
political and operational benefits of cooperation.

15-14893

7/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

Renewed focus on prevention and mediation
33. Ultimately, we cannot respond to the number and intensity of today’s crises by
focusing only on conflict management. Prevention and mediation must return to the
fore, a point also made by the Panel. The strengthening of United Nations
prevention and mediation efforts, including envoys, regional offices, standing
Headquarters capacity for good offices, standby mediation experts and support to
United Nations country teams, has been one of my priorities. Mediation support
capacity, for example, enabled more than 100 mediation advisers to deploy in 2014
in order to assist United Nations efforts or those of our partners to find political
solutions.
34. At the rhetorical level, there is strong support for early warning and conflict
prevention. However, this is not always translated into early action. M ember States,
which have the primary responsibility for preventing conflict, are often reluctant to
attract a global spotlight on disputes at home and in their neighbourhood. The
Security Council has at times been hesitant to consider crises at an early st age. The
good offices of the Secretary-General have proven to be a powerful preventive tool.
However, even discreet engagement, through dialogue and facilitation, human rights
monitoring, expert teams and capacity-building, requires political support to be
effective. When we engage too late or with insufficient support, our tools may no
longer be sufficient to prevent violence, and they are then wrongly blamed for
failing.
35. It is time to fulfil our commitment to prevention as the core function of the
Organization. Strong Member State political support for United Nations prevention
and mediation efforts can send a powerful signal that the global system is intent on
reducing armed conflict. It can build confidence in the capacity of international
organizations to advance peace. I set out below concrete steps that I believe are
essential to expanding the range of United Nations capacities to tackle crises before
they become conflicts that we struggle to resolve.

IV. Implementing our priorities: an agenda for action
36. The present section sets out a near-term agenda to make United Nations peace
operations fit for purpose, which I am acutely aware will extend beyond my tenure.
I focus on steps that are being or can be taken forward in 2016, while offering
thoughts on those actions to be considered by my successor and Member States.

A.

Strengthening the range of United Nations responses: capacities
for conflict prevention and mediation
37. Strengthening United Nations tools to prevent and mediate crises is helping to
create faster and more cost-effective responses to conflict, yet successful early
action, such as in Guinea, has failed to ignite political urgency for prevention. It is
time we invest in making our tools more predictable and effective. I fu lly endorse
the Panel’s call for a significant strengthening of and more reliable resourcing
through the regular budget for the Secretariat’s core prevention and mediation
capacities.

8/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

38. One of the most powerful prevention tools is the Security Council’s early
engagement. Where united and resolute, the Council can bring important political
and other resources to bear on a deteriorating situation. I will continue to explore
different ways to bring the Council’s attention to such situations, including inform al
briefings and discussions and continued use of the “any other business” agenda item
in informal consultations. In other contexts, however, discreet approaches stand a
greater chance of success. I will elaborate further on those in my forthcoming report
to the Council on conflict prevention.
Regional offices
39. Regional offices have become one of the most effective operational tools of
the United Nations in helping to defuse tensions and supporting national actors in
reaching political settlements. As the recent engagement of the United Nations
Office for West Africa in Burkina Faso, in partnership with the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States, demonstrates, they work with
national actors, United Nations country teams, missions and regional partners to act
early in a crisis and put in place joined-up responses. In West and Central Africa, as
well as in Central Asia, they also contribute to developing collective responses to a
range of longer-term transnational challenges, from organized crime to managing
scarce natural resources. In addition, such offices are cost -effective: their annual
budgets range from $3 million to $10 million.
40. Given the unique role that regional offices play, I strongly support the Panel’s
call for the establishment of additional such offices where they might be of benefit.
I am exploring with regional and national partners in North Africa and West Asia, as
well as in Southern Africa, the establishment of such offices in those regions. As a
crucial operational arm of the Organization’s core prevention mandate, regional
offices should be resourced accordingly.
Strengthening preventive capacities of United Nations country teams
41. United Nations development actors play a critical role in drawing the attention
of the United Nations to a deteriorating situation. They are often the first to face a
burgeoning political crisis, and they support national counterparts in identifying
risks to development and develop strategies to address them. In recent year s we
have made good progress in reinforcing their capacity, including through the
deployment of peace and development advisers, human rights advisers and
mediation expertise. We have also reinforced the capacities of resident coordinators
in such situations.
42. The adoption of the sustainable development goals, notably goal 16, on
peaceful and inclusive societies, offers a tremendous opportunity to strengthen
collaboration between development and peace and security actors. In my capacity as
Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, I
intend to engage leaders of the United Nations system organizations at upcoming
Board sessions on how the United Nations system can be brought together to
strengthen preventive and peacebuilding work. I have also requested the United
Nations Development Group to take forward a review of current capacities of
agencies, funds and programmes, which will feed into those and subsequent
discussions.

15-14893

9/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

Human Rights Up Front
43. My Human Rights Up Front initiative is another step to prioritize and
reinforce system-wide prevention efforts. It seeks to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations system to identify earlier signs of serious human rights abuses and
potential conflict and enable proactive and more effective responses that draw on all
United Nations tools. I am pleased at the Panel’s strong endorsement of the
initiative and will continue to strengthen it, including by institutionalizing regular
reviews of high-risk situations by senior managers. Such reviews will ensure that
United Nations action in the field is early, informed and driven by human rights
priorities.
Early action through “light teams”
44. In situations of crisis or mission transition or when the United Nations
in-country representative and presence require enhanced support, “light teams” of
experts can help to bring together United Nations development, human rights and
peace and security activities to craft a tailored approach to a specific situation.
Operating under my good offices, these small, flexible and time-limited teams can
deploy early and at low cost to work discreetly, under or in close consultation with
resident coordinators, as appropriate, and national authorities to assess the situation,
support national processes and facilitate engagement with partners. I appreciate the
Panel’s endorsement of this important concept and will continue to make use of it
when appropriate.

B.

Reinforced global-regional partnerships
45. The establishment of effective global-regional partnerships will be a critical
undertaking for Member States, regional partners and the United Nations in coming
years. My report concerning cooperation between the United Nations and regional
partners on mediation (A/70/328) reflects our experiences to date and how we can
strengthen collective efforts.
46. Over the next year I intend to further institutionalize cooperation with those
regional partners with which we work particularly closely, so as to enable
consultation, common early warning and conflict analysis, and coordinated
responses to the specific dynamics and needs of each region. With the European
Union, we will fully implement agreed priorities to further strengthen our strong
strategic partnership for 2015-2018. I share the Panel’s view that United Nations
cooperation with the League of Arab States should be further strengthened, and our
two secretariats are exploring the potential deployment of a small United Nation s
liaison presence.
The African Union as a key partner
47. With most United Nations peace operations in Africa, significant African
Union peace operations under way and common mediation efforts across the
continent, the African Union is the key regional partner of the United Nations. Our
cooperation is underpinned by principles that apply to other regional partners,
including consultative decision-making and appropriate common strategies for an
integrated response to conflict, based on respective compar ative advantage,
transparency, accountability and respect for international norms and standards. The

10/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission are taking steps to
finalize, in 2016, a Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which will provide a blueprint for early and
continuous engagement between our organizations before, during and after conflict
and with a view to finding political solutions to the crises that we face. Principles o f
the Framework underpin the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
and the Peace and Security Department of the African Union, and the Framework
has demonstrated the value of collaborative approaches.
48. If the United Nations is to fulfil its commitment to partnership with the
African Union, we need to optimize the full range of potential support modalities,
which may include a combination of voluntary, assessed and bilateral support. I
concur with the Panel’s call for sustained, predictab le and flexible funding
mechanisms to support African Union peace operations. In that regard, I commend
the African Union’s commitment to self-reliance, including to financing 25 per cent
of future African Union peace operations. I urge Member States to gi ve urgent
consideration to how the United Nations can respond to that initiative. In support
thereof, and further to my letter dated 2 January 2015 to the President of the
Council (S/2015/3), I have requested the Secretariat to carry out, jointly with the
African Union and in consultation with other partners, a review and assessment of
various mechanisms currently available to finance and support African Union peace
operations authorized by the Council. The review will be informed by the results of
the recent strategic review of the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia.
49. I recognize, as does the African Union, that any financing provided by the
United Nations will depend on institutional capability to effectively plan, deploy
and conduct peace operations and will be contingent on compliance with United
Nations norms, standards and financial rules and regulations. Recent reform and
restructuring initiatives of the African Union Commission are laying the foundations
for more effective institutional processes. We are supporting a major effort by the
Commission to identify an effective mission support concept for the African Union
and the capacities needed to implement it. As part of t hat, we are exploring how the
African Union could gain access to United Nations system contracts. In the
meantime, we will ensure that the strategic deployment stocks of the United Nations
remain available as a mechanism to provide the African Union with r eady access to
the goods and services required to establish and maintain its operations.
50. The United Nations will continue to provide technical and planning expertise
to assist the African Union in conflict prevention, mediation, military and police
planning, financial and logistics management, security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and mine action. We will also continue to support
the African Union’s commitment to integrating human rights in its operations and to
ensure that international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law standards are
adhered to by forces deployed by the African Union so as to facilitate United
Nations support in line with the human rights due diligence policy on United
Nations support to non-United Nations security forces. Specific areas of work that
we have agreed to support include predeployment training, monitoring and
oversight mechanisms and screening of personnel.
51. I fully anticipate that United Nations and African Union peace operations will
continue to deploy in sequence or in parallel in coming years. It is incumbent upon

15-14893

11/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

us to institutionalize consultative processes and, where appropriate, joint
mechanisms. We have agreed to develop, by early 2016, a shared vision for
benchmarks to guide transitions from African Union to United Nations operations,
drawing on lessons from the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia. We have
also agreed to initiate joint work on standardizing the process of rehatting
uniformed personnel from African Union to United Nations operations, which will
address, inter alia, training, equipment, sustainment and performance standards,
conduct and accountability, and logistics support requirements.

C.

Tailored peace operations
52. The demands, impact and cost of today’s peace operations require
comprehensive strengthening of the ways in which we plan and conduct operations.
The call for tailored peace operations that can respond effectively across the
lifetime of a conflict is one of the Panel’s recommendations that I will prioritize.
Analysis and planning
53. I fully endorse the Panel’s view, echoed by the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, that conflict analysis should
systematically include considerations of human rights and threats to civilians, as
well as the political, security, social, economic, gender and regional dimensions of a
conflict. To that end, over the next six months, existing conflict analysis
methodologies will be revised and new guidelines issued t o enable systematic
application of joined-up conflict analysis, as well as to strengthen and
institutionalize the system-wide analysis and response mechanisms — the regional
quarterly review and the Senior Action Group — set up under my Human Rights Up
Front initiative.
54. The United Nations has a system-wide policy on integrated assessment and
planning that provides a good basis for planning in contexts of peace operations. It
needs to be consistently implemented and continually refined. As recommended by
the Panel, and to support a strategic and coherent approach to United Nations
conflict response from the earliest stage, I am establishing a small centralized
analysis and planning capacity in my office within existing resources. That entity
will draw on and compile information and analysis across the system to prepare
strategic considerations and options for possible United Nations responses. It will
translate my guidance into strategic directives that set out overall parameters for
potential United Nations engagement, trigger strategic assessments where required
and designate roles and responsibilities, including the lead department. The small
capacity will also serve to ensure that integrated planning complies with my
strategic directives and relevant planning policies across an operation’s lifetime.
55. Lead departments are responsible for taking forward integrated strategic
assessments and planning processes. An empowered planner, working from the lead
department and with planners across the system, will develop coherent and
prioritized strategic plans. The Secretariat is compiling a list of senior planners,
drawing on capacities within and outside the system. I also agree with the Panel’s
recommendation to transfer responsibility for operational mission planning, as soon
as feasible, to the field. Missions will be responsible for the preparation of mission
and component operational plans that are coherent, interoperable and tailored to

12/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

their operating environment. Lead departments at Headquarters will be responsible
for review and approval, after assessing whether operational plans reflect strategic
planning directives, are joined-up and reflect available resources. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support have already
begun to jointly approve military, police and support concepts.
56. Effective planning also requires capable and multidisciplinary planners. I am
committed to enhancing training in conflict analysis and assessments, as well as
strategic and operational planning, so that United Nations personnel are equipped to
work capably together. I call upon Member States to support those efforts.
Sequenced mandates
57. Quality analysis allows me to provide the Council with frank and well considered advice that it needs in assessing options to respond to crisis. The
decision to launch a peace operation, therefore, must be made in the context of
sustained dialogue on emerging priorities and how the United Nations can address
them. I support the Panel’s suggestion that the Council consider how it can better
prioritize and sequence tasks that it sets for peace operations. Some recent Council
mandates have taken welcome steps in that direction.
58. On the basis of clear political objectives, the Council may decide to esta blish
an initial mandate and request me to return after a defined period with more
comprehensive proposals for prioritized mission tasks, including assessment of the
military, police, substantive and support capabilities required for implementation
and options for rapid generation and deployment.
59. Where a significant presence is immediately required, for example in
situations characterized by urgent protection needs, the Council may initially restrict
the mandate to political, security and protection tasks, with the understanding that
any further tasks are contingent on progress on the most immediate threats to
civilians. In such cases, my reports would include a regular assessment of the
mission’s political and protection effect, the extent to which the mission has the
capabilities to fulfil its protection mandate and the additional political and practical
support required. Such reports would also track progress towards a political process
and identify options for changes to the mission’s strategy and man date where
progress is not forthcoming. When political openings occur, I would identify
priority actions that a mission can take to support and advance them.
60. A benefit of sequenced approaches, in addition to better use of limited
resources and better risk management, is that they enable United Nations peace
operations to consult early with national and regional stakeholders in the design and
delivery of mandated tasks. Sequencing also allows the Council greater potential to
engage host States and regional partners on expectations and commitments. I
welcome an early opportunity to discuss such options with the Council.
Dialogue between the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop and
police contributors
61. Sustained dialogue between the Council, the Secretariat and contributors is
essential for shared understanding of appropriate responses and their implications
for the mandate and conduct of a peace operation. That dialogue should begin
before the mission is established. One option that could be c onsidered is for the

15-14893

13/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

Secretariat to brief potential contributors together with Council members on its
assessment of a conflict before an operation is authorized. This could serve to alert
potential contributors and allow them to consider what capabilities might be
required. It would also give the Council an opportunity to obtain insights on the
challenges and opportunities involved in mandating certain tasks and in generating
the required capabilities under specific time frames.
62. As the Council moves closer to authorizing or changing the mandate of an
operation, a subsequent set of triangular consultations could be held to ensure
clarity on planned priorities, operational implications and required capabilities.
Such discussions would accompany ongoing memorandum of understanding
negotiations between individual contributors and the Secretariat. To ensure full
clarity on our mutual commitments, I have instructed the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support to include in ea ch
memorandum of understanding the relevant statement of unit requirements, which
details the capabilities and standards to be provided and tasks to be undertaken.
63. Once the mandate of a peace operation is established, the Secretariat will
regularly brief contributors and seek their views in assessing progress. It is
incumbent upon us to immediately explain any changes or requirements that have
implications for troops and police.
Engaging on national priorities and building support for action
64. Consent of national authorities is the basis for United Nations engagement in a
country. I intend to explore with relevant host Governments the establishment of
compacts as a way to ensure understanding of our mandates and status -of-mission
agreements and, as appropriate, support coordinated international engagement.
However, the support of local populations is essential for effective action. United
Nations peace operations must foster public support immediately on deployment,
and strategic communication and community engagement are essential. Where
security conditions permit, peace operations will recruit national staff and
community liaison officers, particularly women, from the outset. Public opinion
surveys undertaken by many peace operations are a valuable means of regularly
assessing progress and evolving community priorities. I have instructed that they be
conducted regularly.
Delivering coherent responses
65. Once Security Council and national priorities are defined, my priority is the
delivery of coherent United Nations responses. Integrated approaches allow us to
create new ways of working together and enable specialist support to be provided
from across the system. They are potentially more cost-effective where participating
mission components and agencies co-locate staff, share services and put in place
cost-sharing arrangements. I intend to accelerate the establishment of platforms for
coordinated work in cross-cutting areas. The Global Focal Point for the Police,
Justice and Corrections brings together the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and others to provide joint support
in the areas of the rule of law and human rights in 19 countries with peace
operations, as well as in other conflict and post-conflict settings. I intend to enhance

14/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

that arrangement by strengthening its capacity for joint programme design and
implementation.
66. Protection functions will also benefit from a more coherent framework of
support to deliver greater impact. Beginning with careful and considered outreach to
communities at the local level and extending to strong mission information
management that informs action and feeds into protection responses, and reporting
to the Council, a shared platform will strengthen response, monitoring and the
coherence of multiple reporting functions, including for children and armed conflict
and conflict-related sexual violence. Going forward, all peace operations with a
protection of civilians mandate should have a senior protection of civilians advis er,
located in the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General, to
coordinate the development of mission-wide strategies and guidance for all
components, in liaison with relevant protection actors, including the humanitarian
protection cluster. With due consideration for the requirements of flexibility to
respond to differing contexts, a dedicated capacity for specialized protection
functions relating to child protection and conflict-related sexual violence will be
consolidated within mission human rights components. The head of the component
will be responsible, through the head of mission, for the implementation of those
specialized mandates and ensure that the Special Representatives of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict have
the engagement, information and support required for the delivery of their
respective mandates.
67. Coherent mechanisms to support women’s full participation in peace and
security are vital. Building on the successful pilot in Haiti, I have decided to
henceforth request that the Senior Gender Adviser of United Nations peace
operations be located in the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General, supported by gender expertise embedded in functiona l mission
components. I am pleased that UN-Women, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs are putting in place arrangements
to strengthen the provision of substantive and technical support to missions and to
make full use of respective comparative advantages. My forthcoming report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) details collective efforts
to advance the women and peace and security agenda.
68. Jobs and livelihoods are another key concern for communities and one in
which United Nations agencies and others have comparative advantages.
Collaboration between the United Nations and the World Bank has been increasing,
and the two organizations have a shared set of partnership objectives. To strengthen
cooperation across security and justice sectors, core government functions and
employment, I have instructed my senior management to propose a mechanism that
brings together the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and key regional banks to engage coherently in crisis countries.
69. I welcome the call by both the Panel and the Advisory Group of Experts to
address shortfalls in financing the different activities needed to achieve and sustain
peace. Efforts to deliver programmes demanded more frequently by Security
Council mandates have been limited to an extension of the traditional resourcing
model. Nevertheless, constructive options to apply available resources in enlisting
partners to support mandate delivery exist. In that context, I am taking steps to
ensure that forthcoming mission budget requests include the full range of resources

15-14893

15/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

required to implement mandates and that missions closely coordinate with the
United Nations country teams in that work. We also need to look at how pooled
country-level funds can support the delivery of coordinated support in cross -cutting
areas and help to manage often volatile aid allocations.
70. My Peacebuilding Fund has become a proven instrument to assist with rapid,
coherent and risk-tolerant funding that yields impact in sensitive political
environments. It urgently needs additional resources to continue operations at the
current level of $100 million per year. Going forward, I will actively explore, in
close consultation with Member States and through appropriate intergovernmental
bodies, options to provide predictable resources for the Fund. I intend to bring
persistent financing gaps to the attention of the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Assessing impact and transitioning
71. Regular assessment of mission progress enables operations to adapt their
responses to a fast-evolving environment. While significant steps have been taken to
establish integrated field assessments, the tools required to do so remain incomplete.
Progress is often as complex to measure as it is to obtain. Better impact assessment
could facilitate realistic benchmarks for missions, and a more results -focused
formulation of budgets could better inform regular assessment and resource
management.
72. Periodic independent evaluations could complement a more impact -focused
approach. I am mindful that a myriad of routine and ad hoc assessments are
undertaken by multiple Headquarters entities. I have instructed the streamlining of
reviews to permit more systematic independent evaluations and will provide details
in my forthcoming report on the overview of the financing of peacekeeping
operations.
73. Ongoing analysis and impact measurement are equally essential to the
successful transition of peace operations. They must be undertaken with national
and United Nations partners that may take on and advance work initially carried out
by peace operations. They should incorporate the assessment of capacities and
resources of those actors. Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti and Liberia will be early cases for
that approach, building on effective transitions in Sierra Leone and Timor -Leste.
Sustained political engagement after transitions is also essential. The Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as regional organizations and regional offices, holds
significant potential and can play a valuable role in that regard.
Financing and structures
74. Some of the existing financing arrangements applicable to the Secretariat are
an obstacle to tailored peace operations and present challen ges and cost
inefficiencies with regard to efforts to draw on all tools available to the
Organization. My report on the review of arrangements for funding and
backstopping special political missions (A/66/340), which remains before the
General Assembly for its consideration, presents options that address many of the
obstacles to tailored peace operations. I support the Panel’s call to Member States to
take immediate action on this critical issue. A tailored and coh erent approach to
peace operations will also require overcoming current hurdles to providing
specialist support to field missions, whether human rights, mediation or electoral

16/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

assistance to peacekeeping missions and military advice or rule of law support t o
special political missions.
75. As the Panel observes, the structure of the Secretariat may itself also present a
challenge to a more coherent approach. Structures, in and of themselves, will not
solve problems of coherence, speed and efficiency, but the y can help to reduce
inefficiency and support cooperation in planning and deploying peace operations.
The Panel’s recommendation to restructure the Secretariat’s peace and security
architecture will require a more comprehensive consideration that I will en courage
my successor to undertake. Secretariat restructuring will be a necessary but
insufficient condition to realize a tailored approach to peace operations and better
calibrated responses to conflict.

D.

Agile field support
Empowering the field
76. Tailored peace operations will remain an elusive goal unless we change the
way in which we support missions. The current administrative framework for peace
operations is often slow, cumbersome and averse to risk. The average length of time
to recruit and deploy rostered civilian staff to a peace operation is 180 days, 120 of
which are required to complete reference checks, medical clearance and travel to the
duty station. At least 20 distinct steps are involved in engaging and deploying
uniformed personnel, requiring the coordination of four different divisions within
three separate departments. Current processes, when applied to volatile, poorly
resourced and often remote environments, are proving ineffective. A collective
change of culture, policies and approaches is needed.
77. We must look to best global practice in the administration of field -based
organizations. That approach, practiced in most of our countries, is directed at
aligning authorities and accountability with responsibilities. I intend t o further
empower field missions so that they can carry out their responsibilities and utilize
resources effectively and accountably.
78. All United Nations managers must demonstrate responsible stewardship of
funds and resources entrusted to the Organization. Increased authority of field
managers will be accompanied, therefore, by strong efforts to strengthen mission
management capabilities. I will hold managers accountable and will establish clear
chains of command and guidance on the exercise of authorit ies. Accountability
arrangements will include clear reporting requirements, efficient monitoring and
support, and regular assessment of performance, as well as corrective action to
support enhanced authority and decision-making responsibilities.
79. A tailored peace operation requires a dynamic workforce that can be adapted
and resized to meet specific needs at any given time. The Organization should be
able to quickly recruit and deploy qualified individuals under the most appropriate
contractual modalities, discipline them for cause and terminate them if they are no
longer required for the mandate or context. This is not possible under current
arrangements. The recruitment of National Professional Officers is subject to the
same criteria as that of international staff even in countries emerging from
prolonged conflict, where conditions have not allowed them to meet those criteria.
I intend to complete a review of the key processes that may not be supportive of our

15-14893

17/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

field operations by September 2016 and have requested a broader review of
Secretariat policies and procedures, to be completed by September 2017.
80. I am committed to ensuring that field perspectives and needs are reflected in
administrative policies and procedures. To that end, I am instituting formalized
internal consultative mechanisms and representative field participation to ensure
that policies and procedures are applicable to all Secretariat staff, including those
working in the field, and that, where required, relevant field -specific arrangements
are established.
Standing administrative measures for start-ups and emergencies
81. I am putting in place, by the end of 2015, standing administrative measures for
start-up and crisis situations to go into effect for six months on a renewable b asis
upon the establishment of a peace operation or my certification of a crisis or
emergency. Those measures include some exceptional measures approved in such
situations as the Ebola crisis response, the Haiti earthquake of 2010 and more recent
mission start-ups. Other obstacles to rapid and predictable response, such as the
three-month limit on temporary duty assignments of personnel from Headquarters,
were established through decisions of the General Assembly. As those impediments
constrain the effective use of United Nations personnel surge support, I intend to
present proposals to the Assembly in the context of my forthcoming report on the
overview of the financing of peacekeeping operations.
Rapidly deployable headquarters
82. The Department of Field Support and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will finalize, by early 2016, a concept and standard operating procedures
for a rapidly deployable integrated civilian, military and police headquarters
capacity that can be fully functional within 8 to 12 weeks of the issuance of a
mandate. This will build on prior efforts, including by incorporating standardized
designs, the use of strategic deployment stocks and modular solutions, standard
operating procedures to facilitate the fast-track deployment of civilian, military and
police personnel, and standby arrangements for the construction and sustainment of
integrated headquarters and other mission components.
Specialized support packages
83. Force and police generation will remain the main vehicle to generate
uniformed capabilities for peace operations. However, in start -up or emergency
situations or when there are particularly challenging environments to navigate, a
broader range of support options will need consideration. Logistics capabilitie s
located elsewhere in the system, such as in the United Nations Office for Project
Services, can provide important enablers, and I will continue to draw on established
arrangements that provide for their rapid engagement.
84. I will also invite regional partners and Member States that have capabilities in
key enabling areas to propose and provide specialist support packages to address
specific substantive and support needs, particularly for short -duration tasks to
address urgent field requirements or temporary gaps. They include engineering
capabilities for infrastructure construction; immediate medical facilities and medical
evacuation solutions; and strategic airlift support.

18/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

E.

Speed, capabilities and performance of uniformed capabilities
85. The timely deployment and the effective performance of uniformed
capabilities are where partnership between troop and police contributors and the
Secretariat stands or fails. To improve the consistency and coordination of
capability development initiatives, I intend to establish, with interested Member
States, a single capability and performance framework for uniformed personnel. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has a unique contribution to make
to that work.
Rapid deployment of uniformed capabilities
86. The Panel made a number of important recommendations to accelerate military
and police deployment to peace operations, all of which I am pursuing. A small
Strategic Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell has been established,
through extrabudgetary resources, to engage current and potential troop and police
contributors on a more timely and sustained basis on required capabilities, including
female personnel. The Cell also manages the new Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System, which replaced the previous Standby Arrangements System.
I will propose the institutionalization of that important function in my forthcoming
request under the support account for peacekeeping operations.
87. The case for rapidly available capacity is incontestable. The political
commitment and financial incentives to realize it, however, have been decades -long
obstacles. Building on past experience, I am establishing three complementary
rapidly deployable capacities that, with Member State support, can provide the basis
for timely response when needed. All will draw on the integrated mission
headquarters noted above. First, the Secretariat is developing requirements for
standby units for a range of capabilities and will invite Member States and regional
organizations to establish arrangements that could enable those capabilities to be
drawn on under defined conditions and during defined time periods. Those standby
capabilities will become part of the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and
provide the backbone to early deployment.
88. Second, I will continue to explore arrangements for the rapid and time -bound
transfer of assets and capabilities from existing missions to meet crises or start -up
needs. While such inter-mission cooperation arrangements are not a substitute for
properly resourced missions, they provide the means to respond quickly to changing
circumstances, as during the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire in 2011 and the elections in
Liberia. The quick reaction force subsequently deployed in the United Nat ions
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire has significant potential to support nearby peace
operations. I intend to build on that innovation and explore similar capacities in
other regions, where authorized by the Council.
89. Third, pre-established arrangements between Member States, regional
organizations and the Secretariat for strategic deployment capacity and the
provision of key enablers are an emerging means of assisting faster deployment to
start-up or crisis situations. We will continue to engage interested and capable
Member States for the provision of national enabling capabilities through stand alone agreements and the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System.

15-14893

19/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

90. A longer-term option is the small United Nations “vanguard capability” for
mission start-ups or reinforcement, as proposed by the Panel, an intriguing concept
to establish standby regional strategic reserve contingents that could deploy from a
regional hub and be self-sustaining for up to 180 days. I have instructed the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support to
explore the concept further for discussion with Member States.
Uniformed capability development and performance
91. High-tempo environments call for a broader range of capabilities, including
specialist functions, and a high degree of operational readiness. In asking
contributors to do more, the Security Council and the Secretariat must also do more
to support contributors in meeting capability and performance requirements.
92. Progress has been made, in cooperation with Member States, in establishing
clear military unit standards and capabilities for most types of military units.
Increasingly customized and precise unit requirements are being detailed for each
peace operation. Such steps are facilitating triangular capacity-building initiatives
between the Secretariat, troop contributors and countries with specific specialist
capabilities. I welcome such initiatives and invite other Member States with the
requisite skills and capacity to support similar developments of other specialist
enabling capabilities, such as medical and signals units.
93. Development of police capabilities requires a similar concerted effort. The
central pillars of the police strategic guidance framework will be in place by the end
of 2015 and will provide a sound basis for cooperation between Member States and
the Secretariat on the articulation of standards, tasks and training requirements of
formed police units, specialized teams and individual police officers. Guidance and
new modalities for planning and recruitment will be critical to improving coherence
and interoperability. To support that effort, I have instructed the Police Division to
undertake an external review of functions, structure and capacity and to present the
results in my forthcoming report on United Nations policing.
94. New capabilities will continue to be required for United Nations peace
operations. An effective system for the acquisition, analysis and operationalization
of information for peace operations in complex environments is lacking. I have
tasked the Secretariat with developing parameters for an information and
intelligence framework that can support field missions in operating effectively and
safely. I welcome further discussions with Member States on that urgent capability
gap.
95. We must continue to work together to respond to the need for greater mobility
in field operations. Operational effectiveness in high -tempo contexts, including the
ability to protect civilians, requires proactive and forward -leaning postures, as well
as flexible support mechanisms. I have directed the Secretariat to undertake a
comprehensive review of issues related to in-mission mobility, as well as command
and control of military enabling assets, by the second quarter of 201 6.
96. The Department of Field Support and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will consult with Member States to propose revisions of accommodation
definitions and standards to focus on the provision of high -quality adaptable
solutions that ensure acceptable living conditions for short- and long-term
deployments while providing the mobility necessary to adapt to dynamic mission

20/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

requirements, in advance of the meeting of the Working Group on Reimbursement
of Contingent-Owned Equipment to be held in 2017.
97. All of the steps above are intended to ensure effective performance in the
field, whose measurement requires clear performance standards. Building on the
recent development of an operational readiness assurance framework, the proposed
capability and performance framework should take forward their development.
While predeployment preparations, supported by Secretariat visits, remain critical to
ensuring operational readiness, regular assessments of units and equipment should
also be conducted in missions. Such assessments would allow early identification of
deficiencies, including as a result of operating in austere environments, enable
contributors to be alerted and quickly address problems, and ensure that contingents
receive the support or remedial training required. The critical role of the Office for
the Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership in supporting field performance should be
reinforced.
98. Every contributor must communicate, during negotiations over possible
deployment, national caveats regarding the use of military or police contingents.
The decision process in selecting forces for peace operations will take those caveats
into account, including whether to proceed with deployment. Additional caveats
beyond those explicitly agreed by the Secretariat cannot be accepted after
deployment. I have instructed all missions to communicate to Headquarters any
incidents of refusal to follow orders given by the Force Commander or the Police
Commissioner, whether on grounds of new national caveats or others. The
Secretariat will immediately inform the concerned Member State and, on a regular
basis, the Security Council and, where no remedial action is forthcoming, will
repatriate the unit concerned.
Training
99. The complexities of today’s operations require a collective effort to enhance
the training of uniformed personnel for United Nations peace operations. The
limited time available for predeployment training must be maximized to increase
readiness and familiarity with United Nations standards and requirements. I am
taking forward three interlinked initiatives to enhance predeployment training, set
out below, and encourage Member States to support them.
100. First, as from January 2016, I will request Member States to provide
certification for all uniformed personnel who have completed United Nationsspecified predeployment training as part of force and police generation processes.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support
are strengthening their mobile training teams to provide targeted support to
interested Member States in meeting that requirement.
101. Second, I have requested the two Departments to support the establishment of
bilateral and regional training partnerships. That capacity would act as a hub to
match Member States’ training capacity to needs, particularly in support of new and
emerging troop and police contributors.
102. Third, I intend to establish a pilot train-the-trainer centre, supported by
voluntary contributions, for uniformed personnel. The centre will reinforce the role
of the United Nations in setting training standards and allow for earlier and more

15-14893

21/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

consistent engagement with Member States in the preparation of uniformed
personnel.

F.

Safety and security
103. The deterioration of the global security environment has increased the
complexity and the scale of security challenges for United Nations peace operati ons.
The United Nations is a direct target for attack by some parties that do not view the
Organization as an impartial entity or that consider its presence as an impediment to
their objectives. The threat is aggravated, in certain contexts, by blurred lin es
between criminal and extremist groups and competition between them. Intense
conflict has also increased the risk of indirect attacks against peace operations
personnel. That threat environment will not improve significantly in the short term.
Our focus must be on increasing the capability of the United Nations system to
“stay and deliver” while ensuring the safety and security of United Nations
personnel.
104. The increasing use of armoured vehicles and technology, improved
communications, information gathering and analysis, training and quality medical
care, as well as guard units, are some of the most effective ways to keep our
personnel safe, and I will continue to pursue advances across all of those fronts.
105. To better integrate security efforts, I am taking forward the consolidation of all
Secretariat security resources under the Department of Safety and Security, in line
with General Assembly resolution 59/276, which will improve our ability to analyse
threats and risks and deploy personnel according to field needs and priorities.
Implementation of that ambitious initiative will begin early in 2016. It will be
bolstered by the roll-out at the end of 2015 of a new security risk management
policy and process that incorporates enhanced security threat assessment and
management tools. Demand for regional analysis is being addressed through
additional security analysts, the deployment of physical security specialists to
regional offices, and increased surge support from Headquarters.
106. The new tools, together with enhanced implementation of the programme
criticality framework, will support managers in making informed and time -sensitive
decisions in high-risk environments as to which activities to undertake and how to
manage risks to personnel. Gender-specific risk considerations are currently being
developed to ensure that the security needs of female staff are met. A system -wide
crisis management policy and department-specific operating procedures will be
finalized to enable effective and coherent responses.
107. I strongly believe that the adoption of widely available and cost -effective
technologies can make huge strides towards improving the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and assets, as well as our capacity to protect civilians and
to implement mandates effectively. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support have put in place a strategy to implement the
key recommendations of the recent Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in
United Nations Peacekeeping, and I look forward to progress in that regard.
108. Information management tools to improve data collection and recording of
security incidents are one example of the benefits of technology. Those tools will be
fully operational in selected missions by the end of 2015 and will help in

22/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

determining proactive security responses. They will also strengthen the
Organization’s capacity to systematically follow up with host Governments on their
responsibility to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of cr imes against United
Nations personnel. I urge host States to cooperate in that regard. Furthermore,
I have instructed the Department of Management, in coordination with the United
Nations Operations and Crisis Centre and other entities, to take responsibi lity for
the consolidated management of information regarding fatalities to ensure that
administrative processes, including facilitating support to next of kin, are
appropriately and consistently handled. The Panel has called for rates of
compensation for death and disability to be given due consideration by the General
Assembly, and I encourage Member States to do so.
109. Member States deploying uniformed personnel to peace operations also bear
responsibility for ensuring that military and police operatin g in high-risk
environments have the tactics, techniques and procedures necessary to do so
effectively. The United Nations can and does provide on -demand specialized
training and guidance, for example to manage risks of improvised explosive
devices. However, it is up to Member States to ensure that blue helmets have the
training required to operate in conflict, and lives are needlessly lost when that is not
the case.
Medical standards and capabilities
110. Good medical and health care saves lives. Today’s peace operations urgently
require medical capabilities that can meet emergency and trauma care needs. The
new edition of the Medical Support Manual, which will be issued shortly, sets out
revised international standards for casualty response required in all field missions.
In addition, I initiated the establishment of a medical performance framework for
United Nations peace operations. This will focus initially on level II hospitals,
United Nations-operated level I clinics and aero-medical evacuation teams and will
be progressively expanded to include all field health -care capabilities, both civilian
and military. In cooperation with interested Member States, the project will define
and set standards for the performance of care, the processes governing fi eld
hospitals and clinics, and ways in which emergency and trauma health care is
delivered in the field. The results of the project will be fed into the meeting of the
Working Group on Reimbursement of Contingent-Owned Equipment to be held in
2017.
111. I share contributors’ concerns at the challenges experienced by some missions
in consistently responding to medical emergencies and in evacuating casualties.
I requested the Department of Field Support, as a matter of priority, to review its
aviation and casualty evacuation guidelines and internal procedures to ensure that
missions can meet international standards of casualty evacuation. This will require a
collective effort. Missions must improve their coordination processes and
mechanisms to be able to respond quickly and predictably to casualties.
Contributing countries must ensure that their troops are trained to perform
emergency trauma care and that their level I clinics are capable of stabilizing
casualties. Host States must support requests for medical and casualty evacuation
support, including air space access. The Department is addressing, on a mission -bymission basis, current impediments to night flight operations for purposes of
casualty evacuation. In some missions, the composition of air fleets and medical

15-14893

23/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

facilities may need to be revisited to ensure that there are sufficient resources to
meet emergency requirements in addition to more routine tasks.

G.

Leadership and accountability
Leadership
112. I am mindful of the immense responsibility that rests on leaders of United
Nations peace operations. I welcome the Panel’s emphasis on the importance of
selecting the right leaders and ensuring that they have the support necessary to
provide political direction and executive manageme nt of often large and complex
operations.
113. I will continue to appoint mission leaders on the basis of merit and the specific
requirements of each situation, which will be reflected in tailored post profiles and
competencies. They will include political acumen, mediation expertise, regional
knowledge, management skills and linguistic capabilities. Candidates for mission
leadership positions should also be assessed for their human rights commitment.
The outreach mechanisms and predictable assessment and r ecruitment procedures
that I have introduced over the past eight years have gone some way in
strengthening leadership appointments and include efforts to attract the best force
commanders and police commissioners. I encourage Member States to support those
efforts.
114. Improving the representation of women in senior leadership has been a long standing priority of mine. Gender diversity in leadership teams brings important
perspectives and enables missions to engage a broader section of the population.
Currently 23 per cent of heads of mission and 17 per cent of deputy heads of
mission are female. I encourage Member States to share profiles of qualified women
candidates for consideration as part of a global response to bring women to the fore.
115. Heads of peace operations need to be assisted by leadership teams with
relevant experience and skills, particularly in United Nations policies and
administrative systems. Leaders need to be able to draw on and work as part of a
mutually reinforcing management team that includes deputies, chiefs of staff,
mission support and individual components. I recognize that establishing and
maintaining leadership teams with complementary competencies is a challenge.
I have instructed my staff to develop leadership team profiles and competencies to
provide criteria against which the rotating recruitment and selection of individual
senior managers can be considered. My special representatives will also be
consulted on senior appointments to their teams.
116. The leadership of the United Nations country team is an important component
of any such team. In non-mission settings, where the Resident Coordinator leads the
country’s team’s approach to a crisis, it is particularly critical. I welcome the
attention given by the Panel and the peacebuilding review to the importance of that
post. A rigorous assessment process already exists to identify prospective resident
coordinators, and I intend to further strengthen procedures to assess the ability of
candidates to operate in politically sensitive and crisis environments.
117. I will strengthen comprehensive leadership training for incoming senior
mission leaders using both United Nations System Staff College and Headquarters
resources. A voluntary mentoring programme is currently being pi loted to provide

24/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

follow-up support after deployment; pending results and available resources, it
could be made mandatory.
118. Performance management is another way of strengthening support provided to
senior leaders. I am refining the senior manager compact for heads of mission to
better reflect their multiple responsibilities, including directing mission -wide
strategies and mainstreaming gender. Performance assessment tools are also being
revised to ensure feedback on performance, as well as to strengthen interaction
between field and Headquarters leadership. The results of such assessments will
have an impact on decisions regarding appointment renewal.
Sexual exploitation and abuse
119. I have made it abundantly clear that the United Nations prohibits sexual
exploitation and abuse. I am grateful for the endorsement by the General Assembly
of the steps outlined in my most recent report on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse ( A/69/779) to further implement zero
tolerance, and measures are already under way to put them in place. Most peace
operations have already set up standing task forces on sexual exploitation and
abuse. By the end of 2015 immediate response teams will be set up to gather and
preserve evidence within 72 hours of receipt of an allegation. I have informed field
operations and Member States that investigations of sexual exploitation and abuse
allegations must be concluded within six months. Better follow-up and investigation
requires Member State cooperation, and I urge troop -contributing countries to
embed national investigation officers in their contingents.
120. I have clearly communicated my intent to impose strong sanctions against
those who commit acts of misconduct and those who fail to take action against
them, including mission leadership and command authorities. I have strengthened
administrative sanctions against United Nations staff members found to have
committed sexual exploitation and abuse, including placing them on administrative
leave without pay pending completion of investigations. I have begun suspending
payments where there are credible allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
implicating individual contingents or police personnel. I will repatriate contingents
where there is a demonstrated pattern of abuse or non -response to allegations of
misconduct and, as previously reported, consider terminating the deployment of
uniformed personnel where there is a documented pattern of non -compliance with
United Nations standards of conduct. I urge Member States to hold courts martial in
host countries as a measure of visible accountability.
121. Detailed guidance to missions on standards and procedures for alerting United
Nations Headquarters to instances of criminal misconduct by civilian, military or
police personnel will be disseminated to missions early in 2016. Such cases will be
referred to judicial authorities of host countries and, where relevant, the
contributing country, for pursuit of criminal accountability under national law.
Genuine accountability, however, rests on the cooperation of Member States. I urge
Member States to demonstrate their commitment to ridding the United Nations of
the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse by concluding their discussions,
pending since 2006, on a proposed international convention to ensure accountability
of United Nations personnel in connection with crimes committed in peacekeeping
operations. Continued failure to do so sends a terrible signal to th e world.

15-14893

25/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

122. I will continue to bring public light to misconduct. I have committed to
publicly disclosing the nationality of personnel contributed by Member States being
investigated for sexual exploitation and abuse and, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 69/307, will consult Member States on the reporting
methodology that I am putting in place for that purpose. I have requested that issues
of misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse, be added to the agenda of
meetings of the Council to highlight developments on sexual exploitation and abuse.
I have also proposed that the issue be placed on the agenda of meetings of the
Council with troop and police contributors and that the Council review follow -up
action on all reported cases. I urge the Council to take those initiatives forward.
123. We must reach out to affected communities and other partners. Missions have
been instructed to put in place, by the second quarter of 2016, a framework to
provide community-based mechanisms where people can more readily come
forward to raise complaints regarding United Nations personnel. The creation of an
adequately resourced victim assistance programme is under way with the
development of terms of reference for a trust fund to support awareness -raising and
community outreach and support to identified providers of services to victims.
I shall report on its progress in my next report on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
124. Strengthened sexual exploitation and abuse prevention requires constant
awareness-raising and training. The development of a mandatory e -learning
programme on sexual exploitation and abuse for all field personnel is in progress,
and a pilot will be rolled out in May 2016. I am expanding the ve tting of civilian
personnel to ensure that they do not have a history of sexual misconduct during
prior service in the United Nations. Specific means for vetting military contingent
and formed police unit personnel will be developed by the end of 2015.
125. I share the Panel’s assessment that United Nations peace operations must
immediately inform relevant Governments and regional organizations of allegations
of human rights violations and sexual exploitation and abuse by non -United Nations
forces. I await the findings of the independent review panel on the United Nations
response to allegations of sexual abuse by foreign military forces in the Central
African Republic, on the basis of which I will establish procedures for external
engagement with parallel presences and a dedicated system-wide lead to drive
forward zero tolerance.
Human rights standards
126. Since 2011, policies that require human rights screening of all United Nations
civilian and uniformed personnel, as well as human rights due diligence for the
provision of United Nations operational or training support to non -United Nations
security forces, have been in place. I have tasked relevant United Nations entities
with ensuring the systematic application of those policies. I call upon Member
States to ensure the nomination and deployment of military and police personnel
who meet United Nations standards as part of force generation and rehatting
processes. I also call upon Member States, when their security forces receive United
Nations operational or training support, to provide up-to-date relevant information
to inform United Nations risk assessments under the due diligence policy.
127. State parties repeatedly listed in my annual reports on children and armed
conflict and on conflict-related sexual violence will henceforth not be accepted for

26/28

15-14893

A/70/357
S/2015/682

participation in United Nations peace operations. I have requested those troop and
police contributors that are currently listed to engage with my respective Special
Representatives in order to be delisted, by making and implementing specific time bound commitments and concrete action plans to address violations for which they
are listed. Failure to cease systematic violations and implement action plans
expeditiously will result in their suspension from peace operations.
Environmental awareness
128. The environment has been one of my priorities as Secretary-General, and I am
fully committed to ensuring that United Nations peace operations are a sustainable
presence. A review of my 2009 environmental policy for United Nations field
missions will be completed early in 2016 and will include measures to improve the
health and safety of mission personnel and local populations while reducing harmful
environmental impact from mission activities. It will be complemented by a new
waste management policy for missions.
129. I also welcome the Panel’s recommendation that environmental impact
assessments be carried out as part of the assessment and planning of new missions
and regularly during the mission’s lifetime. I have requested the United Nations
Environment Programme to provide support in establishing environmental baselines
and monitoring benchmarks in peace operations. Some field missions have
dedicated environmental units to develop and implement missi on-specific
environmental policies and oversee environmental compliance, although significant
challenges remain.

V. Conclusions: a call for change
130. I approach my final year as Secretary-General with profound concern over the
many challenges facing us. The scale and complexity of conflict today and the
suffering that it creates threaten the international order established 70 years ago. We
urgently need new and stronger ways to address international peace and security
challenges. We must harness the full range of tools available: political, security,
development, human rights and humanitarian, and we need to change the way in
which we do business within and across that range.
131. The present report sets out how United Nations peace operations, when
designed and conducted in more people-focused and targeted ways, can contribute
to this global effort. It sets an agenda for action that reflects what I as Secretary General can do to advance earlier, more tailored and more effective United Nations
prevention and conflict responses. It provides a balanced and prioritized set of
reforms to address the most urgent challenges facing peace operations today, while
offering a basis for more long-term transformation. With smart and targeted
investments in critical areas, substantial improvements can be achieved.
132. However, United Nations peace operations are only one of the tools that we
urgently need. Without focused commitment on the part of Member States, the
whole United Nations system, regional partners and other organizations to
advancing and consolidating peace, today’s conflicts will rage into tomorrow, and
yesterday’s conflicts will violently return. Peace operations are a collective tool.
They are a vital part of a global commitment to preventing and res olving conflict,
protecting civilians and sustaining peace. Adapting them requires a system -wide

15-14893

27/28

A/70/357
S/2015/682

effort and the active engagement and support of the entire membership. I urge
Member States to join me in this endeavour.
133. I recognize that it is no easy task. The global political and economic
environment is perilously stretched. Resources are limited and the demands are
many. Scepticism runs high. Yet those who gathered 70 years ago to create the
United Nations also confronted a divided and distraught wor ld. Those strains
reinforced countries’ determination to invest in international peace and security.
They understood that there is simply no alternative: we must, together, renew our
resolve to “save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.

28/28

15-14893
