V.

32/169.

Resolutions adopted on the reporu of the Seeond Committee

Implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations Conference
on Desertification with respect to financia! and technical assistance to the least
developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Desertification, held at Nairobi
from 29 August to 9 September 1977,101
Recognizing that desertification constitutes a worldwide economic and social problem,
Reaffirming the cardinal principie of the permanent
sovereignty of States over their natural resources,
Bearing in mind resolution 2 of 9 September 1977
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification, in which the Conference recognized that the
least developed among the developing countries with
limited resources at their disposal were in need of immediate financia! and technical assistance from the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system,
Taking note of resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 102
1. Recommends the speedy implementation of recommendation 28 of the United Nations Confercnce on
Desertification with respect to financia! and technical
assistance to the least developed countries; 103
2. Urges the United Nations and its Member States,
the specialized agencies and international and regional
financial institutions to ensure the implementation of
the recommendations of the United Nations Conferencc
on Desertification in favour of those countries by extending additional international and bilateral assistance;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third scssion on the
implementation of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/170.

Measures to he taken for the henefit
of the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Considering the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and the relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29 August to
9 September 1977,104
Bearing in mind the resolutions and recommendations of the United Nations concerning the drought in
the Sahel and the implementation of the medium-term
and long-term programme for the recovery and rehabilitation of the region,
101 See A/CONF.74/36, chap. II.
1 02 See Proceedings of the United

Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
103 See A/CONF.74/36, chap. I.
104 !bid., chaps. I and II.

105

Aware of the particular seriousness of desertification
in the Sudano-Sahelian region and of the recurrent
critica! situations resulting from it, which hamper the
economic and social development of the region and
have particularly adverse effects on the way of life
of the population,
Noting, in particular, the harmful effects of the particularly low level of rainfall in the region,
1. Stresses the need for the immediate implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and of the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Desertilication;
2. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to consider at its sixth
session, on the basis of a report by the Executive Director of the Programme which will take account of
the role and activities of the competent existing organs
in the region, measures to improve institutional arrangements in the Sudano-Sahelian region, íncluding the
establishment of a subregional office of the Programme
for thc purposc of supporting efforts undertaken at
the national and regional levels by the countries concerned to combat desertification and of encouraging
and co-ordinating, in co-operation wíth competent existing organs, assistance from developed countries, multilateral financia! institutions, intergovernmental organizatíons and non-governmental donors;
3. Further invites the Governing Council to inelude in its agenda, when it considers the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,
an ítem concerning measures and modes of action for
implementing projects and programmcs to combat desertification in the Sudano-Sahclian region.
107th plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1977
32/171.

Livin~ <'onditions of the
people

Palestinian

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, I 976, 10 " and the relevant recommendations
for national action 106 adopted by Habitat: United Natíons Conference on Human Settlements, held at Vancouver from 31 May to 11 June 197 6,
Recalling also resolution 3 on the living condítions
of the Palestinians in occupied territories, as contained
in thc recommendations of the Conference for international co-operation, 107 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Reca/ling General Assembly resolution 31 / 110 of
16 December 1976,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on thc living conditions of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories 108 and expresses the víew that
there is need for further analysis in arder to meet fully
the objectives of General Assembly resolution 31/110;
2. Requests therefore thc Secretary-General, in collaboration with the relevant United Nations organs and
105 Report of Habitar: United Nations Co11fere11ce on Human
Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.
106 tbid., chap. !l.
107 !bid., chap. III.
]OS A 1 32/228.
