V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

tory, including the dispatch of teams of orthopaedic surgeons;
7. Requests Member States, organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people, in close co-operation
with the Palestine Liberation Organization;
8. Requests ali Member States and donors that provide
any form of assistance to the occupied Palestinian West
Bank to sustain and increase that assistance and to channel it to the Palestinian people through their representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization;
9. Decides to extend to the occupied Palestinian territory the same preferential treatment accorded the least developed countries, pending the elimination of the Israelí
occupation and the assumption of full control by the
Palestinian people over their national economy without
externa! interference;
10. Calls for treatment on a transit basis of Palestinian
exports and imports passing through neighbouring ports
and points of exit and entry;
11. Also calls for the granting of trade concessions and
concrete preferential measures for Palestinian exports on
the basis of certificates of origin issued by Palestinian bodies designated by the Palestine Liberation Organization;
12. Further calls for the implementation of development projects in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the projects mentioned in its resolution 39/223 of
18 December 1984;
13. Condemns the occupying Power, Israel, for its brutal economic and social policies and practices against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory;
14. Requests United Nations bodies not to extend any
form of assistance to the occupying Power, Israel;
15. Stresses that aid is not and cannot be a substitute
for a genuine and just solution to the question of Palestine;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/179.

Second Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/160 of 19 December 1977,
Recalling a/so Economic and Social Council resolution
2097 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977,
Emphasizing the need for full implementation of the
goals and objectives of the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa, especially in the light of continuing inadequacies in the field of transport and communications in Africa,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1988/67 of 28 July 1988;
2. Declares the period 1991-2000 the Second Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and existing African regional and subregional economic groups, as well as
relevant United Nations agencies, to undertake the necessary preparatory arrangements for the Second Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa, and to submit to

135

the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council, a progress report at its forty-fourth session and a
final report at its forty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/180.

International Year of Shelter for the Homeless

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolution 37 /221 of20 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the year 1987 International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Recalling also, in particular, the objectives ofthe Year as
contained in resolution 37/221,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) entitled "International Year of Shelter for the
Homeless: activities and achievements", 11 and the comments of the Commission on Human Settlements and of
the Economic and Social Council on that report,
1. Welcomes the success achieved in attaining the objectives of the Intemational Year of Shelter for the Homeless;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the numerous and
encouraging reports, which had been received from a total
of one hundred and thirty countries as at 31 December
1987, on activities, policies, programmes and projects undertaken by those countries within the context ofthe Year
and towards the successful attainment of its objectives;
3. Commends Governments, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations for the efforts and resources that were effectively mobilized for the programme
of activities for the Year;
4. Requests Governments to sustain the momentum
generated by the programme for the Year and to continue
implementing concrete and innovative programmes aimed
at improving the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor
and the disadvantaged;
5. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to continue
to assist Governments in their efforts towards that goal,
within the framework ofthe Global Strategy for Shelter to
the Year 2000; 12
6. Recommends that Governments indica te, if possible
on World Habitat Day, the concrete actions to be taken
and the specific targets to be achieved during each successive year;
7. Also recommends that Governments maintain,
where appropriate, the national focal points and national
committees for the International Y ear of Shelter for the
Homeless for the purpose of monitoring and assessing the
progress achieved in improving the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and the disadvantaged;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly periodically, through the Economic and
Social Council, on progress achieved in improving the
shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and the disadvantaged.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
11 HS/C/11/~.
12 Officia/ Records

of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
S11pplement No. 8, addendum (A/43/8/ Add.1 ).
