United Nations

A/RES/63/194

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 97

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/431)]

63/194. Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking
in persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/180 of 20 December 2006 on improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and other relevant General
Assembly resolutions on trafficking in persons and other contemporary forms of
slavery,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2008/33 of 25 July
2008 on strengthening coordination of the United Nations and other efforts in
fighting trafficking in persons and previous Council resolutions on trafficking in
persons,
Recalling further the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime 1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography 3 and the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery,
the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 4
0F

1F

2F

3F

Welcoming the progress made at the fourth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and taking note of the decisions of the Conference on the issue of trafficking in
persons,
Recognizing that trafficking in persons impairs the enjoyment of human rights,
continues to pose a serious challenge to humanity and requires a concerted
international response,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.
2

08-48243

A/RES/63/194

Welcoming the decisions of the Human Rights Council to establish the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its
causes and consequences, 5 and to extend the mandates of the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children 6 and the Special Rapporteur
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7
4F

5F

6F

Recognizing that broad international cooperation between Member States and
relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations is essential for
effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other contemporary
forms of slavery,
Recognizing also the need to continue fostering a global partnership against
trafficking in persons and other contemporary forms of slavery,
Recognizing further that the provision of effective support to the work of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention should be an important part of the
coordination efforts of the United Nations system on the issue of trafficking in persons,
Recognizing the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and
international cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information
exchanges on good practices, of Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons,
especially women and children,
Reaffirming the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium
Summit 8 and the 2005 World Summit 9 to devise, enforce and strengthen effective
measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons to counter the
demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
7F

8F

Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider taking
1.
measures to ratify or accede to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,2 and to implement fully all
aspects of those instruments;
0H

1H

2.
Also urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider taking
measures to ratify or accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography,3 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 10 and the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery,
the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,4 and to implement
fully all aspects of those instruments;
2H

9F

3H

3.
Recognizes that broad international cooperation between Member States
and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations is essential for
effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other contemporary
forms of slavery;
_______________
5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I,
sect. A, resolution 6/14.
6
Ibid., chap. III, sect. A, resolution 8/12.
7
Ibid., chap. II, resolution 7/13.
8
See resolution 55/2.
9
See resolution 60/1.
10
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.

2

A/RES/63/194

4.
Welcomes the steps taken by human rights treaty bodies and the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, United
Nations agencies and other concerned intergovernmental and governmental
organizations, within their mandates, as well as civil society, to address the problem
of trafficking in persons, and encourages them to continue doing so and to share
their knowledge and best practices as widely as possible;
Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts to criminalize
5.
trafficking in persons in all its forms, including for the sexual exploitation of
children, to take measures to criminalize child sex tourism, to condemn the practice
of trafficking in persons, and to investigate, prosecute, condemn and penalize
traffickers and intermediaries, while providing protection and assistance to the
victims of trafficking with full respect for their human rights, and invites Member
States to continue to support those United Nations agencies and international
organizations that are actively involved in victim protection;
Encourages all stakeholders, including the private sector, to strengthen
6.
the coordination of efforts, including through the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and regional as well as bilateral initiatives that
promote cooperation and collaboration;
Welcomes the holding of the Vienna Forum to Fight Human Trafficking,
7.
from 13 to 15 February 2008, as a part of the awareness-raising efforts to fight
human trafficking, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
continue consultations with Member States, to ensure that the Global Initiative to
Fight Human Trafficking is carried out as a technical assistance project within the
mandates agreed to by the relevant governing bodies and to brief Member States on
the workplan of the Global Initiative, to be executed before the end of the project in
2009;
Recognizes the importance of comparable data disaggregated by types of
8.
trafficking in persons, sex and age, as well as of strengthening national capacity for
the gathering, analysing and reporting of such data, and welcomes the efforts of the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, drawing on the
comparative advantages of the respective agencies, to share information, experiences
and good practices on anti-trafficking activities of the partner agencies with
Governments, other international and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and other relevant bodies;
9.
Acknowledges the important work on data collection and analysis
conducted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime under its Global
Programme against Trafficking in Human Beings, as well as by the International
Organization for Migration through its global Counter-Trafficking Module database;
10. Takes note of the discussions at the thematic debate of the General
Assembly on human trafficking, held in New York on 3 June 2008, which included a
discussion on the advisability of a United Nations strategy or plan of action on
preventing trafficking in persons and protecting and assisting victims of trafficking;
11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to collect the views of all stakeholders,
including Member States and regional and international organizations, on how to
achieve the full and effective coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons of
all Member States, organizations, machineries, treaty bodies and all other partners
within and outside the United Nations system, including civil society, and to ensure
the full and effective implementation of all legal instruments relevant to trafficking
in persons, particularly the United Nations Convention against Transnational
3

A/RES/63/194

Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, without prejudice to the mandate of the
working group established by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, and
submit, no later than 1 June 2009, a background paper to the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session;
12. Invites all Member States to accelerate the consideration of the
advisability of a global plan of action on preventing trafficking in persons,
prosecuting traffickers and protecting and assisting victims of trafficking, which
would achieve the full and effective coordination of efforts against trafficking in
persons of all Member States, organizations, machineries, treaty bodies and all other
partners within and outside the United Nations system, including civil society, and
ensure the full and effective implementation of all legal instruments relevant to
trafficking in persons, particularly the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide the United
Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme with sufficient resources
for the full implementation of its mandates on combating trafficking in persons, in
conformity with its high priorities, and to provide adequate support to the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and invites Member States
to provide voluntary contributions to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
for the purpose of providing assistance to Member States upon request;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention and the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on possible approaches to
strengthen the coordination efforts against trafficking in persons of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons.
71st plenary meeting
18 December 2008

4
