Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committ~

of Portugal fails to implempnt (---;enPral AssPmhly reso ·
lution 1514 (XV);
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized agencies concerned
and other international relief organizations to increase
their assistance to the refugees from the Territories
under Portuguese administration and to the people who
have suffered from military operations;
11. Requests the Security Council to con?ider putting into effect against Portugal the appropriate measures laid down in the Charter, for the purpose of
carrying out its resolutions concerning the Territories
under Portuguese domination;
12. Decides to include the question of the Territories
under Portuguese administration in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-first session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2108 (XX). Speaal training programme for
Territories under Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1808 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 and 1973 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
by which it established a special trainin~ P:ogramme
for the indigenous people of the Terntones under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1973 (XVIII) ,38
Noting with deep regret that, notwithstanding paragraph 10 of resolution 1808 (XVII) and paragraph 8
of resolution 1973 (XVIII), the (',overnment of Portugal has not co-operated in the implementation of the
special training programme,
Noting iuith satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that many of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for higher education only and,
consequently, are not accessible to most applicants from
Territories under Portuguese administration, whose
qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the
use of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures with a view to making the benefits
of the special training programme available to as many
indigenous inhabitants nf the Territories under Portuguese administration as possible;
2. Invites the United Nations programmes of technical assistance and the specialized agencies to continue
to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme mentioned above, by offering every
possible assistance and such facilities and resources
as they may be able to provide to the recipients and
the Governments participating in the programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
which have extended offers of scholarships to students
from Territories 1mder Portuguese administration ;
38 Ibid., agenda item 71, documents A/5783 and Add.1, am!
A/6076 and Add.1 and 2.

6S

4. Tnvites the Member States which have offered
scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider
ofTeri11g in the first place scholarships for secondary
<'duration nnd for vocationnl and technical training;
5. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made
and utilized;
6. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
administration who are seeking to avail themselves of
the educational opportunities offered ;
7. Reiterates its request to the Government of Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme for inhabitants of Territories under
its administration ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2109 (XX). Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it dissolved the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and,
inter a1ia, requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information
transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance
with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
and to take it fullv into account in examining the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
Drclaration,
Noting the procedures suggested by the SecretaryGeneral89 and adopted by the Special Committee
whereby the latest information transmitted by Administering Members is taken into account by the Committee in its consideration of the Territories concerned
and is reflected in the relevant chapters of the Committee's reports on each Territory,
Having studied those chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,•0
Having also examined the reports of the SecretaryGf'neral on the said information. 41
l. Approves the reports and the procedures adopted
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for the discharge of its functions under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII);
~- Fxpresses its regret that not all Member States
having responsihilities for the administration of Non3 9 Jbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter II, appendix I.
40 Ibid., chapter II; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6000/Rev.1), chapter XXVI.
4 1 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
72, documents A/5843 and A/6038.

General Aseem'bly-Twentleth Session

Self-Governing Territories have seen fit to transmit
information under Article 73 c of the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Once again urges all Member States which have
or which assume responsibilities for the administration
of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full
measure of self-government to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General information as
prescribed under Article 73 e of the Charter, as well
as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional development;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII) in accordance with the procedures referred tc above.
1407th plena.ry meeting,
21 December 1965.

2110 (XX). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The (ieneral Assembly,
Recaliing its resolution 1974 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Having examined the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories under General Assembly resolution 845
(IX) of 22 November 1954,42
1. Takes note of the reports of the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships to the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
3. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete information about the scholarships offered and,
whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students ;
4. Once again invites the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories and to render effective
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
5. Requests Member States to facilitate the travel
of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories seeking to avail themselves of the educational opportunities
which are offered to them;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to this resolution.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
42 Il>id.,

documenb A/5784 and Add.1; A/6057 and Add.I.

2111 (XX). Question of the Trust Territory of
Nauru
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Trusteeship Council relating to conditions in the Trust
Territory of Nauru, 48
Taking note of the report on Nauru submitted by
the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Trust
Territories of Nauru and New Guinea, 1965, 44
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Trust Territory of Nauru, 45
Reaffirming the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960 confaining the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Noting that. in compliance with the request of tht"
Trusteeship Council at its thirty-first session. tht"
Administering Authority and representatives of the
Nauman people, in June 1965 at the Canberr:1 Conference, pursued further the question of a futnre home
for the Nauman people which would prrserve thrir
national identity,
Noting further the conclusions of the Trusteeship
Council at its thirtv-second session to the effect that.
:1s the Administering Authority was unable to satisfy
fully the Nauruans' conditions that they should be
able to resettle as an inrlependent people and have
territorial sovereignty in their new place of residence,
and as the offer of Australian citizenship was unacceptable to them. the Nauruans decided not to proceed
with the proposal for resettlement on Curtis Island
and the Australian Government has discontinued action
nn this proposal, 46
Endorsing the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Special Committee relating
to the Territory,
Recalling the proposals made by the Nauman representatives to the Administering Authority for the establishment of a Legislative Council by 31 January 1966
and for the granting of independence on 31 January
1968, after two years of legislative experience together
with experience through an Executive Council in the
forms and procedure of democratic political administration and in the executive processes of government, 41
Considering the decision of the Nauman people to
stay on the island of Nauru and their request to the
Administering Authority to restore, for habitation by
4 3 Ibid., Nineteetith Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/5804).
paTt II. chapter II: ibid., Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 4
(A/6004), part II, chapter II.
44 Official Records of the Trnsteeship Council, Thirty-sec011d
Session, Supplement No. 2 (T /1645), document T /1636.
45
Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninetunth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I) (A/5800/Rev.l ). chapter
XIX; ibid., Twentieth Srssion, Annexrs, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter XVIII.
46 Ibid., Twnrtirth Session, Supp/ement No. 4 (A/6004).
para. 324.
47 !bid .. par2. 377.
