General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

60

-

---· - ~ - - - - - .

---

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco )".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/144.

Chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, in which it commended the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, and expressed the
hope for the widest possible adherence to that Convention,
Recalling that, in paragraph 73 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 17 it expressed the opinion that all States which
have not yet done so should consider adhering to the
Convention,
Recalling that the States parties to the Convention
met at Geneva from 3 to 21 March 1980 to review the
operation of the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction that, at the time of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, eighty-one States
had ratified the Convention, six States had acceded to
the Convention and a further thirty-seven States had
signed but had yet to ratify the Convention,

I. Welcomes the final declaration of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, 18 in which the
States parties to the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Reaffirmed their strong determination, for the
sake of all mankind, to exclude completely the possibility of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins
being used as weapons, their strong support for the Convention and their continued dedication to its principles
and objectives and their commitment to implement effectively its provisions;
(b) Expressed the belief that article I had proved sufficiently comprehensive to have covered recent scientific
and technological developments relevant to the Convention;
(c) Considered that the flexibility of the provisions
concerning consultations and co-operation on any
problems which might arise in relation to the objective,
or in the application of the provisions of, the Convention enabled interested States parties to use various international procedures which would make it possible to
ensure effectively and adequately the implementation of
the provisions of the Convention, taking into account
the concern expressed by the participants in the Conference to this effect-these procedures include, inter
alia, the right of any State party subsequently to request
that a consultative meeting open to all States parties be
convened at the expert level-and, having noted the con" Resolution S- JO /2.

"BWC/CONF.1/10, sect. II.

--

--

cerns and differing views expressed on the adequacy of
article V, believed that this question should be further
considered at an appropriate time;
(d) Reaffirmed the obligation assumed by the States
parties to the Convention to continue negotiations in
good faith towards the recognized objectives of an early
agreement on complete, effective and adequately verifiable measures for the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and for
their destruction:
(e) Noted that during the first five years of the
operation of the Convention the provisions of articles
VI, VII, XI and XIII had not been invoked:
2. Calls upon all signatory States which have not
ratified the Convention to do so without delay and upon
those States which have not yet signed the Convention
to consider doing so at an early date as a significant contribution to international confidence.

94th plenary meeting
12 December J980
B

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A (XXVI) of 16
December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3256 (XXIX) of 9
December 1974, 3465 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/65 of 10 December 1976, 32/77 of 12 December
1977, S-10/2 of 30 June 1978, 33/59 A of 14 December
1978 and 34/72 of 11 December 1979, relating to the
complete and effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
of their destruction,
Reaffirming also the necessity of strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June I 925.'"
and of the adherence by all States to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, 20
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Disarmament,' 1 which embodies, inter alia, the report of
its Ad Hoe Working Group on Chemical Weapons,
Taking note of the joint report on progress in the
bilateral negotiations on the prohibition of chemical
weapons, submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America to the Committee on Disarmament on 7 July 1980, which regrettably have not yet resulted in the elaboration of a
joint initiative,
Considering it necessary that all efforts be exerted for
the earliest successful conclusion of the negotiations on
the prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction,
1. Notes with satisfaction the work of the Committee
on Disarmament during its session held in 1980 regarding the prohibition of chemical weapons, in partic" League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV ( 1929), No. 21.18.
p. 65.
"'Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Ses.<ion.
Supplement No. 27 (A/35/27).

III.

61

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ular the work of its Ad Hoe Working Group on that
question;
2. Expresses its regret that an agreement on the
complete and effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their destruction has not yet heen elaborated;
3. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue, as from the beginning of its session to be held in
1981, negotiations on such a multilateral convention as
a matter of high priority, taking into account all existing
proposals and future initiatives:
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on the results of its negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

94th plenary meeting
12 December I 980
('

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use
in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and
of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, which was
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925 and entered into force
on 8 February 1928, 10
Noting that the States parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction"' have reaffirmed
their adherence to the principles and objectives of that
Protocol and called upon all States to comply strictly
with them,
Noting that the Protocol does not provide for the establishment of any machinery for investigating reports
about activities prohibited under the Protocol,
Believing that the continued authority of the Protocol
and relevant .rules of customary international law require that full and proper attention be given to all
reports regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons
and to their harmful effects, both immediate and longterm, to humans and to the environment of the victim
countries,
Noting reports alleging that chemical weapons have
been used in recent wars and certain military operations
in various regions of the world,
Noting recent reports from certain States concerning
the use of chemical weapons on their territories,
Noting also the statements of various international organizations, in particular of the International Committee of the Red Cross, concerning these reports,
Expressing profound regret that certain States directly
interested in the clarification of reports pertaining to the
actual or alleged use of chemical weapons and which
have submitted appropriate proposals or suggestions in
that matter had not been given the opportunity to present their views in the Committee on Disarmament during its session held in 1980,
Concerned over the fact that a convention on the complete and effective prohibition of chemical weapons and
on the destruction of their stockpiles which would fully
preclude the danger of their use has not yet been concluded,
Gravely concerned about the continued research and
development programmes in the field of chemical weapons, especially the development of binary and multicomponent weapons whose field deployment could

compromise the ongoing effort to prohibit the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons
and trigger a chemical arms race,
Urging all States to refrain from the development,
production and deployment of new types of chemical
munitions, in particular binary and multicomponent
munitions,
Believing it necessary for all States, in particular
militarily significant States, to refrain from any action
which could impede multilateral negotiations on banning chemical weapons,
Convinced of the need to ascertain the facts pertaining
to these reports and, in particular, to determine the
harmful effects of the use of chemical weapons to
human beings and the environment of the victim countries,
I. Calls upon all States parties to the 1925 Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare to reaffirm their determination
strictly to observe all their obligations under the
Protocol:
2. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so to
accede to the Protocol:
3. Appeals to all States to comply with the principles
and objectives of the Protocol:
4. Decides to carry out an impartial investigation to
ascertain the facts pertaining to the reports regarding
the alleged use of chemical weapons and to assess the extent of the damage caused by the use of such weapons:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out such
investigation, inter a/ia, taking into account proposals
advanced by the States on whose territories the use of
chemical weapons has been reported, with the assistance
of qualified medical and technical experts 1 ! who shall:
(a) Seek relevant information from all concerned
Governments, international organizations and other
sources necessary:
(b) Collect and examine evidence, including on-site
with the consent of the countries concerned, to the extent relevant to the purposes of the investigation;
6. Invites the Governments of States where chemical
weapons were used to provide the Secretary-General
with all relevant information they may have in their possession:
7. Calls upon all States to co-operate in this investigation and to provide any relevant information they
may have in their possession regarding such reports:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
0n t_his matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
35/ 145.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
34/73
A
CESSATION Oli ALL TEST 1:XPLOSIONS
OF 1'-lJCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that the complete cessation of
nuclear-weapon tests. which has been examined for
"Subsequently referred lo as the Group of Experts to Investigate
Reports on the Alleged I 1se of Chemical Weapons.
