160

General Assembly-Forty-sec:ond Session
ANNEX

l. GUIDELINES FOR NA TIONAL ACTION
1. Ali Governments that have not airead y done so should endeavour
to prepare national shelter strategies at appropriate levels as an integral
part of their development strategies.
2. The national shelter strategies should take into account the multidimensional nature of the problem and fulfil and reflect the wide socioeconomic benefits of shelter development.
3. The national shelter strategies should also reflect the criteria of affordability and replicability, particularly for shelter for low-income
population groups; special attention should be paid to improving the access of the poor to land with secure tenure and appropriate building
materials, as well as to developing housing finance institutions that will
mobilize household savings and are responsive to the needs of lowincome groups.
4. Ali efforts should be made to involve, in full partnership, ali concerned governmental, non-governmental, public-sector and privatesector bodies, agencies and institutions at all levels and, in particular, the
communities and people concerned, in the planning and implementation
of national shelter strategies.
5. In the national shelter strategies, special attention should be paid
to the problems faced and capacities represented by marginalized groups
such as women and youth and disadvantaged groups such as the aged
and the disabled.
6. Governments should report biennially at the session of the Commission on Human Settlements on the progress made in implementing
the measures mentioned above.

11.

GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL ACTION

Ali United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and institutions
should support, as necessary, the Commission on Human Settlements
and the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) in the formulation and implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and ensure that their relevan! country-specific activities are supportive of and co-ordinated with national
shelter strategies.
l.

2. The regional commissions of the United Nations should encourage and assist in the formulation of shelter strategies in their respective
regions and the exchange of information thereon, and the Executive Director is invited to make ful] use of contacts with Governments through
the regional commissions and their subsidiary bodies.
3. Ali countries in a position to do so and international funding agencies should give ali possible support to Governments in their efforts to
plan and implement national shelter strategies for the attainment of the
goals of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and, within the
framework of an enabling shelter strategy, their endeavours to achieve
improvement in the shelter situation of their inhabitants, in particular
the poor and disadvantaged, and they should report to the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) on
their actions in this respect.

42/192.

Tenth anniversary ofthe adoption ofthe Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the continuing importance of the Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development 76 in providing comprehensive guidance for the
work of the United Nations system in the field of science
and technology for development,
Having considered the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development
on its ninth session,77

76
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, Vienna, 20--31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
77
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.
Supplement No. 37 (A/42/37 and Corr. l).

Noting that 1989 will mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science
and Technology for Development, and taking note of the
recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee
that the General Assembly observe the anniversary at its
forty-fourth session, at a commemorative plenary meeting,'1 8
Recalling that the Intergovernmental Committee, at its
tenth session, will carry out an end-of-decade review ofthe
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
Conscious of the need to enhance the endogenous scientific and technological capabilities of the developing countries, and aware of the impact of new and emerging areas
of science and technology on the development of the developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the multi-faceted preparation of
the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action constitutes a challenge and
an opportunity to contribute to a forward-looking strategy
for incorporating science and technology in the development process,
1. Endorses the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development at its ninth session; 79
2. Also endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1987/79 of 8 July 1987;
3. Emphasizes the need for careful and comprehensive
preparation of the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and
Technology for Development, in 1989, taking into account the important role that science and technology play
in the development process, in particular in developing
countries;
4. Reaffirms the crucial role of the United Nations in
promoting and catalyzing international co-operation in
the field of science and technology for development, in
particular in developing countries, and in helping solve
global scientific and technological problems;
5. Decides to observe at its forty-fourth session, at a
commemorative plenary meeting, the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, and encourages the participation of distinguished professionals in the
field of science and technology;
6. Also decides that, in the light ofthe importance and
priority accorded to science and technology for development, the general debate on the question will be conducted
at its forty-fourth session in plenary meeting.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/193.

Preparation of the new international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Du-

78 /bid., sect. II.A, resolution 1 (IX), sect. II.
79 /bid., sect. II.
