THE SITUATION IN MOZAMBIQUE

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier
with the members of the Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:365

Decision

At its 3123rd meeting, on 13 October 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Mozambique to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation in Mozambique: report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (S/24642)". 17

"The Council has taken note of the letter of 23
October 1992 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council concerning the situation in Mozambique. It expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General
and to his interim Special Representative for Mozambique
for their efforts to ensure that the United Nations contributes to the implementation of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique 361 in accordance with the provisions
of this Agreement.

Resolution 782 (1992)

or 13 October 1992
The Security Council,

"The Council remains deeply concerned by the reports
of major violations of the cease-fire in several regions of
Mozambique. It calls upon the parties to halt such violations immediately and scrupulously to respect the ceasefire and all the commitments entered into under the
Agreement. It also urges the parties to cooperate fully with
the interim Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and in particular to take all measures necessary
to ensure the safety of United Nations staff in Mozambique.

Welcoming the signature at Rome, on 4 October 1992, of
a General Peace Agreement for Mozambique between the
Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia Nacional
Moc;ambicana, 361
Considering that the signature of the Agreement constitutes
an important contribution to the restoration of peace and
security in the region,
Taking note of the Joint Declaration signed at Rome on 7
August 1992362 bythe President of the Republic ofMozambique
and the President of the Resistencia Nacional Moc;ambicana, in
which the parties accept the role of the United Nations in
monitoring and guaranteeing the implementation of the
Agreement,

"The Council wishes to reiterate its firm commitment
to work towards a lasting peace in Mozambique. In this
regard, it urges the parties to respect fully the cease-fire,
which is a necessary condition for the speedy establishment
of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique and its
successful deployment."

Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
9 October 1992 on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique363 and of the request ofthe President ofMozambique,364

At its 3149th meeting, on 16 December 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Mozambique to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation in Mozambique: report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (S/24892 and
Add.1)". 17

1. Approves the appointment by the Secretary-General of
an interim Special Representative for Mozambique, and the
dispatch to Mozambique of a team ofup to twenty-five military
observers as recommended in paragraph 16 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 9 October 1992 on the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique; 363

Resolution 797 (1992)

or 16 December 1992

2. Looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General
on the establishment ofa United Nations Operation in Mozambique, including in particular a detailed estimate of the cost of
this operation;

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 782 (1992) of 13 October 1992,

3.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3123rd

Recalling also the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 27 October 1992, 365

m«tin&

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
3 December 1992 on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique,366

Decisions

At its 3125th meeting, on 27 October 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Mozambique: Jetter
dated 23 October 1992 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council".

Stressing the importance it attaches to the General Peace
Agreement for Mozambique 361 and to the fulfilment by the
parties in good faith of the obligations contained therein,
108

commitments constitutes a necessary condition for the fulfilment by the Operation of its mandate;

Noting the efforts made so far by the Government of
Mozambique and the Resistencia Nacional M~ambicana to
maintain the cease-fire, and expressing concern over the delays
in initiating some of the major tasks arising from the Agreement,

5. Demands that all parties and others concerned in
Mozambique take all measures necessary to ensure the safety
of United Nations and all other personnel deployed pursuant
to the present and prior resolutions;

Welcoming the appointment by the Secretary-General of an
interim Special Representative for Mozambique who will be in
overall charge of United Nations activities in support of the
Agreement, as well as the dispatch to Mozambique of a team
of twenty-five military observers, as approved by resolution 782
(1992),

6. Endorses the approach in paragraphs 30 and 51 of the
report of the Secretary-General as regards the timetable for the
electoral process, and invites the Secretary-General to consult
closely with all the parties on the precise timing of and preparations for the presidential and legislative elections, as well as on
a precise timetable for the implementation of the other major
aspects of the Agreement, and to report back to the Council on
this as soon as possible, and in any event not later than 31
March 1993;

Noting the intention of the Secretary-General, in this as in
other peace-keeping operations, to monitor expenditures
carefully during this period of increasing demands on peacekeeping resources,

7. Calls upon the Government of Mozambique and the
Resistencia Nacional M~ambicana to finalize as soon as
possible, in close coordination with the interim Special Representative of the Secretary-General, organizational and logistical
preparations for the demobilization process;

Approves the report of the Secretary-General of 3
December 1992 on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique366 and the recommendations contained therein;
1.

2. Decides to establish the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique as proposed by the Secretary-General and in line
with the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique,361 and
requests the Secretary-General in planning and executing the
deployment of the Operation to seek economies through, inter
alia, phased deployment and to report regularly to the Council
on what is achieved in this regard;

8. Encourages Member States to respond positively to
requests made to them by the Secretary-General to contribute
personnel and equipment to the Operation;
9. Also encourages Member States to contribute voluntarily to United Nations activities in support of the Agreement,
and requests United Nations programmes and specialized
agencies to provide appropriate assistance and support for the
implementation of the major tasks arising from the Agreement;

3. Also decides that the Operation is established for a
period until 31 October 1993 in order to accomplish the
objectives described in the report of the Secretary-General;

10. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council informed of developments and to submit a further
report to the Council by 31 March 1993;

4. Calls upon the Government of Mozambique and the
Resistencia Nacional M~ambicana to cooperate fully with the
interim Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Mozambique and with the Operation and to respect scrupulously the cease-fire and all the commitments entered into under
the Agreement, and stresses that the full respect of these

11. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted w,animous/y at the 3149th
meeting,

THE SITUATION IN TAJIKISTAN

"Letter dated 21 October 1992 from the Permanent
Representative of Tajikistan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/24699)". 17

Decisions

At its 3131st meeting, on 30 October 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled:

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier
with the members of the Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf the Council:367

"The situation in Tajikistan:
"Letter dated 29 October 1992 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/24739); 17

"The Council has considered the communications
received from the Government of Tajikistan.
"The Council expresses its very grave concern about
the continuing deterioration in the situation in Tajikistan,
which is causing considerable loss of human life and
serious material damage. It notes with concern the conse-

"Letter dated 19 October 1992 from the Permanent
Representative of Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/24692); 17
109
