VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of southern Africa constitute a majar obstacle to political
independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories that impede the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination;
5. Condemns the Governments which continue to
support or collaborate with those foreign economic and
other interests engaged in exploiting the natural and
human resources of the Territories, thus violating the
political, economic and social rights and interests of
the indigenous peoples and obstructing the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in respect
of those Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the collaboration in both
nuclear and military fields between the racist minority
régime of South Africa and all countries, in particular
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, which continue to
supply that régime with nuclear and military equipment
and technology, thus increasing its nuclear and military
potential, and calls upan all Govemments, in particular
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, the
United Kingdom and the United States, to refrain from
extending facilities, directly or indirectly, to the racist
minority régime of South Africa enabling it to produce
uranium, plutonium and other nuclear materials, reactors or military equipment;
7. Calls once again upon all Governments which
have not done so to take legislative, administrative or
other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the
inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end
to such enterprises and to prevent new investments that
run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories;
8. Condemns all Governments that violate the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council against
the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia,
as well as the continued failure of certain Member States
to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary to the
obligations assumed by them under Article 25 of the
Charter;
9. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to those
régimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples
of the colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements;
1O. Calls once again upon all Sta tes to discontinue
all economic, financia! or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic, financia! or other relations with South
Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
which may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
11. Strongly condemns the racist minority régime
of South Africa which, in violation of the relevant reso-

ll7

lutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of its specific obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls
upan that Government to cease immediately all forms
of collaboration with the illegal racist minority régime
in Southern Rhodesia;
12. Invites all Governments and organizations within
the United Nations system, having regard to the relevant
provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, contained in
General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974, and of the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure, in particular,
that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural resources is fully respected and
safeguarded;
13. Cal/s upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration and
to apply in each Territory a uniform system of wages
to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, a sustained and wide publicity campaign with a
view to informing world public opinion of the facts
concerning the pillaging of natural resources and the
exploitation of the indigenous populations by foreign
monopolies and the support they render to the colonialist and racist régimes;
15. R eq uests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session.
55th plenary meeting
5 November 1976
31/29.

Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to
take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 3420 (XXX) of 8 December 1975, in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted
to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the rcport of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter4 and the
action taken by the Committee in rcspect of that information,
1
· lhid.,

Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.l ), chap. XXXII.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

118

Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 5
Deploring that, despite the repeated recommendations
of the General Assembly and the Special Committee,
sorne Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories have
ceased or have failed to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United N ations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
:rerritory has attained a full measure of self-government
m terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transrnit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the
Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on
political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/30.

lmplementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Implementation
of the_ Declarati?n on the Granting of Independence to
~olomal Countnes and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with
the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec~mber
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration contained in its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 as well as
all other relevant resolutions of the Gener~l Assembly
and the Security Council,
Having examined the reports submitted on the ítem
by the Secretary-General, 6 the Economic and Social
CounciF and the Special Committee on the Situation
5 A/31/275.

6A/31/65 and Add.1-5, A/31/238.
General Assembly, Thirty-first Sess1on, Supplement No. 3 (A/31/3), chap. VII, sect. E.
• 7 Official Records of the

with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 8
Taking into account the positions of the national
liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africa on this ítem, as explained to the Special Committee
and to the Ad Hoc Group established by the Committee
at its 1029th meeting on 1 April 1976,9 which visited
a number of African countries in May 1976, and conscious of the urgent and pressing need of the peoples
concerned for concrete assistance from the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system,
. Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take all effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, particularly in the
proyision of moral and material assistance on a priority
basis, to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their
national liberation movements,
N oting with concern that, although progress has been
maintained in the extension of assistance to refugees
from the colonial Territories in Africa, the actions taken
hither~o by the organizations concerned in the provision
of ass1stance to the peoples of the Territories through
their national liberation movements continue to remain
inadequate to meet the urgent needs of these peoples,
N oting with satisfaction the measures initiated by
s~m~ of the specialized agencies and other organizations
withm the United Nations system, in particular the
World Food Programme and the United Nations Deve~opme~t Programme, to provide assistance on a prionty_ 1?as1s to the peoples of the Territories formerly
~dmm1stered by Portugal, and expressing its appreciat10n to the Secretary-General for the initiative he has
taken in that regard,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the organizations within the United Nations system in connexion with the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and
?ther o~ganizations within the United Nations system
m the 1mplementation of the various United Nations
decisions relating to decolonization,
1. :4-pproves the c~apt~r of the report of the Special
Comm1ttee on the S1tuat10n with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item; 8
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations
organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial
peoples to achieve freedom and independence entails
as a corollary, the extension by the organizations withiti
the United Nations system of all the necessary moral
and _ma!erial assist~nce ~o the peoples of the colonial
Terntones and their nat10nal liberation movements·
'
3. . Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and organizations within the United Nations
8 lbíd.,

9 Ibíd.,

Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. VI.
chap. VII.
