A /70/PV.114

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

114th plenary meeting

Friday, 29 July 2016, 10:30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda items 15 and 116 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/70/L.60)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered agenda items 15 and 116
at its 4th plenary meeting, on 25 September 2015, and
adopted resolution 70/1 under those items.
Members will also recall that the Assembly
considered agenda items 15, 116 and 123 in a joint
debate at its 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November
2015. Members will recall that the Assembly considered
agenda items 15 and 116 at its 108th plenary meeting,
on 30 June, and adopted resolution 70/290 under
those items.
Only last week, during the High-level Political
Forum, we witnessed a series of examples of how
Governments, civil society, the private sector,
universities, the United Nations system and others are
taking steps to get implementation of the 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) off to the
best possible start.

16-24090 (E)

Draft resolution, A/70/L.60, which is before the
Assembly today, is another one of those steps. While
it is a small contribution as compared to the grand
achievements of 2015, I believe it is a critical one. It
comes on the back of the Secretary-General’s report
(A/70/684) on critical milestones presented in January
of this year and includes a series of decisions that will
help the follow-up and review processes at the global
level, particularly in the High-level Political Forum, to
be as effective and engaging as they possibly can.
I therefore wish to thank Her Excellency Ms. Lois
Michele Young, Permanent Representative of Belize, and
His Excellency Ib Petersen, Permanent Representative
of Denmark, and their teams for leading the informal
consultations in such an inclusive and skilful manner.
I also want to thank each and every representative who
gave considerable time and effort to the negotiating
process and who ultimately summoned the spirit of
unity that led to last year’s agreement.
As members know, however, those consultations
were not without their complications. It is regrettable
that technical discussions at times veered towards
a renegotiation of issues that had been decided last
September. It is my sincere hope that, as we move
towards the seventy-first session, delegations will
embrace a new mindset that sees the focus here in
New York shift towards creating an environment that
inspires action from all actors and implementation at
all levels.
At the same time, I am aware that certain aspects of
the draft text present challenges for some delegations.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1624090*

A/70/PV.114

In that regard, allow me to remind representatives that
resolution 70/1, together with other resolutions, provides
the context for the current draft resolution. Through it,
world leaders agreed to a universal agenda to be met
for all nations, peoples and all segments of society.
They decided that the Goals and targets be integrated
and indivisible, balancing the three dimensions of
sustainable development, namely, the economic, social
and environmental. They also addressed a wide-range
of other issues including, in paragraph 35, the issue of
peoples living under colonial and foreign occupation,
and, in paragraph 74, the principles related to follow-up
and review processes.
In the light of this, I trust that a spirit of consensus
will prevail in the Assembly today. Such consensus
will help preserve the universal ownership of the 2030
Agenda and, in this critical first year of implementation,
help sustain global efforts to transform our world for
the better — for the people and the planet alike.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.60.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of position before its adoption, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): In September 2015, all countries welcomed
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) and we committed
ourselves to implementing parts of it starting in
2016. Mexico made that commitment its own and
acknowledged the fundamental principles of the
Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030 Agenda,
which, in paragraph 55, emphasize the integrated and
indivisible character, the global nature and the universal
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
My delegation therefore wishes to refer to the content
of paragraph 5 of draft resolution A/70/L.60, which we
are considering in connection with the follow-up and
review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
at the global level, and express — as we have already
on numerous occasions — that although we understand
that paragraph 5 is necessary for some delegations,
for purely practical reasons, Mexico believes that
the paragraph can break with the principle of the
indivisibility and integrity of the Agenda because it
fragments the follow-up of the Sustainable Development
2/9

29/07/2016

Goals over a period of three years. Mexico is convinced
that dividing up the follow-up and review of the Agenda
is a bad methodology, as it gives de facto priority to the
implementation of some Goals above others.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the firm desire
of my delegation to continue to work to ensure that the
segmentation of the follow-up over three years of the
Goals does not fragment the Agenda and ensure that the
indivisibility and integrity of the Agenda be preserved.
I would grateful if my statement were recorded in the
record of this meeting.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/70/L.60, entitled “Followup and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.60 was adopted (resolution
70/299).
The President: Before giving the floor to those
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
At the outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you
on the consensus adoption of resolution 70/299, on
the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) at the global
level. Without any doubt, the resolution underscores the
shared vision and aspirations of all States Members with
regard to the crucial path set forth to assess progress in
the implementation of the ambitious global Agenda and
ensure that its overall objectives of poverty eradication
and sustainable development are duly achieved.
The 134 members of the G-77 and China attach
high importance to the robust guidance on how the 2030
Agenda is to be followed up at the national, regional and
global levels. We recall that, on 5 February, it was the
Group of 77 and China that proposed the way forward
to address the issue of coherent, efficient and inclusive
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda at the global
level in a more structured and inclusive discussion in
the form of a General Assembly resolution to be arrived
at through an intergovernmental process.
16-24090

29/07/2016

With today’s adoption, I wish to express the Group’s
deepest disappointment that one of the Group’s most
important historical principles with regard to countries
and peoples under colonial and foreign occupation was
omitted. We underscore that the resolution first and
foremost must be read and implemented consistent with
the 2030 Agenda, which starts from the premise that
no one will be left behind. We further emphasize that
because a full listing of all groupings of countries and
peoples who faced specific challenges was not in the
end accommodated in the resolution, that omission, in a
way, betrays our leaders’ commitment to leaving no one
behind and the shared principles that they reaffirmed in
the 2030 Agenda.
The right to self-determination is a primordial right
that anchors the United Nations. For the Group of 77
and China, it has been and continues to be a beacon
of hope for all those who struggle under the weight of
occupation. While the Group did not break its silence, it
could not remain silent on an issue that has long united
us and been an thread of solidarity for our Group. It
was therefore deeply disappointing that even a benign
reference to those rights and the very principles that
uphold those rights, which the Group proposed as a way
out of the impasse, was rejected. Indeed, it raises the
question that if we cannot stand for what the United
Nations promises in its very Charter, then what do we
stand for?
It is therefore incumbent upon the Group to set forth
its understanding of the interpretation of the resolution
for the record, as follows: that there is no derogation
from the commitments enshrined in the 2030 Agenda,
especially from the shared principles as set forth in
the Agenda; that while countries and peoples under
colonial and foreign occupation are not expressly
mentioned in the resolution, paragraph 35 of the 2030
Agenda, which refers to the full realization of the right
of self-determination of peoples living under colonial
and foreign occupation, which continues to adversely
affect their economic and social development, as well
as their development, is nonetheless validated in the
resolution’s reaffirmation of the 2030 Agenda itself; and
that the process of the follow-up and review of the 2030
Agenda at the global level, including through the Highlevel Political Forum, shall therefore be conducted by
taking into account paragraph 35, among other relevant
paragraphs relating to countries and peoples facing
specific challenges.

A/70/PV.114

The Group reiterates and reaffirms our strong
position that in the implementation and follow-up
and review of the 2030 Agenda, we must not forget
the severe difficulties faced by peoples living under
colonial and foreign occupation and strive to remove
the obstacles to their full realization of the right to selfdetermination, which adversely affects their economic
and social development and their ability to achieve and
implement the Sustainable Development Goals, and to
ensure that they will not be left behind.
Our members have demonstrated the utmost
flexibility in agreeing to the introductory remarks of the
President the General Assembly, so that the institutional
arrangements for the follow-up and review process for
the 2030 Agenda and its related mechanisms set out in
the resolution can be implemented. This, we believe, is
to the shared benefit of all member States and States
Members of the United Nations. However, we wish to
caution that our flexibility cannot be used as a precedent
or a pretext to adopt a new methodology of negotiation
in any future intergovernmental process, especially as
it relates to the issue at hand. Due consideration must be
given in the negotiation process to the full realization of
the self-determination of countries and peoples living
under colonial and foreign occupation in relation to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It is our legitimate
hope that all member States and States Members of the
United Nations will engage in all future negotiations
with an open mind in order that no one is left behind.
Mr. Schaerlaekens (Belgium): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your team for having brought this
important exercise to successful conclusion. We would
like also to thank the co-facilitators, Ambassadors
Young and Petersen, and their teams — I have the
honour to sit next to one of them — for their tireless
work in steering this process and bridging the
divergences between the delegations that participated
in the consultations.
The European Union and its member States have
engaged in negotiations in good faith, showing a
lot of flexibility in the common interest of reaching
consensus. We regret, though, that this has not always
been reciprocal. In particular, some of the developments
in the last stages of consultations were not conducive to
building trust, which is very unfortunate. As we have
consistently argued, a strong follow-up and review
framework is key to accelerating progress on the

16-240903/9

A/70/PV.114

implementation of the comprehensive 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), foster broad
ownership and partnership, and promote accountability
and inclusivity.
Today we have joined the consensus on resolution
70/299. We would like, however, to register our strong
reservations on paragraph 9 as it currently stands. We
are disappointed that the concerns we expressed on
this paragraph during the last informal consultations
were not addressed before the text was put on a silence
procedure. However, we thank those partners who were
willing to show flexibility on the question.
This paragraph, and, for that matter, the whole
resolution cannot be interpreted as undermining
in any way the modalities of the European Union’s
full participation in the High-level Political Forum,
as specified in paragraph 10 of resolution 67/290.
Paragraph 9 of the present resolution must be
implemented consistently with operative paragraph
10 of resolution 67/290. The EU therefore retains the
right to provide the feedback foreseen in paragraph 9.
Moreover, the formulation used in this paragraph does
not constitute a precedent in any way.
Concerning paragraph 4 and the reference to
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 17 being
reviewed annually, I would like to reiterate that for the
EU and its member States, every single SDG is of equal
importance, in line with the integrated, indivisible
and interlinked nature of the Agenda. Moreover, we
would like to recall that in the complex institutional
architecture that was set up last summer, the financing
for development forum is the place where means of
implementation, including Goal 17, are to be reviewed
on an annual basis.
We also regret that we were not able to act in this
resolution to resolve the artificial division between the
high-level sessions of the High-level Political Forum
held under the auspices of the Economic and Social
Council and the high-level segment of the Economic
and Social Council itself. This duality adversely affects
the credibility of this high-level week.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm our commitment
to ensuring the full and effective participation of all
stakeholders in the implementation, follow-up and
review of the 2030 Agenda. We note that the Agenda
itself is quite clear that regard. For the EU and its
member States, the relevant provisions of the 2030
4/9

29/07/2016

Agenda are still valid. They have not been modified by
the present resolution.
We would kindly request that this statement be
reflected in the records of today’s meeting.
Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States and to convey the Group’s appreciation
to all States that participated in the negotiations on
resolution 70/299, which we have just adopted, on the
follow-up and review of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
I should like to thank in particular the members of
the Group of 77 and China. We appreciate their efforts
during the negotiations and their determination to
take into account the concerns of Member States. The
resolution represents an important milestone in the
achievement of tangible progress in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda, which underscores issues critical
to all, including sustainable development, the combat
against poverty, and the creation of societies living in
security.
The resolution reflects the will of Member
States and their determination to implement the 2030
Agenda in an effective way at all levels. We sought
to contribute to the consensus on the adoption of the
resolution based on our conviction as regards certain
important issues that require cooperation among all for
their implementation. However, I should like to voice
the disappointment of the Arab Group in the context
of one of the fundamental principles that the 2030
Agenda underscores, especially in its paragraph 35,
concerning the right of countries living under foreign
occupation to self-determination. This is a right that
we have underscored during meetings of the Main
and subsidiary committees of the General Assembly
and a principle that is directly linked to sustainable
development and human rights.
I should like also to stress the fact that failing
to mention the right to self-determination does not
mean that we are not obliged to uphold it, for this is
a procedural resolution on the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, which makes reference to this important
principle.
I should like to reiterate our determination to
closely monitor the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and related procedures as regards the right to selfdetermination, so as to avoid double standards in the
16-24090

29/07/2016

application of the principles contained in the 2030
Agenda, so as to ensure that its implementation is
holistic and achieved in all of its aspects.
Mr. Luque Márquez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we associate ourselves with the statement
read out by the Permanent Representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
I wish to express the gratitude of the delegation
of Ecuador for your efforts, Mr. President, during
the negotiation process on resolution 70/299, entitled
“Follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development at the global level”. We
welcome its consensus adoption.
Nevertheless, I must say that Ecuador deeply regrets
the fact that, owing to opposition on the part of a few
States, paragraph 11 of the resolution omits a reference
to countries and peoples under foreign occupation. The
Declaration of the 2030 Agenda clearly highlights the
fact that
“[s]ustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security.” (resolution 70/1, para.
35)
In the same paragraph, the Declaration also calls for the
removal of
“the obstacles to the full realization of the right of
self-determination of peoples living under colonial
and foreign occupation”,
for such a situation continues to adversely affect their
economic and social development.
It is for this reason that, along with other countries
facing special challenges — the least developed
countries, the small island developing States and the
landlocked countries — paragraph 11 of the resolution
should have included the peoples and countries under
foreign occupation, as proposed by the Group of 77 and
China in already compromise wording. That is why
Ecuador wishes to state for the record of this meeting
that it is our interpretation that paragraph 11 of the
resolution implicitly includes countries and peoples
under colonial and foreign occupation.
I must say that my delegation is concerned about
how the few countries that prevented the inclusion of
wording referring to colonial and foreign occupation
are systematically opposed to using this wording in the
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and
in other United Nations organs and forums, including

A/70/PV.114

where such language has been in use for several decades.
The promoting the self-determination of all peoples is
one of the fundamental purposes defined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Its concrete implementation
is based on the liberation of peoples under colonial
domination and foreign occupation. Therefore, the
delegation of Ecuador will be opposed here, and in any
other forum, that preferences for such clear and historic
references be deleted.
Finally, I wish to point out that my delegation
would have preferred the General Assembly to
have met in its Hall — in the Hall of the General
Assembly — particularly on a topic of special
importance such as the one that brings us together
this morning.
Ms. Leyva Regueira (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to express its full support for the
statement delivered by the representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Today, resolution 70/299, on the follow-up and
review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), has finally been adopted at the global
level. It is a document of paramount importance for
developing countries and for developed countries alike.
As reflected in the preamble of the 2030 Agenda, our
countries pledged to ensure that all human beings can
fulfil their potential in dignity and equality. Resolution
70/299 as the result of intensive and productive
rounds of consultations — an exercise for which we
should certainly thank those delegations that did
everything possible to maintain the constructive spirit
of the process. I take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, and the co-facilitators for the work and
efforts realized.
After adopting this document, and beyond this
process, my delegation would like to make some
comments on how negotiations are being conducted in
different forums of the Organization, which we have
witnessed in recent times. On that basis, allow me to
express the displeasure of my delegation at the growing
trend at the United Nations to favour negotiating
processes that either ignore or attempt to impose
criteria on Member States. The traditional methods of
inclusive, participatory and transparent negotiations
without imposition must once again prevail in these
forums. The right of every State to have its proposals
taken into account should not be overshadowed, much
less constricted, by mechanisms or actors established

16-240905/9

A/70/PV.114

to conduct these processes, nor can we allow their
ownership to be breached nor to interpret what Member
States really mean to say.
The deadlines and time limits, far from constituting
straitjackets, should indicate the full satisfaction of our
expectations as Member States with full rights. We must
not forget that the adoption of a document is not the
end in itself. The commitments made in our resolutions
will make a difference, so they must be made wisely
and unhurriedly. Conflicts will never cease to exist;
however, we must show full respect to dialogue and
negotiations as the only way to find a solution to them.
If I may, I would like to conclude by recalling the
burden of responsibility we bear and the commitment
of our delegations to the right to development for all our
peoples without exceptions.
Mr. Pinto Damiani (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to refer to resolution 70/299, entitled “Followup and the review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level”, which we have just
adopted by consensus.
At the outset, we wish to reiterate our support of the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We would like to point out certain aspects in our
national capacity.
Our country joined the consensus on this resolution
as a reflection of its commitment to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which was conceived as a way of
resolving existing socioeconomic problems while
contributing to the continuation of life on the planet
and the preservation of the human species. The Agenda
is universal; it applies to everyone equally and has as
its centre the human being, based on solidarity, justice,
social inclusion, equity, the promotion of and respect
for human rights and the participation of all citizens.
However, in the context of the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals, it is necessary
to guarantee that the concerns and sensitivities of
all countries, in particular in the developing world,
be incorporated in the decisions to be agreed. In
that respect, we endorse the concern expressed by
various delegations with regard to the procedure and
non-inclusion of sensitive themes for developing
countries in such a substantive document meant to
6/9

29/07/2016

follow up the 2030 Agenda, even when these proposals
come from two thirds of the Member States. Therefore,
we wish to emphasize, as set forth in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, that we insistently call
for:
“effective measures and actions to be taken, in
conformity with international law, to remove the
obstacles to the full realization of the right of selfdetermination of peoples living under colonial and
foreign occupation, which continue to adversely
affect their economic and social development
as well as their environment.” (resolution 70/1,
para. 35)
Only by truly considering the views of everyone can we
ensure that no one is left behind.
Ms. Bajaña (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
On the adoption of the important resolution 70/299,
entitled “Follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development at the global level”, my
delegation wishes to express its deepest concern about
the new trend in negotiating and drafting solutions,
ministerial statements and other documents that are
of paramount importance for the development of our
people. Nicaragua regrets that the process used to reach
consensus on the resolution was to block negotiations
on the subject for months in order to corner the Group
of 77 and China at the last minute and pressure it
under the pretext of having running out of time to
negotiate. These processes, without negotiating word
choices and with supposed creative options such as the
delivering of a general statement from the President of
the General Assembly on sensitive and crucial topics
affecting developing countries that were not included,
are unsatisfactory for the States and peoples who live,
in this case, under colonial and foreign occupation.
All States — be they large and powerful or small
and developing, like us — enjoy the same rights at the
United Nations. We have observed a trend within the
United Nations of impositions set by the co-facilitators,
which is a practice that does not in any way contribute
to multilateralism. We reject that methodology, as that
is not how the United Nations should work.
We do not want the new precedent to be characterized
by the imposition of texts that have not been fully
16-24090

29/07/2016

negotiated, nor by the lack of consideration of the
sovereign positions of States, particularly when those
are the previously agreed-upon rules. Negotiating in
good faith means reaching a consensus that reflects the
interests of all Member States. We would like to remind
the entire international community that we are here to
promote the rights and development of our peoples, and
that these types of impositions will not eradicate global
poverty, much less allow for the implementation of the
2030 Agenda. The resolution adopted today does not
consider the right of peoples living under colonial and
foreign occupation to sustainable development.
Finally, the fact that we have not objected to the
adoption of the resolution does not imply that we agree
with the procedures or with the pressure that led to its
adoption, and in no way can we accept it as a precedent
or methodology to be used in the future.
Ms. Miyano (Japan): On the occasion of the
unanimous adoption of resolution 70/299, we would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and your team, as well
as the co-facilitators of the resolution, Ambassador
Young and Ambassador Petersen, for their patient and
dedicated work and for ensuring a transparent and
inclusive process.
There was an unfortunate turn of events after
general agreement was reached among Member
States. Nevertheless, my delegation believes that we
gathered here are capable of proceeding with the global
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) together and in unity.
Japan joined consensus on the resolution based on the
following understanding.
First, designating a set of goals to be reviewed in-depth
each year should not lead to a narrow, so-called silo
approach. The integrated nature of the whole Agenda
and the interlinkages between goals are the major
features of the agenda that are to be upheld.
Secondly, the duplication of effort between the Highlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development and
the Economic and Social Council Forum on Financing
for Development should be kept at a minimum. The
Forum on Financing for Development was one of the
major outcomes of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and
is is a venue for following up the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda itself, as all of the means of implementation of
the 2030 Agenda.

A/70/PV.114

Thirdly, we are of the firm view that nothing in this
resolution changes what we agreed upon in the 2030
Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the urgency
of our work. We are already eight months into the
implementation stage, and 15 years is not that long.
We should accelerate our work in both the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in order
to support its implementation. As the President rightly
noted, we have no more time to spend on reopening or
renegotiating what we already agreed to.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to express our thanks and appreciation
to you, Sir, for having convened this meeting.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
70/299, entitled “Follow-up and review of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level”.
I would like to recall resolution 67/290; resolution
69/313, on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
third International Conference on Financing for
Development; and resolution 70/1, which crowned
the international consensus on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. These resolutions confirm
the global commitment to eliminating poverty and
hunger and fully reaching the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) in their three dimensions within the next
15 years.
My delegation would like to associate itself with the
statements delivered by the representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on
behalf of the Group of Arab States.
We would like to stress the complementary nature
of all objectives, which must be approached in a
comprehensive and integrated manner. We also stress
the need for a comprehensive, transparent, effective
and robust mechanism for follow-up and review that
will track the global implementation of the SDGs and
assist Member States at the national and regional levels
to achieve the best results possible by exchanging
information and lessons learned, mobilizing support
and developing best practices for seizing opportunities
and tackling challenges.
My delegation would like to stress the voluntary
nature of the follow-up and review system at the national
level. Countries must be given total liberty to decide
their priorities and work on pursuing development

16-240907/9

A/70/PV.114

in accordance with their national legislation, ethical
values, social and cultural traditions and internationally
recognized instruments. We would also like to
express the importance of regional cooperation. All
sectors of society — Government, public and private
sectors — must cooperate in reaching objectives and
following up with the results.
The Agenda for Sustainable Development stresses
that no one should be left behind. We want to underscore
the need to attach great importance to the challenges
faced by countries in special circumstances, particularly
least developed countries, African States, countries
emerging from conflict and small island developing
States. We add to the list countries under colonial and
foreign occupation and their people’s right to selfdetermination and freedom, a category that was left
out of the resolution without any justification, although
it was established in paragraph 35 of the Agenda. We
would like to stress that the right to self-determination
is one of the fundamental rights set out in Article 1 of
the Charter of the United Nations and that it is a right
that cannot be called into question.
My delegation would also like to recall paragraph
30 of the Agenda, which strongly urges States to refrain
from applying any unilateral economic, financial or
trade measures and coercive measures on developing
countries. Such measures undoubtedly run counter to
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
obstruct efforts to eliminate poverty and ultimately end
up affecting the poorest sectors of the population in my
country and other countries affected by such measures.
They also run counter to the principle of leaving no
one behind; unfortunately, such measures deliberately
leave some people behind instead.
The Agenda for Sustainable Development has placed
people at the centre of all sustainable development
activities. Human dignity and social justice will not be
realized as long as the inequality in our world today
persists and those capable of providing assistance
continually fail to uphold their obligations. We hope
that the United Nations, through its development
system, will work in a coordinated and effective
manner to assist developing countries. We also affirm
the need for all international stakeholders to establish
a constructive global partnership to promote economic
growth, achieve social welfare and protect the planet in
the interest of present and future generations.
8/9

29/07/2016

We ask that this statement be included in the record
of this meeting.
Ms. Beekma Reis (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the Permanent Mission of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
At the outset, we extend our sincere congratulations
to you, Mr. President, and to the co-facilitators of this
process.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Kingdom of Thailand on behalf of the Group of
77 and China and wishes to add a few points in its
national capacity.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 70/299, on
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) at the global level. The
Sustainable Development Goals aim to establish a
more just and equal world free from poverty by 2030.
Our Heads of State committed to implementing these
goals and abiding by the principles set forth in the 2030
Agenda. This resolution highlights the shared vision of
Member States and establishes the necessary road map
to evaluate progress towards the implementation of
the global agenda, as well as to ensure that the overall
objectives are truly achieved.
However, we believe that leaving no one behind
is the only way to achieve genuine universality in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. In order to
achieve these goals, we must eliminate the obstacles to
the full realization of the right to self-determination of
peoples living under colonial domination and foreign
occupation, which affects their economic, social and
environmental development. We therefore regret that
this document does not take into account the principle
of the right to development, which is a right of every
human being without exception.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the by the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Jordan on behalf
of the Group of Arab States.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
70/299, on the follow-up and review of implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). However, we continue to regret and
16-24090

29/07/2016

deplore the fact that there are still voices expressing
reservations or opposing a fundamental principle,
namely, that of the right to self-determination of peoples
under foreign occupation and colonial domination. This
is in contravention of the goal that has been highlighted
since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, namely, to
ensure that no one be left behind. In that regard, my
delegation recalls the fact that foreign occupation and
colonial domination constitute the worst form of human
rights violation and the very denial of those rights.
My delegation will continue to recall the fact that
the right to self-determination is clearly enshrined in
international law, particularly the Charter of the United
Nations and the international covenants on human
rights. In that context, we stress the fact that the people
of the 17 non-self-governing territories legitimately
expect to fully exercise their right to self-detrmination,
that the responsibility to complete the decolonization
process is incumbent upon the United Nations and
that, once again, it is deplorable that, in the twentyfirst century, we hear voices rising up against this
fundamental right, in flagrant breach of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the various relevant resolutions.
Such opposition also runs counter to resolution
70/1, solemnly adopted in September 2015, enshrining
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, whose
universal and global nature our Heads of State and
Government committed to upholding by adopting it by
consensus. On the other hand, my delegation particularly
emphasizes the fact that the manner in which this

A/70/PV.114

resolution was adopted — thanks to the flexibilty
shown by the Group of 77 and China — shall by no
means constitute grounds to be invoked in the context
of future activities, in particular intergovernmental
activities within the United Nations system.
Ms. Maricle (United States of America): I would
like to thank the co-facilitators and all those who
worked painstakingly for months to achieve this
outcome, and in doing so, to offer further clarity on a
critical element of the 2030 Agenda. We also want to
thank the many countries that came to the table in good
faith over the past months to forge forward towards this
outcome. However, we would be remiss not to note our
disappointment in how the final stages of this process
unfolded after we had come to an agreement.
Together, we have built a common understanding
and respect for the methods and norms of our work
together in this organ. Resolution 70/299 did not follow
that, resulting in a disturbing erosion of trust. Coming
out of a successful and energizing first High-level
Political Forum, I hope that, as we move forward, this
will not repeat itself, and that instead we can return to
an important spirit of collegiality. Too much is on the
line in the implementation of our agenda for that not
to happen.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 15 and 116.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

16-240909/9
