S/PRST/2009/26*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6206th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 October 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous relevant resolutions and
statements of its President which underscore the importance of developing
effective partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union, in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and the relevant statutes of the regional organizations.
“The Security Council reiterates its primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security, and recalls
that cooperation with regional and subregional organizations in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, and consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, can improve collective
security.
“The Security Council welcomes the continuing important efforts and
enhanced peacekeeping role of the African Union and its subregional
organizations, consistent with Security Council resolutions and decisions, to
prevent, mediate and settle conflicts in the African continent.
“The Security Council reaffirms its resolution 1809 (2008), which
recognizes the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing regional organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under a
United Nations authorization.
“The Security Council reiterates that regional organizations have the
responsibility to secure human, financial, logistical and other resources for
their organizations, including through contributions by their members and
support from donors. The Security Council commends the support extended by
donors to the African Union Peace and Security Architecture through specific
mechanisms including the African Peace Facility.
“The Security Council recalls the statement of its President
(S/PRST/2009/3) in which it requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report on practical ways to provide effective support for the African Union
* Reissued for technical reasons.

09-57710* (E) 271009

*0957710*

S/PRST/2009/26

when it undertakes peacekeeping operations authorized by the United Nations,
that includes a detailed assessment of the recommendations contained in the
report of the African Union-United Nations panel (A/63/666-S/2008/813), in
particular those on financing, as well as on the establishment of a joint African
Union-United Nations team. The Security Council notes that the
aforementioned report is an important contribution towards the overall efforts
to enhance the capacity of the African Union in undertaking peacekeeping
operations.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations (A/64/359-S/2009/470).
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of establishing a more
effective strategic relationship between the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council and between the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission. The Council
encourages further enhancement of regular interaction, coordination and
consultation between the United Nations and the African Union on matters of
mutual interest. The Security Council notes the ongoing efforts by the
Secretariat and the Commission in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of expediting the
implementation, in close consultation with other international partners, of the
2006 United Nations-African Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union mainly focusing on peace and security, in particular the
operationalization of the African Union Standby Force and the continental
early warning system. The Security Council supports the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the African Peace and Security Architecture and reiterates its call
for the international community, particularly the donors, to fulfil their
commitments as endorsed by the 2005 World Summit Outcome document.
“The Security Council recognizes that, in deploying peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council, the African Union is
contributing towards maintenance of international peace and security, in a
manner consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.
“The Security Council notes the assessment of the options for financing
African Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security Council
outlined in the report of the Secretary- General and expresses its intention to
keep all options under consideration.
“The Security Council notes that the African Union needs to enhance its
institutional capacity to enable it to effectively plan, manage and deploy
peacekeeping operations. The Security Council, in this regard, calls upon the
African Union, in the context of developing its Strategic Plan for 2009-2012,
to develop a long-term, comprehensive capacity-building road map in
consultation with the United Nations and other international partners.
“The Security Council underlines the need for the United Nations and the
African Union to study the lessons learned from the Light and Heavy support
packages for AMIS, the logistics package for AMISOM, as well as

2

09-57710

S/PRST/2009/26

collaboration under UNAMID and the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM (UNSOA) in close consultation with other international partners.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission to set up a joint task force on
peace and security to review immediate and long-term strategic and
operational issues.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update the
Council by 26 April 2010 and submit a progress report no later than
26 October 2010.”

09-57710

3
