TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

10 OCTOBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgendall554)

. . . . . , . , . . , . , . . . . , . , . . . . . , ,. . , , , . . , , 1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Gamal Abdel Nasser, President of the United
Arab Republic . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . I . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.....

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Radhakrishna

1

Ramani of Malaysia . . , . . . , .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , , , . , . , , , . . . , , , . . , , , . . . , , , 1
Adoption of the agenda ~.,.,.,....,,..,.........~....~..,.I..

I , ,. . . , I . 1

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 10 October 1970 from the Prime Minister of Fiji addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/9957) . . ,,..,,......,,....,....I,,...,,.

1

SjPV.1554

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a Unired
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOURTH
Held in New York on Saturday,
President:

Mr. Jaime DE PINIES

10 October 1970, at 11.1s a.m.

(Spain).

during that month were public, but we had very many
private meetings. It gives me special satisfaction to
pay a tribute to the Ambassador of Sierra Leone, who
worked quietly and discharged his duties as President
of the Council during a time and in circumstances that
were particularly difficult for mankind.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
,Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
ofSoviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was ndop(eh.,

*Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l%I)
I.

Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 10 October 1970 from the Prime
Minister of Fiji addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/9957).

MEETING

Admission of new Members
Letter dated 10 October 1970 from the Prime Minister of Fiji addressed to the Secretary-General
(A/9957)

of the agenda.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fvam Spanish):
The Security Council will ‘now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda, relating to Fiji’s request
to be admitted to membership of the United Nations
[S/99573.

Tribute to the memory of Mr, Gamal Abdel Nasser,
President of the United Arab Republic

6. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr. President, may I first congratulate you most warmly on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Having in mind your long experience here,
your wisdom and skill, I cannot imagine more distinguished leadership than that which we can look forwardtothismonth,andIamsurethattheCouncilwilIenjoy one of its most constructive and productive periods.
7. ‘May I also join you in a tribute to last month’s
President, the Ambassador of SierraLeone, whose skill
and dedication enabled him to deal so successfully with
the difficult problems which we confronted during that
nonth. I should like to express our warm appreciation
to him.
8. Let me say first of all how happy I am to participate
in this meeting of the Security Council, which will,
I am sure, recommend the admission of Fiji as the
one hundred and twenty-seventhMember
of the United
Nations. There is no doubt, in the view of my Government, that Fiji is, in the words of Article 4 of the
Charter, “able and willing to carry out” the obligations
contained in the Charter.
9. That nation, which gains its independence today,
has a population of more than 500,000 and a total land
area of more than 7,000 square miles. Like its sister
former British colonies, it has been well prepared to
assume a seat in this Organization. It has had a iarge
measure of internal self-government in recent years
and in the process has developed a responsible group
of leaders. The Prime Minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese
Mara, the former Chief Minister, is known to many
representatives here from his visits to the United

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jkwn Spanish):
Since the last time we met in this Chamber the world
has suffered an irreparable loss by the death of President Nasser, a great statesman who earned the love
of his people and the respect of all. I am sure that
I speak for all the members of the Council in expressing
sincere condolences and proposing that a telegram be
sent expressing to the Government of the United Arab
Republic the Council’s deep sorrow at this great loss.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Radhakrishna
Ramani of Malaysia
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I should like on behalf of the Security Council to
express our feelings of sorrow at the death of Ambassador Ramani, a man who was beloved by all in the
United Nations. He represented his country in the
Security Council, and presided over twenty-five of its
meetings in the rnonth of May 1965 with the wisdom
and tact for which he was well known,

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to pay a sincere tribute of admiration
to the President of the Security Council for the month
of September, the Ambassador of Sierra Leone.
4. The Ambassador of Sierra Leone, whom we all
know and admire, was President of the Security Council during one of the most difficult months.in the. history
of the United Nations. It is true that few of the meetings
1

Nations and his testimony before the Committee of
Twenty-Four.l
I understand that he will be here next
week to take part in the United Nations twenty-fifth
anniversary celebrations and we look forward to seeing
him. Let me repeat: it gives the United States Govern: ment, and me personally, very great pleasure to welcome into the United Nations Fiji-a
nation that in
our view is entirely willing and able to fulfil the obligations of membership under the Charter.

proposal by both permanent and non-permanent’
members. If no formal report to that effect has yet
been submitted to the Council, it is because of an understanding that the Committee of Experts would act by
consensus only. The United States therefore considers
it appropriate to raise the subject in connexion with
the first application for membership submitted since
the establishment of the Committee of Experts by the
Security Council in August 1969. Had there been any
doubt about the suitability for membership of Fiji, to
reactivate the procedure at this moment might have
seemed invidious. However, since there is no doubt
in our mind-nor,
I believe, in anyone else’s-that
Fiji should be admitted, this seems a particularly
appropriate moment to re-establish the Charter procedure. We can do so on this occasion with the clear
understanding that we are casting no doubt whatsoever
on. the fitness of the applicant and that our sole object
is to correct for the future our own failure over a number
of years to be faithful to the intent of the Charter and
to the letter of our own rules of procedure.

10. Before we proceed further, however, I should
like to recall to the Council the provisions of rule 59
of our provisional rules of procedure. That rule provides, inter alia, that:
“Unless the Security Council decides otherwise,
the application shall be referred by the President
to a committee of the Security Council upon which
each member of the Security Council shall be represented.”
11. That rule was not adopted by our predecessors
frivolously or without good reason. It was, and is, in
strict accordance with the intent of the Charter and
was designed to enable the Council itself to carry out
in a conscientious manner its responsibilities
under
Article 4 of the ‘Charter, that is, to assure itself that
the applicant is a peace-loving State which accepts
the obligations contained in the Charter and is able
and willing to carry them out. Unfortunately,
this
rule-like
some of the other principles and procedures
wisely prescribed by our founding fathers-has fallen
into abeyance and in recent years has not been applied
as it should have been. The United States believes
that this is a mistake, We believe that the time has
come, now that the United Nations has one hundred
and twenty-six Members and will, in a few days, have
one hundred and twenty-seven, for the Council once
again to pay strict attention to its responsibility laid
down in the Charter in this regard: that is, to examine
with care in each case whether the applicant is not
only willing but able to bear the considerable burdens
and obligations of membership. Certainly, if the Council and the Assembly were so to deviate from the Charter as to admit in the future considerable numbers of
States not able to carry the obligations of membership,
not only would this amount in fact to a revision of
the Charter, but it would seriously weaken our
Organization. It would reduce its prestige, effectiveness and credibility just at the time when, as we have
all been saying during this session of the Assembly,
it most needs strengthening and the widest possible
public support.

13. I believe, therefore, that in accordance with rule
59 the President should refer this application to a committee of the Council on which each member is represented. In order to expedite action on the application
of Fiji, I should think that we might immediately meet
as a committee of the whole, that we might very speedily adopt a report to the Council--which
I am sure
would be a favourable one-and that the Council might
then immediately take action to recommend Fiji for
membership.
14. The PRESIDENT
(ilzterpretatiora~onz Spnnish):
I thank the representative of the United States for his
kind remarks about me.
15. I call upon the representative
on a point of order.
16.

Mr. MALIK

of the Soviet Union

(Union ofSoviet SocialistRepublics)

(translated from Russian): I should like to ascertain

from the United States representative what formal
proposal he is introducing for consideration by the
Security Council. We have listened carefully to his
comments and reasoning; but what is he actually proposing? I should like this to be clarified.
17. Mr. YOST (United States of America): It is very
simple. I was merely inviting the attention of the Council to its rule 59 and to the fact that, as that is worded,
unless the Council decides otherwise applications for
membership should be referred by the President tO
a committee of the Security Council. Therefore, I was
assuming that the rule would be followed, unless the
Council should decide otherwise.

12. As members of the Council know, in the Security
Council Committee
of Expert? the United States
joined in proposals made by a number of its members
for the reactivation of the procedures laid down in
rule 59. There was widespread endorsement of the

18. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I understand the proposal

of the United States representative to be that the application should be referred to a committee.

’ Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
’ Committee of Experts established by the Security Council at
its 1506th meeting.

19. Mr. YOST (United States of America): No, I do
not think any proposal is necessary. This is provided
for in our rules of procedure. If someone wishes to
2

suspended this rule on a number of occasions and I
am sure there would be no difficulty in doing so today.

propose that the Council should decide otherwise obviously he is at liberty to do so. But members do not
need to make proposals that we carry out our rules
of procedure. That goes without saying.

27. This proposal is meant primarily to accelerate
action on Fiji’s application for membership. I should
like it to be recorded that the request for suspension
of rule 59 applies to this particular application.

20. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom
Russian): Now I understand the proposal of the United States delegation to be that we
must transmit Fiji’s application for membership in the
! United Nations to a committee and that the committee
must report its conclusions thereon to the Council not
less than thirty-five days in advance of a regular session
of the General Assembly. If the rule is strictly followed,
thirty-five days are required. This means that we cannot consider this application at this session. Is this
what the United States representative has in mind?
That is the rule.

28. The PRESIDENT
(intkrpretationfiom
Spanish):
The Security Council has heard the proposal just made
by the representative of Zambia to the effect that the
application of rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council be suspended on this occasion when the Council is discussing the item on its
agenda relating to the admission of Fiji to membership
of the United Nations.
29. I have a number of speakers on my list, and after
we have heard them I shall put to the vote the proposal
of the representative of Zambia. If there is no objection,
however, I shall first call on the representative of Finland.

21. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I do not
see it that way. I have always assumed that the last
sentence of that rule referred to applications submitted
in intervals when the Assembly was not in session.
Common sense, it seems to me, would lead us to the
conclusion that it does not apply when the General
Assembly is already in session. There certainly could
have been no intent on the part of the authors of the
ruIes of procedure to provide that an applicant for membership during a session of the General Assembly
would have to wait a full year. I think we could apply
the rule of reason to this interpretation. Certainly we
would have no intention of suggesting any delay in
action on Fiji’s application.

30. Mr. FASTINEN
(Finland): Mr. ,President, I shall
have another opportunity to express to you the congratulations of my delegation.
31. Rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council stipulates that unless the Security
Council decides otherwise, an application for membership shall be referred by the President to a committee
on admissions. As we know, this rule has not been
applied during the last twenty-one years and one can
therefore say that a different practice has emerged in
the Council in dealing with apphcations for membership. It seems to my delegation, however, that the
practice thus established has not and cannot have
superseded the procedure provided for in rule 59. It
would seem reasonable to conclude, therefore, that
in previous cases the Security Council has waived the
application of rule 59, either by an explicit expression
of will in accepting without objection a Presidential
proposal to this effect or, in cases where such a proposal was not made by the President, implicitly by the
fact that no member of the Council has raised the point.

22. As I made very clear in my presentation, we
would hope that the committee
might be called
immediately
into session, take immediate action and
report to the Council, and that the Council might
then-today,
right away-recommend
to the General
Assembly the admission of Fiji to membership. I think
that is entirely consistent with what is the obvious
intent of the authors of this rule of procedure.
23. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, I shall
have another opportunity to pay you a well-deserved
tribute and to do so also to your distinguished predecessor.
24. I take the floor now formally
suspend rule 59 of the provisional
of the Security Council.

32. It is the view of the Finnish delegation, however,
that as soon as the point of the application of rule
59is raised, as it has now been raised by the representative of the United States, the rule should apply unless
there is a decision to the contrary.

to propose that we
rules of prgcedure

25.

It is obvious that all of us are agreed on the need
accelerate action on Fiji’s application. And since
it is Fiji’s desire to be admitted to membership of the
United Nations before the commencement of the commemorative session of the General Assembly I am sure
that the members will agree to a suspension of this
rule, which would have the effect of enabling us to
recommend
to the General Assembly immediately
Fiji’s admission to the United Nations.

33. My delegation for one sees merit in beginning
now and in continuing henceforth to apply the normal
procedure provided for in rule 59. Our reasons for this
are twofold: first, we see a return to the application
of this rule as a step in the organic evolution of the
procedures and working methods of the Security
Council, in which my delegation has been particularly
interested; secondly, this reflects the attitude of my
delegation to the problem of micro-States, which we
have had occasion to explain earlier in the Council
and in the Committee on micro-States.2

to

26, Rule 59 empowers the Security Council to suspend it and I am therefore not setting a precedent by
asking for this suspension. The Security Council has

’ Idern.

3

34. Without repeating the arguments which we have
adduced on those occasions I should simply like to
say that my delegation still considers valid the arguments and recommendations
on the question of microStates advanced by the Secretary-General
in the
introduction to his annual report in 19674 and that we
continue to support his views on this matter.

always has priority over congratulations.
fore stick to procedure.

42, The French delegation supports the proposal fo
the Zambian ‘delegation for two .reasons: firstly,
because we believe, like everyone else here, that we
should not delay the admission of Fiji to the great family
of the United Nations; and secondly, because rule 59
stipulates “unless the Security Council decides
otherwise” and therefore provision is made for the
Council to waive the application of rule 59.

35. Finally, I should like to emphasize !that the views
I have just expressed are of a general nature. They
have nothing to do with the present application for
membership
by Fiji, which, in the view of my
delegation, fulfils the requirements for membership laid
down in Article 4 of the Charter and whose application
my delegation will therefore be happy to support. It
is precisely because the application of Fiji,is beyond
doubt that this seems to be a good moment to return
to the original procedures laid down in rule 59.

43. But to say that in exceptional cases the Council
may waive the application of that rule means that in
general-and
this is our view-the
rule should be
applied. Therefore, it is evident that it is because we
are dealing with an exceptional case that we waive
the application of rule 59, but that in general, and particularly
henceforth,
the rule will be applied
because-and in this we entirely agree with the delegation of the United States-it is important to strengthen
the Charter, it is important to strengthen its procedures
and it is important to make full use of all the possibilities
which its provisions afford us.

36. It is the expectation of my delegation that the
consideration of the application of Fiji by a committee
on admissions and by the Security Council can be concluded with all necessary speed. Accordingly, we hope
that the Security Council, after the matter has been
considered by a committee on admissions, will be able
to agree, if possible today, on a recommendation
to
the General Assembly to admit Fiji to the United
Nations,

44. That is why we support the proposal of the Zambian delegation.
45. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I shall have another opportunity.to express my
coqgratulations to you.

37. Mr. JOUEJATI
(Syria): My delegation will have
the opportunity
on another occasion to congratulate
you, Mr. President,
on your assumption
to the
Presidency.

46. The proposal made by the representative of Zambia that the Security Council should decide not to refer
this application to a committee but to deal with it
directly is in accordance with the provisions of rule
59, which expressly allows for exceptions to be made
to what the rule prescribes as the normal course.

38. For the time being I shall speak on procedure.
The statement of the representative of the United
States and the motion presented by the representative
of Zambia have made unnecessary any statement by
me. As a matter of fact, both interventions
stressed
the desi?ability of immediately
admitting Fiji to membership of the United Nations.

47. My delegation would prefer that we should agree
unanimously not to make such an exception in this
case because it believes that there would be value in
returning to the general practice of referring applications for membership of the United Nations to a committee on admissions even if in cases such as the present
one this further study was of a purely. formal nature.
As the representative
of the United States has
observed, the case of Fiji is in some ways an appropriate one to reactivate this machinery. Fiji is so evidently qualified to be a Member of the United Nations
that no one could suppose that to follow what our
provisional rules of procedure prescribe as the normal
course would be to cast any reflection upon that
country.

39. To apply rule 59 in this context would be very
cumbersome, Delay would result. Indeed the rule contains provisions which we cannot apply. We cannot
wait thirty-five days. That would be contrary to the
Security Council’s desire to accelerate action on this
application.
40. The Council has the right, as is stipulated in rule
59, to suspend that rule in cases such as the one we
are facing today. Therefore, the motion of the representative of Zambia is very pertinent. It flows from rule
59 itself. I think that it is obvious from the three statements we have already heard that the Council is bent
on accelerating action on this application.
Hence, in
my humble opinion, the motion by Zambia does not
even need to be put to the vote because there should
be no objection to it.
41. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
pretation from French):
Mr.

I shall there-

48. However, it is, in our view, of overriding importance that the application of Fiji should not be held
up by a procedural disagreement between us-which,
I regret to say, has been the implication of some of
the things that have been said.

(France) (interPresident, procedure

49. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of
the proposal that we should in this case decide, as
rule 59 expressly allows, not to follow the course of
reference to a committee. In so doing we give ,notice

4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. IA, paras. 161 to 166.

4

that in other circumstances
view.
50.

we may not take the same

advance of such session, Exceptions concerning cases
where a session is in progress, which would simply
be dealt with at the time, are not mentioned. Therefore
if we keep strictly to the rule-both the first and secqnd
parts-we shall be obliged to postpone consideration
of the question of Fiji’s admission for thirty-five days.
This would be unprecedented,
particularly
at an
anniversary session and alsi, in view of the fact that
on 14 October we shall begin the commemorative
part
of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
Under the circumstances, the Soviet delegation sees
no practical need to resort to this complicated procedure.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, since the
speakers here have started their statements in various
ways, some congratulating you and some not congratulating you, I prefer briefly to congratulate you
on your assumption of the high office of President of
the Security Council and to express satisfaction at the
active work of your predecessors. I wish you success
in your important post and hope that during your term
oE office there will be no events requiring the Security
Council to meet at irregular hours.
(translated

from

Russian):

54. It is difficult for us to judge the motives guiding
the United States delegation but in this case we repeat,
as we have said many times, that there is no need
to have recourse to the application of this rule, because
this may delay the consideration of the question of
Fiji’s admission to the United Nations,

51, With regard to the question under consideration,
in the course of preliminary consultations with you
the Soviet delegation already expressed its view on
the advisability
of considering the question of the
admission of Fiji to membership in the United Nations
directly at a meeting of the Security Council, without
~ referring it to a committee on the admission of new
Members. We should now like to confirm this view,
which is based on the practice followed for many years
in the Security Council. In fact, for more than ten
years-fourteen
years according to some estimates and
more than twenty according to others-the
Security
Council has not resorted to this complicated procedure
described in rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure. There has been no practical need to do so.
On the other hand, I believe this is the first time that
we have heard a statement from the United States
delegation to the effect that we must observe the rules
and, consequently,
the Charter. We welcome this
approach to the matter, We must strictly observe both
the rules of procedure and the Charter of the United
Nations, I therefore think that in the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations we shall revitalize the
Charter and relive another body which has not been
active for twenty-five years-the Military Staff Committee-for
the direction of peace-keeping operations,
When I speak of reactivating the rules and the Charter,
I mean reactivating them to the fullest extent, In this
case, since there is no objection on the part of the
united States to the admission of Fiji to the United
Nations, nor on the part of any of the fifteen members
of the Security Council, and since the committee would
have the same membership as the Security Council,
there is no practical need whatever for this.

5.5. The United States delegation may say that there
is a rule of reason. But the rule of reason is the fact
that for fourteen years the Security Council has not
made use of the services of a committee. It is a stronger
rule.of reason, confirmed by many years’ experience.
And in this case it is stronger than the rule of reason
whereby rule 59 is broken up and one part is accepted,
while the other is rejected.
56. Under the circumstances, the Soviet delegation
supports the proposal of the Zambian delegation that
rile 59 should not be followed in the case of the admission of Fiji to membership of the United Nations and
that we should follow the long-established practice of
the Security Council and immediately
consider the
question here and decide whether or not to admit Fiji.
57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Spanish):
I wish to thank the representative of the Soviet Union
for the kind words he addressed to me at beginning
of his statement.
58. Mr. YOST (United States): I do not want to prolong this procedural debate. I shall just say a few words.
59, We have explained, and I think others have joined
in explaining why there would now be decided advantages in returning, despite its long disuse, to rule 59
and applying it in future. We have had a lengthy and
difficult consultation and debate this morning, I should
hate to see this sort of thing happen every time we
have an application for membership. I would much
prefer to see us seize this opportunity without debate
and, in a case where there is no argument about the
qualifications of the applicant, re-establish the rule and
get it settled once and for all and not have it come
up again,

52. On the other hand, if the United States representative insists on the application of rule 59, I cannot agree
with his interpretation of that rule, He is trying to do
two things: on the one hand, to refer the question to
a committee
on admissions and, on the other hand,
to solve the question in five minutes. That is a new
proposal designed to change the rule,
53. The first part of rule 59 provides for the referral
of the question of admitting a new Member to a committee; the second part provides that the committee shall
examine
the application referred to it not less than
thirty-five
days in advance of a regular session of the
General Assembly or, if a special session of the General
Assembly
is called, not less than fourteen days in

60. Now, as to the point just raised again by Mr.
Malik-the
thirty-five days-1 think we must assume
that the authors of our rules of procedure were sensible,
reasonable people and that they could hardly have
intended that when the General Assembly was in session it would be impossible to have any State admitted
5

for another whole year. There would be no reason
for such a rule and I do not think they ever had that
in mind.

66. Fiji is a country of great beauty, with its rain
forests, gnarled mountains, fields of sugar cane, coral
reefs, bluelagoons and oceanic sunsets, It is a cornpam.
tively small country, though with its 7,000 square miles
and half a million people it is of course a good deal
larger than the three other countries
of the
Pacific-Western
Samoa, Nauru and Tonga-which
during the past decade have achieved independence
and assumed full responsibility for the conduct of their
own affairs. Moreover, Fiji is larger, both in area and
in population, than a number of countries that are
already participating
as Member
States of our
Organization.

61. The last sentence of rule 59 obviously refers to
periods when the Assembly is not in session and says
that in those cases a membership
committee shall
report its conclusions not less than thirty-five days
in advance of a regular session. That is the only reasonable interpretation of that rule, so I do not think we
need fear that an action on our part to refer the matter
to a membership committee, as I have proposed, and
take immediate action in that committee and in the
Council would in any way infringe the intent of the
last part of rule 59.

67. In the latter part of the twentieth century Fiji
is an important centre for communications
and has
rightly been described as the crossroads of the Pacific.
But for countless centuries the people of Fiji, in spite
of their long voyages through the vast ocean in their
great canoes, were little known, save to the people
of the adjacent islands. Living as they did far from
the trans-Pacific sailing routes pioneered in the age
of the European explorers by your countrymen, Mr.
President, the Fijian people passed through the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries with little
contact with the world outside their own islands.

62. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
Spanish):
I shall now proceed to put to the vote .the proposal
of the representative of Zambia that on this occasion
rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council be suspended.
A vote was taken by show

of hamis.

In ~~VOLII’: Burundi, France, Nepal, Poland, Sierra
Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Zambia.
Against:

68. The history of the United Kingdom’s relationship
with Fiji is a singular one. On this day exactly ninety-six
years ago, by Act of Cession, Fiji voluntarily placed
itself under the protection of the British Crown. The
first offer of cession had been made sixteen years
earlier, in 1858, and it is a matter of historical record
that throughout those sixteen years the United King
dom had been reluctant to assume such responsibilities
in a group of islands so remote from its own shores.
Nevertheless, in 1874 the United Kingdom did accept
the cession of the Chiefs of Fiji as a trust. It took
place on equal terms, and we in the United Kingdom,
no less than the people of Fiji, have always derived
a particular satisfaction from the circumstances in
which the fruitful association between our two
countries took root.

United States of America.

Abstaining:

China, Colombia,

The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

Finland,. Nicaragua.

by IO votes to one, with

63. The PRESIDENT
(ilztei’p~etatiorz~onz Spanish):
I should like, in my capacity as representative of
SPAIN, to explain my vote. My delegation decided
to vote in favour of the suspension of rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
precisely because, as we understand it, since it has
been included in the provisional rules of procedure
it must apply, except in those cases in which the Council decides to suspend it. The practice over the past
twenty-one years has been not to apply this rule. On
some occasions decisions to that effect were taken;
on others none were taken. My delegation believes
that it is desirable to adopt a decision in the Council
for suspension when, as in the present case, circumstances so demand.
64. Speaking in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
shall now proceed to consider Fiji’s application
admission.

69. The last ninety-six years have seen many changes
in Fiji: the establishment
of important sugar and
coconut industries and the expansion of Fiji’s COIIImerce which has led to its present thriving economy;
the diversification of its population; the establishment
of close links with the peoples of South Asia, with
New Zealand and Australia and with its more
immediate Pacific island neighbours; the establishment
of parliamentary institutions and the framework of its
modern political and judicial systems. In the Second
World War, when the Fijians found themselves unexpectedly almost in the front line, they performed prodigies of valour on behalf of the allied cause. And
throughout this period the United Kingdom has heen
privileged and proud to work with the peoples of Fiji
on a basis of partnership.

we
for

65. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): It gives
me very great pleasure to have the opportunity today
to recommend to the Council the application of Fiji
for membership of the United Nations. A draft resolution in the name of all three Commonwealth members
of the Security Council-Sierra
Leone, Zambia and
the United
Kingdom-is
now being circulated

70. Until very recently the diverse backgrounds of
the peoples of Fiji presented obstacles to agreement
among them on a move to independence. The wisdom

[S /9959].
6

and statesmanship of the leaders of Fiji, however, have
now given a lead which has transcended all the earlier
differences. They have shown that it is possible, by
assessing what is the overriding interest for all the
people of Fiji, to move to independence in a spirit
of unity and harmony. I should like to t&e this opportunity of saying how much this agreement among the
leaders and people of Fiji has earned our admiration.
They have acted in a spirit which indeed conforms
to the name borne by that greatest of all the oceans,
the Pacific; and the sagacity shown by their leaders
offers a splendid augury for their contribution in the
wider field open to them as Members of this
Organization.

this Ykar as Chairman, was visited by the Prime Minister of Fiji and the Leader of the Opposition earlier
this year. It was for us an important and unique occaSian and we were greatly impressed, I may add that
in that case the usual procedure was neatly, and unofficially, reversed, and they came as a visiting mission
to the United Nations instead of our Committee’s going
to Fiji. Their application for membership in the United
Nations, which my delegation now gladly sponsors,
assures US that their findings were agreeable and
acceptable to them. Today we have much pleasure
in welcoming their application and warmly and unreservedly sponsoring this application, as a sister country
of the Commonwealth.

71. Fiji is the twenty-ninth
member of the Commonwealth to apply for membership of the United
Nations. My delegation can take pride in the process
by which, to quote a striking phrase used elsewhere
earlier this week by our colleague the Ambassador of
Sierra Leone, “the United Kingdom has added yet
another graduate from its school of colonized Territories to its collegiate Commonwealth”.5

76. I should like also to thank the Special Committee and its Sub-Committee on Fiji for the attention,
and interest they have devoted to this matter during
the past two years. The Fijian peoples have had a long
and proud history of civilization and self-government
even before colonial times. They possess a nobility of
purpose and show warm hospitality to many communities. Therefore we have every confidence that their
contribution to this Organization will be an important and significant one.

72. Through all the changes which Fijians have
experienced
over the years in which they were
associated with my country, many of their traditional
values have remained unchanged. Blended as they are
with other, newer influences, we believe this will be
a source of strength for the future. We have no doubt
that Fiji will be able and willing, faithfully and loyally
to fulfil its obligations under the Charter. It is with
sincere congratulations and the greatest good will to
the Government and people of Fiji that, in this twentyfifth anniversary year of the United Nations, I am
pleased to join with my Commonwealth colleagues in
recommending this application to the Security Council.

77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Spanish):
I thank the representative of Sierra Leone for the kind
words he addressed to me.
78. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, allow
me to convey to you my warm and sincere congratulations on your assumption of the high office of President
of the Security Council. This is the second time you
have presided ov& the proceedings of this Council
and your presence in the Chair’reconfirms my belief
that you will conduct the affairs of this Council with
your usual sense of fairness and impartiality.

73. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of President and to pay tribute to
your wisdom, courtesy and skill in diplomacy. Your
month of office is one of great importance, as it falls
during our twenty-fifth anniversary celebrations, when
Heads of State and Government will be with us. The
choice of Spain in your person could not have been
happier, as its legal and cultural traditions bestride old
and new worlds like a colossus.

79. I should like also to pay unstinting tribute to my
brother and colleague, Mr. Nicol of Sierra Leone, for
the admirable manner in which he conducted the affairs
of this Council during the month of September. His
immense qualities as a renowned academician, diplomatist and conciliator have greatly contributed to
the sluccess of our work.
80. I am taking the floor at this time with mixed feelings. I say so because by this debate the international
community is taking note and welcoming the emergence of the island State of Fiji as an independent
and sovereign State. Historically this symbolizes the
further erosion and breakdown of the inhuman system
of colonialism. Of particular importance is the fact that
the emergence of a free Fiji today in circumstances
of which we are all aware points to the fact that it
is quite possible for a colonized people to achieve its
freedom without violence, without bitterness, without
the letting of blood and without heightening the threat
to international peace and security.

74. We wish to congratulate Fiji on its independence
yesterday, when for the first time its national flag flew
from the mast-head of its State House. The negotiations
which have brought it to independence reflect credit
on all the communities of Fiji and on the Government
of the United Kingdom, We congratulate them.
75. The Special Committee
op the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, which I am privileged and proud to serve

81. On thk other hand, as we salute with joy the emergence of a free Fiji, we are sadly and bitterly reminded
of the fact that colonialism is still running rampant
iu other areas of the world, particularly in southern

5 At the 771st meeting of the Spqcial Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
and Peoples
Countries
of
Independence
to Colonial

(AIAC.lO9IPV. 771,p. 22).
7

Africa. It is very ironical to note the most conspicuous
fact that the colonial Power that for decades denied
the people of Fiji their legitimate freedom but has now
submitted to their will is the very same colonial Power
that is using every conceivable excuse not to fulfil its
obligations to the people and territory of Zimbabwe.

hold urgent debates on threats to international pena
and security. Today, it is the fact that the world i:
round-and one of the consequences of that fact, whict
is not provided for in the rules of procedure; namely,
the world’s division into time zones-which brings ~5
together outside normal working hours. That is some
thing which we agreed to with pleasure since it has
fallen to our lot to celebrate a happy event, the acces.
sion of a new country to independence.

82. The free island State of Fiji is an important example of a society that has taken into its fold a people
of varied extractions. Despite all the dangers and pitfalls that had been placed before it by the pernicious
colonial system, the Fijian society has emerged as one
and not as a society broken by colonialism or racism.
The independence of Fiji comes at a very appropriate
moment, because this year is the tenth anniversary
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. It is a matter for
deep regret to my delegation that, instead of extending
a hand of complete friendship, we still have to face
the sad fact ,that 28 million people on this planet are
not yet free to determine their own destinies.

89. If we have grounds to take pleasure in the increase
in the number of States Members of the Organization,
and the further step taken in this way towards the
universality of the Organization, my delegation finds
particular reason for pleasure in the admission of Fiji
to the United Nations:
this is a former NonSelf-Governing Territory which, by peaceful means,
has achieved full sovereignty. This is thus the continuation of the happy process of decolonization which was
embarked upon a very long time ago but which has
been considerably accelerated in recent years.

83. The difficulties of the island State of Fiji do not
end with the attainment
of independence and
statehood, The will shown by the Fijian people in their
quest for freedom will, I believe, serve as a good starting point for tackling the problems of rehabilitation,
development and piogress.

90. In setting 10 October as the date for the final
transfer of governmental powers, the representatives
of the former administrative
Power and of the new
State have implicitly offered us food for thought on
the human, economic and political evolution which has
been taking place over a period of exactly ninety-six
years, Rarely in the space of less than a century has
a combination of labour migration, natural demographic
movements and the struggle against disease changed
so totally the very physiognomy of an island community:
relatively
widely-scattered
homogeneous
ethnic groups have gradually been replaced by a dense
and partially urbanized population which has now
passed the half million mark.

84. It is therefore with a deep sense of personal satisfaction that I express the heartfelt congratulations of
the Republic of Zambia to the people, Government
and leaders of Fiji as they rejoice in the fruitful and
happy culmination of their efforts, We are certain they
will move from strength tc, strength and play their rightful role in the affairs of the international community.
We look forwarcl to enjoying a warm, productive, fruitful and rewarding relationship with the independent
people of the ever beautiful island of Fiji. It is for
these reasons that my delegation has joined the delegations of the Commonwealth countries of Sierra Leone
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland in sponsoring Fiji’s application for membership
in the United Nations.

91. These demographic changes, with their land.
holding, economic and electoral implications, have not
taken place without controversies which for some years
hindered the process of the emancipation of the terris
tory and whose echoes have reached as far as the
United Nations.

85. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpl’etationfrurn Spanish):
I thank the representative of Zambia for the kind words
he addressed to me,

92. The imagination of an administrative Power--the
United Kingdom-which,
in its task of decolonization
has never been found wanting in the face of the most
difficult constitutional pitfalls, and the realism of the
political leaders who have shown themselves capable
of renouncing partisan wrangles in order to hasten Ihe
access of their common motherland to independence
made it possible, in the final analysis, to bring about
provisional
arrangements reconciling two equally
legitimate claims--the desire of the indigenous peoples
to p;‘eserve the personality of the land of their ancestors
and the ambition of their compatriots who settled later
in the archipelago to be full citizens of their young
State.

86. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation from French): Mr, President, since we
have now dealt with the procedural point and have
reverted to substance I should like to associate myself
with the compliments which have been paid to Ambassador Nicol for the wisdom, tact and great dignity with
which he conducted the proceedings of the Council
in September.
87. As to you, Mr. President, we have known you
for a long time and we are fully aware of your great
talents. We are sure that you will conduct our proceedings with your usual efficiency, authority and mastery.

93. The speed with which in recent months the latesl
constitutional talks came to fruition is a good augury
for the success of future efforts of the Fijian leaders
to find, in harmony, a final solution to this problem.

88. It has happened too often that the Security Council has been called into session at unusual hours to
8

[
/
1
i

defence of the principles of the Charter. The country
you represent is great in its culture, its civilization
and its legacy of goodwill and friendship, a legacy
which constitutes the motive force of the activities in
this world body of the Spanish delegation under your
able guidance.

94. The United Kingdom has repeatedly demonstrated that once the links of subordination have been
broken it has been outstanding in maintaining relations
of friendship and co-operation with the new Commonwealth States, We would like to extend to it our
warmest congratulations. Since Fiji has been welcomed
with the warmest sympathy by the international community, it may be expected that its Government will
enjoy al1 the assistance useful to it in overcoming successfully the obstacles to the gaining of access for its
agricultural produce to world markets.

102. We are proud of our friendship with Spain, proud
to see its devoted son, Jaime de Pinies, presiding over
the,.discussions of this highest organ of the international
organization, and proud of the role which the Spanish
delegation is consistently playing in the improvement
of international relations and the meetings of minds
and purposes.

95. How would it be possible to contemplate anything
other than a prosperous future for a country
which-and I can bear personal witness to this since
I have had the good fortune to visit it-conceives
of
tourism as an extension of its traditional hospitality?
The Suva Government quite rightly counts on the
attraction of its countryside in order to diversify its
ecwnomy. We hope that it will continue in that policy,
and that the welcome which the Fijians accord to their
visitors will contribute not only to an increase of
resources but to the enhancement of the whole stature
of the archipelago.

103. We also wish to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Nicol of Sierra Leone for the manner in which he discharged the heavy duties which confronted him last
month. The gravity of events then was matched by
his effective quiet diplomacy. In every issue he had
an extraordinary ability to see the true goals and the
true interests of the international community, to prescribe the right means for safeguarding them and to
bring about, accordingly, the appropriate consensus
among members. To His Excellency and to his delegation go our high consideration and sincere wishes.

96, Fiji has always been a country of dreams. We
would like to recall that among the intrepid Dutch,
British and American mariners who dared to cross the
most dangerous reefs of an unexplored ocean, a
Frenchman, Dumont d’urville,
was one of the first
to introduce to the world this tiarvellous archipelago
with nine varieties of breadfruit’trees,
with its yearround flora and its colourful fauna, a country of abundance, of music, art and poetry, a country whose charm
and deep uniqueness will not, we hope, be changed
by modern developments.

104. Mr. President, before coming to the substance
of the question that we are discussing, my delegation
wishes also to express to you our gratitude for your
generous gesture in opening this meeting by expressing
on behalf of the Council grief at the death of President
Gamal Abdel Nasser whose loss was deeply felt by
his people, by the Arab people at large, by his African
and Asian brothers, and indeed by the world at large.
We share likewise the grief over the death of Ambassador Ramani of Malaysia and the telegrams which
you have sent are most appreciated by my delegation.

97. Within the immense expanse of the Pacific, Fiji
enjoys a privilege: airline routes have made Suva a
crossroads in their transoceanic network. Apart from
its economic weight proper, the new Member State
therefore symbolizes the whole of Oceania and
strengthens in our Organization the presence of the
fifth part of the world.

105. Amidst world events that trouble the conscience
of every peace-loving and justice-loving man and community there come sometimes glimmers of light junc- i
tures rich in significance which enhance hope. They ’
are a welcome relief. Such is the eventful and most
happy access to independence of Fiji, marking another
step in the eradication of foreign rule, another achievement in the implementation
of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) on granting independence to colonial countries and peoples, especially as we are celebrating this year the tenth anniversary of that Declaration, Above all it is a vindication of the first and
foremost basic purpose of the Charter as embodied
in Article 2, which puts the emphasis on the principle
of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.

98. By a happy coincidence of events, our Organization is called upon on the eve of the celebration of
its twenty-fifth anniversary to admit a new Member,
and the last obstacles to the independence of Fiji have
been removed thanks to the will for conciliation and
understanding on all sides. These are encouraging signs
for Fiji and indeed for the United Nations.
99, That is an extra reason to express with confidence
our wishes for the prosperity of and our warm congratulations to the people and Government of Fiji.

106. This event has been achieved in happy conditions of racial harmony, concordant and astute statesmanship and a perspective of great expectations for
a peaceful, progressive and prosperous Fiji which
Fijians so much deserve, Of course we whole-heartedly
support draft resolution S/9959. Fiji w-ill thus serve
as an examplary State where all citizens, regardless
of origin, creed or colour are equal in rights and duties,
where leaders of the stature and ability of Sir Kamisese
Mara and Sir Mohammad Koya put the vision of a

100. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spnnish): I thank the representative of France for the
kind words he has addressed to me.
101. Mr. JOUEJATI
(Syria): Mr. President, my
delegation welcomes in your person a President of the
Securi’ty Council whose tactful diplomacy and rich
experience have been unceasingly devoted to the
9

I harmonious, united, independent and solid Fiii above
any minor consideration, ihus ensuring the support and
the love of the Fijian population and the admiration
of the international
community.
107. In such a healthy climate the prosperity of Fiji
will be attained by the efforts of its august people to
develop their rich resources and to introduce the necessary diversification
for an independent apd strong
economy, thus fulfilling the potentialities of their land.
We are certain that the Fijian people will meet these
challenges and become a model State to which we can
express our best wishes for consolidation and success.
108. I should not let this occasion pass witliout paying
tribute to His Excellency U Thant for having all along
pressed for the implementation
of General Asslmbly
resolution 1514 (XV) and whose dedication to the eradication of colonialism is too well known to need mention
here. Likewise I pay tribute to the Ambassador of
Sierre Leone, Ambassador Nicol, and his colleagues
who sponsored the draft resolution. He is Chairman
of the Special Committee of Twenty-Four which today
finds its work on Fiji achieved and crowned with
success.

This application in the view of the Burundi delegation
is of threefold significance. First, because if marks the
ending of foreign domination as the result of the acquisition of national sovereignty by a new State. Secondly,
because it gives the right to the Fijians to ‘assume their
international responsibilities like all other Members of
the Organization. Thirdly, because the Government
of the new State embraces, by virtue of its membership
of the United Nations, the role of champion of peace.
113. This is an occasion of a double event of particular
importance for the inhabitants of Fiji. The double event
is accession to national sovereignty and admission to
the concert of States making up our Organization.
114. on behalf of the Burundi Government
my
delegation has great pleasure in expressing warmest
possible wishes to the new Member and extending
enthusiastic congratulations to the Government and
people of Fiji. These are very well deserved because
of the efforts made by the leaders of Fiji, supported
by its people, to exercise their right to selfdetermination
and to recover the human dignity of
which every country subject to a foreign Power has
been deprived.
115. Membership
of the United Nations entails
obligations, but my Government and my delegation
feel that this membership of the United Nations should
also bring privileges and even preferential treatment
for countries which fall into the same category as Fiji.
By this I mean that some people may overlook the
fact that not only should Members of the United
Nations have the obligation of contributing
to the
United Nations-which
of course they have to
assume-but,
in accordance with the spirit and form
of the Charter, the United Nations has a special obligation towards small nations, namely, that of helping
them to be economically,
socially, culturally and
genuinely independent.

109. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): I thank the representative of Syria for the

kind words he has addressed to me.
110.

Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
The Burundi delegation for many reasons
wishes to congratulate the representative
of Sierre
Leone on the exceptional mastery and success with
which he conducted secret diplomacy in the month
of September, a month in which a complex and delicate
situation brought the Security Council into session.
We congratulate him for another reason-that
as representative of an African country, indeed of Africa
as a whole, he has reason for satisfaction in the accession of Fiji to .national sovereignty. This event is of
course important to him as chairman of the Committee
of Twenty-Four-almost
as important as it is to the
Fijians themselves. I pay tribute to him atid share the
pride of all Africans in his success.
French):

116. ‘I think it my duty to point out that the United
Nations has this obligation in its programme and it
should assume it appropriately
and effectively.
Furthermore, I think we should state that harmonious
racial coexistence among Fiji citizens should constitute
an incentive and a lesson for certain Powers which
still have colonies, because, as we have stated on other
occasions;racial diversity and cultural diversity should
not constitute obstacles to the coexistence of’ races,
as has just been demonstrated by the people of Fiji.

111, I wish now to address myself to you, Mr. President, in order to tell you how great is our appreciation
of the frequent support you have given to Africa
throughout your term in the Council. This sentiment
is tinged with regret that unfortunately there is very
little time left before the expiration of that term.
However, you may rest assured that Africa has highly
appreciated your support and the way in which you
showed your independence in your judgements and
decisions affecting African Governments in particular.
May I say that the successors of Spain and Finland,
in a few months, will be able to follow that example
with a certain independence of mind and departing
somewhat from a policy which might sometimes be
constraining to those who belong to a certain part of
the world.

117. I revert to the idea which is so obvious to US,
that, generally speaking, a country which acquires
independence is by that very fact involved in CO:
operation with its former metropolitan country.
118. To conclude, the events which we have witnessed so enthusiastically-that
is, the accession to
independence of Fiji-is an example which should be
followed by the Governments of Portugal and the
United Kingdom. The peoples, even those who are
most oppressed or who suffer most, as in the case
of Rhodesia, South Africa, Namibia, and the Partuguese colonies, should not be deprived of indepen-

112. I should like now io touch on the problem of.
substance, the admission of Fiji tp the United Nations.
10

-

dence because of a certain fear that once they have
acceded to independence they may take reprisals. I
emphasize that the humanity and magnanimity of the
African peoples will serve as a guarantee to the whites
who are in Rhodesia, South Africa, Namibia and the
Portuguese Territories, when those Africans are in a
position to exercise their right to self-determination.
Consequently, this should be an incentive to the United
Kingdom and to Portugal, so that the process of
decolonization
and the recovery
of national
sovereignty will continue and be concluded for all
peoples who are still under foreign colonial domination.
119. The
PRESIDENT
(interpr’etntior?
from
Spn~islz): I thank the representative of Burundi for
the kind words he has addressed to me.
i20. Mr. PASTINEN
(Finland): I am pleased to have
this opportunity to express to you, Mr. President, the
congratulations
of the Finnish delegation on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for this important month of October.
121. I should also like to convey the expression of
our gratitude and esteem to the outgoing President of
the Council, Ambassador Nicol of Sierra Leone, for
the services he gave to the Council during the month
of September.
122. I wish to add the voice of the Finnish delegation
to the voices of those who have already expressed
their pleasure at the opportunity of voting in favour
of the recommendation
to admit Fiji to membership
of the United Nations, It is gratifying to know that
one of the very first acts of the Government of this
newly independent State was to apply for membership
of our Organization.
This application, following the
entry of so many new States during the last decade
and a half, is yet another indication of the success
of the United Nations in translating into reality the
Iofty aims of Chapter XI of the Charter.
123. As a member of the Special Committee of
Twenty-Four,
Finland was in a position to observe
closely the preparations and progress of Fiji towards
independence.
This evolution has now come to a SUCcessful conclusion, Fiji has gained its independence
and will presently take its place in the community of
nations as a free and sovereign State. It is opportune
indeed that on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Cole
nial Countries and Peoples, as well as on the eve of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of this Organization, we
shall be able to welcome Fiji among us. We are convinced that Fiji fulfils the requirements laid down in
Article 4 of the Charter and that it will make its contribution
to international
co-operation and understanding.
124. While giving credit to the accomplishements of
the people of Fiji and its leaders, we wish at the same
time to pay a tribute to the Government of the United
Kingdom
for the manner in which it has discharged
its responsibilities for the administration of that Territory and prepared Fiji for full independence, a process

which will now be crowned by the admission
State to the United Nations.

of that

125. The Finnish delegation not only wishes to‘
acclaim today the accession of Fiji to independence
and membership in the community of nations, but looks
forward to co-operating with its representatives, particularly as Finland and Fiji will henceforth sit in international forums elbow-to-elbow, although geographi- 1
tally we are poles apart,
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
126. The
Spa&/z): I thank the representative of Finland for the
kind words he said about me at the beginning of his
statement.
127. Mr.KUJ!,AGA(Poland):Mr.
President,thePolish
delegation offers you the most sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council at a time when the world’s attention is focused
on the United Nations, preparing to celebrate in a few
days its twenty-fifth anniversary. As a member of the
Security Council, Poland stands ready, under your
proved, able and experienced guidance, to co-operate
with the members of the Council in bringing about
this body’s contribution to the solution of the problems
it faces.
128. Permit me also to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation of the efficient and tactful leadership provided to the Council by my colleague on my left,
Ambassador Nicol of Sierra Leone, during his term
as President.
129. The act of admission of a new Member State
to the United Nations family-and
the Council is about
to perform such an act now-is certainly in the category
of positive achievements of our Orgazation during the
twenty-five years of its activities. The record of fiftyseven States welcomed to the United Nations following
their liberation from colonial domination indicates the
magnitude not only of the process of decolonization
in the contemporary world, but also of the role that
the United Nations has played in contributing to that
process, That role remains, in our view, unfilfilled.
130. Each case of a colonial country, whether large
or small, acceding to independence gives us reason
to rejoice, We see in it the triumph of the ideals and
forces of freedom and progress over those of imperialism and retrogression. The case of the accession of
Fiji to independence is, therefore, well befitting in view.
of the imminent celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and the tenth anniversary
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
13 1. The road to independence for the people of Fiji
has not been an easy one. Almost ‘a century of domination afflicted the islands with multiple problems that
at one time seemed to make the achievement of
independence
almost impossible;
but the people’s
indelible aspirations to freedom prevailed over the
many great odds. We congratulate the people of Fiji
on their great accomplishment,
We wish them success

,

in the speedy eIimination
of the legacy of colonial
rule. We wish them success in the consolidation of
their independent
existence and in the all-round
development of their country.

139. The decision of the Government of Fiji to apply
for membership shows that country’s determination
to join in our common partnership in the interest of
world peace. The admission of Fiji to the United
Nations will represent a step towards international cooperation; it will signify progress towards universality
of our Organization. My delegation looks forward most
eagerly to working in mutual co-operation with the
delegation of Fiji in the United Nations.

132. We should like to express the natural hope that
Fiji will increase in this Organization the ranks of those
who in this year of the tenth anniversary of the historic
anti-colonial Declaration are determined to do away
for ever with the evil of colonialism and work for the
development
and implementation
of the United
Nations aims.

140. Before I conclude my statement I should like
to pay the tribute of my delegation to Ambassador
Davidson Nicol for the mature and wise 1eaders;hip
provided by him in the conduct of the affairs of the
Security Council irr September. It is gratifying to note
that the Security Council, by its decision of 9 Sep
tember [resolution 286 (1970)], prevailed upon the
Governments and individuals concerned to display
moderation and perform humanitarian acts.

133. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fionz
Spur&h): I am very grateful to the representative of
Poland for the kind words he addressed to me at the
beginning of his statement.
134. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): Mr. President, it gives
me great pleasure to extend to you the cordial congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council. I assure
you that in the discharge of your great responsibility
you will enjoy the full co-operation and loyalty of my
delegation. As the Security Council meets today to
consider an application for membership of the United
Nations by a newly independent sovereign State, my
delegation is particularly pleased to have you as our
President, because the record of your country in the
area of decolonization has been admirable.

141. Lastly, I wish to thank Ambassador Kulaga
and Ambassador Sevilla Sacasa, otir Presidents for
August and July respectively,
142. The

PRESIDENT
(interpretarion
front
I thank the representative of Nepal for the
kind words he addressed to me at the beginning of
his statement.
Spanish):

143. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, first of all permit me to congratulate you heartily on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council for this historic month.
It is fortunate that our deliberations will have the
benefit of your acumen and experience.

135. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations and the tenth anniversary of
the Declaration on deco!onization one more nation has
gained the full status of a sovereign and independent
State. Fiji’s accession to independence has been
peaceful, without any bloodshed, and with the full cooperation and consent of the entire population. My
delegation congratulates the people of Fiji on the attainment of independence by peaceful means and wishes
them continued peace, harmony and progress in the
years ahead.

144. I should also like to echo the high tributes that
have been extended to the Ambassador of Sierra
Leone, who guided the proceedings of the Council last
month with grace and distinction.
145. The twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations coincides with the tenth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In the midst of our celebrations it is indeed a happy event to salute the birth
of another nation in the South Pacific and to welcome
it as the 127th Member of the United Nations.

136. In welcoming Fiji as an independent State Nepal
is further delighted by the fact that it belongs to and
represents the cultural heritage and genius of the Far
Eastern, Asian and South Pacific regions.

146. A few hours ago Fiji became fully independent,
The new State has a multiracial population Of more
than half a million, Under the dynamic leadership of
the Prime Minister, Sir Kamisese Mara, the variofls
ethnic groups have been welded into a harmonious
whole, proud of their traditions and confident of their
future. We can feel assured that the people of Fiji Will
continue to develop their political stability and
economic well-being and contribute constructively lo
the work of the United Nations.

137, I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to
pay the tribute of my Government to the Government
of the United Kingdom for having granted independence to Fiji with good grace and in good faith. My
delegation hopes that the good example set by the
United Kingdom will be emulated by other colonial
Powers.
138. With regard to the application of Fiji for membership of the United Nations, I have the honour and
the privilege to state that my Government is confident
that Fiji is a peace-loving State and that it is both willing
and able to carry out the obligations of membership
in the United Nations. Nepal whole-heartedly supports
Fiji’s members hip,

147. In this cormexion my delegation wishes to add
a word of congratulation to the former administering
Power for the role it has played in the development
of free political institutions in the islands. It is with
special pleasure that my delegation supports Fiji’s
application today, for 10 October is a historic day not
12

only for the Fijian people but also for us Chinese. It
was on the same date that the Republic of China was
born fifty-nine years ago.
148. I take this opportunity to extend’our warm congratulations and best wishes to the Government and
the people of Fiji.
149. The
PRESIDENT
(irzterlpretation
porn
Spa/zish): I am very grateful to the representative of
China for the kind words he said about me at the beginning of his statement.
150. Mr.

SEVILLA
SACASA (Nicaragua) (interSpanish): Mr, President, first of all
I extend a most cordial greeting and express my wishes
to YOU on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council. We are convinced by your great talents, experience in international affairs and academic
erudition that your conduct of the affairs of the Council
will be crowned by success and that your Presidency
will be remembered by all your colleagues for its
wis_dom.

pretation

from

151. Ambassador de Pinies knows full well that, for
all the Hispanic Americans, the mention of Spain
arouses deep feelings of sympathy and love and
recreates in words the events of its epic and glorious
past.
152. I should like also to reaffirm the gratitude of
my delegation to our distinguished colleagues, Ambassador Nicol of Sierra Leone and Ambassador KuYaga
of Poland, for the splendid manner in which they presided over the Council in the months of August and
September last. We were not surprised at the brilliant
and skilful manner in which they discharged their
duties, because we are all aware of their outstanding
qualities and of the international prestige they so rightly
enjoy.
153, I should like to express my special thanks to my
colleague Ambassador Nical for his generous words
of praise in regard to myself when I presided over
the Council last July. I am greatly honoured by his
words, as I am honoured by his friendship that is so
deartome.AmbassadorNicolknowsofmygreatesteem
and admiration for his great people and my aPPreciation of its great men.
154. On this auspicious occasion I am happy to convey my sincere greetings to the Ambassador of the
Republic of China. He knows that. at this time my country’s flag is raised in honour of his fatherland.
155, My delegation abstained when the motion of the
representative of Zambia was put to the vote merely
‘in order to express our faithful and loyal support of
the rules of procedure that govern’ us. We abstained
with all due respect for the proposal of the representative of Zambia. We abstained although we knew full
well that, from the very moment when the Fiji Islands
achieved independence, from the very moment when
its distinguished Government sbbmitted its application
for membership to the United Nations-with
all the

I rights and duties it entails-we would all desire to
accept that request. We know that a most noble peaceloving people -inhabits those islands, a people that is
fully aware of the responsibilities implicit in membership in the United Nations.
156. On behalf of Nicaragua I should like to state
that we shall enthusiastically vote in favour of the
admission of Fiji as a Member of the United Nations
and we most sincerely and whole-heartedly congratulate its distinguished Government. At the same
time I express my sincere wishes and those of the
Government and people of my country for the growing
prosperity of the Fijian people.
1.57. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish); I should like most especially to thank the
representative of Nicaragua for the glowing terms in
which he has paid tribute to my country. He knows
that his feelings are reciprocated.
158. Mr, ISSRAELYAN
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Ambassador
Malik has already expressed his congratulations and
feelings of esteem to you, Mr. President, and to the
President of the Security Council for September, the
Ambassador of Sierra Leone.
159. Permit me to associate myself with those warm
congratulations and to wish you every success in your
responsible and important work.
160. The Soviet delegation welcomes the arrival of
Fiji in the family of independent sovereign States.
Today the Security Council is considering the request
of the Goverqent
of Fiji for admission to the United
Nations. The toad to independence iYas not easy for
the people of Fiji and this is not the first time that
this country has been discussed in the United Nations.
From the documents which were submitted for the
consideration of the Fourth Committee of the General
Assembly and other organs of the United Nations, we
all learnt of the difficult struggle of the people of Fiji
for their freedom and for the right to autonomous
development and independence. The proclamation of’
the independence of Fiji-a
country which was. a
foreign colony for almost a century-is one of the strlking illustrations of the unconquerable force of the
national liberation struggle of the oppressed peoples.
161. Throughout the whole period during which the
question of Fiji was being considered in various organs
of the United Nations, the Soviet Union spoke out
firmly and consistently in defence of the just and lawful
demands of the people of Fiji for freedom and independence. It is.with great satisfaction that we noti welcome
the birth of another independent State-Fiji-which
has cast off the bonds of colonial slavery.
-

162. At the same time, we cannot fail to note that
many peoples are still languishing under the colonial
yoke. Thus at this solemn moment when we are considering the question of the admission of Fiji tP the
United Nations, it is quite appropriate to recall once

again that a hard struggle lies ahead for the elimination
of a11 the remnants of colonialism.

have already been so eloquently mentioned by preced- i
ing speakers and because thus we shall have in this
concert of free nations a new and most distinguished
Member. With Fiji’s admission we take a further step
along the path conducive to the elimination of colonialism, against which my country struggles fervently
and enthusiastically. Since Colombia is a member of
the Council for Namibia, I believe this is a most appropriate occasion to express the wish that for that people
also the time will come for freedom and independence,

163. In addition, we cannot fail to see that the
achievement of independence by the people of Fiji is
another striking example of the fact that in the modern
world the last remnants of colonialism will be destroyed
under the pressure of freedom-loving forces. The ro tten
edifice of the colonial empires is finally crumbling.
From a historical point of view, the proclamation of
‘, the independence of Fiji once again proves convincingly that imperialism and colonialism are doomed and
that they have not and cannot have any future. Unreservedly expressing our support for the admission of Fiji
as a full State Member of the United Nations, we wish
the people of Fiji success in building a new life and
speedily eliminating the after-effects of colonialism.
We wish the people of Fiji progress and prosperity
on the path of an independent existence and successful
co-operation with all the freedom-loving and progressive forces of the world in the struggle against the
evil of imperialism, from which they suffered so much
and so long.

168. Colombia offers friendship and solidarity to the
new State of Fiji, its people and Government, and
greets it as it begins its new independent, autonomous
struggle for economic development and hence for the
welfare of its people.
169. My abstention on the proposal of the representative of Zambia was in no way intended to delay the
entry of Fiji into the United Nations-which
I am sure
will be agreed on unanimously-because
I also know
that rule 59 would not prevent the committee provided
for therein from meeting immediately and submitting
its conclusions straight away, on this very day. The
second part of rule 59 does not provide for requests
for admission during General Assembly sessions, nor
does it prohibit them. Proof of this is the fact that
we are at present considering a very important
application. The thirty-five days the rule refers to do
not represent a dilatory period but rather establish a
deadline in order that notice of such decisions may
be given well in advance-thirty-five
days before the
regukar sessions of the General Assembly or fourteen
days before special Hessions if they are convened. I
also sought to give expression to a traditional legal
criterion of my country, namely the strict and full application of all legal provisions while at the same time
being consistent with the new spirit prevailing in the
United Nations to strengthen the Organization and
restore its full prestige. I also took into account the
need to remember the implicit soundness of its principles and purposes and the importance of its norms,
which must be complied with so long as they are not
derogated or modified.

164. Allow me in conclusion to read out a message
of welcome from the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Aleksei Nikolaevich Kosygin, to
the Prime Minister of Fiji, Sir Kamisese Mara:
“Accept, Mr. Prime Minister, my heartfelt congratulations on the occasiori of the proclamation of
the independence of Fiji and my wishes for prosperity and progress for the people of your country on
the path of independent deveIopment.
“The Soviet Government, unswervingly basing its
policy on the principles
of equality and selfdetermination of peoples and supporting development and co-operation among all countries, hereby
declares that it recognizes Fiji as an independent
and sovereign State and expresses a readiness to
establish diplomatic relations with it.”
165. The

PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?onz
I thank the representative of the Soviet
Union for the kind words he addressed to me at the
beginning of his statement.
Spanish):

170. Lastly, I should like to congratulate the people
of Fiji and their Government and express our wishes
for their prosperity on this day in which they begin
their independent life and when we here in the Security
Council shall be recommending Fiji’s admission to the
United Nations.

166. Mr. ESPINOSA

VALDERRAMA
(Colombia)
Sir, I should like to begin
my statement by congratulating you most cordially on
your assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council. My delegation is convinced that your intelligence, talents and many personal qualities will be
a decisive factor in the success of our deliberations.
I should also like to pay a tribute of admiration and
gratitude to the Ambassador of Sierra Leone for the
tasks he performed last month, a month beset by so
many difficulties that he was able to overcome with
intelligence and skill,
(interpretationj?om

Spanish):

171 a The PRESIDENT
(inteppretationfrom Spanish):
I am especially grateful for the very kind words the
representative of Colombia has addressed to me.
172. Mr. YOST (United States of America): In my
opening remarks at this meeting I paid tribute to Fiji
at some length and explained why we consider Fiji
fully qualified to be admitted to the United Nations.
I shall not repeat what I said a few minutes ago0
However, since we have moved from the procedural
to the substantive part of our proceedings, I should
not wish that the views of the United States be absent
from this part of the record. Therefore, I merely wish

167. I should like on behalf of my country to announce
that we shall vote in favour of the admission of Fiji
to the United Nations. 1 do so with the greatest pleasure
because of the very great merits of that nation that
14

’ to repeat our gratification that Fiii has achieved,
independence and has applied for admission to the
United Nations, our unqualified intention to vote for
its admission, and our congratulations to the Government and people of Fiji on this joyous occasion.

request the Secretary-General
to transmit to the
General Assembly the text of the resolution just
adopted, together with the verbatim record of this
meeting. With the consent of the Council I should like
on behalf of the Bureau to extend cordial greetings ’
to the delegation of Fiji, which is among us in this
Chamber, and, through it, to convey the best wishes
of the Council to the people and Government of Fiji
on its accession to independence and on the favourable
recommendation
of the Council for Fiji’s admission
to membership of the United Nations.

173. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spnrzish): Speaking as representative of SPAIN, I
should like to state how very gratified my Government
is at the fact that the application for the admission
of Fiji to membership of the United Nations has been
submitted and that this event has coincided with my
assumption of the Chair at a time when we are commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations and the tenth anniversary of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.

178. Before adjourning the meeting, I call on the representative of SierraLeone, who has asked to speak.
!
179. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I
should like to express my own profound gratitude and
that of my delegation to you and our colleagues for
the very kind words that have been expressed on the
Presidency of the Council which my delegation held
last month. I owe a great debt of gratitude to all members for their willing and constructive co-operation at
all hours of the day and the night. It was a tremendous
pleasure to work with them.

174. My Government is convinced that Fiji is apeaceloving country and that it is highly qualified for membership in the United Nations. We shall therefore be
happy to vote in favour of its admission.
175. At the same time, I should like to extend my
congratulations to the delegation of the United Kingdom for expediting the process of decolonization of
that Territory. We hope other Territories will follow
the same example and that the process of decolonization will soon be completed.

180. I was “sandwiched” between two experienced
presiding officers: the representative of Poland and
you, Sir, the representative of Spain; I was surrounded
by you all, By the scientific processes of osmosis and
diffusion it would have been difficult for me to fail
completely.

176. As PRESIDENT,
since there are no further
names on the speakers’ list, I shall now put to the
vote the draft resolution co-sponsored by Sierra Leone,
the United Kingdom and Zambia, contained in document S/9959.

18 1. My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General,
His Excellency U Than& personally, for his constant willingness to advise us on
procedural and political problems, and to his staff for
their ready and swift efficiency.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution. was adopted unanimously

182.

.6

Once more I thank you, Sir.

177. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): In accordance with rule 60 of the provisional

183. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): I thank the representative of Sierra Leone

rules of procedure

for his congratulations.

’ k=e-resolution

of the Security

Council, I shall

The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

287 {1970).

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
pubticotlonr
tho world.
Consult
your
or Genavo.

noy
book#torr

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtalnrd
or write

from bookstores
and dlrtributorr
tar United
Notions,
Solas Section,

DES NATIONS

lhroughout
Now York

UNICS

19s publication*

des Notions
Union
toot en vents
don#
I~B llbrolrir~
01 108 openers
diporltaires
du monde rnlier.
Informer-vous
aup&
do votre Jlbrolrle
ou adresser-vous
br
Notlonr
Unlrg, SetlIon
der vrntor,
New York ou Gonho,
HAH

IlOllY’lHTb

HBdAHHR

OPTAHHSA~HW

06~E~HHEHHbIX

HAUHI

Ilo~amtr
Oprannaaqnn OG*u~n~e~~t~arxWaqnC 3iomuo x~nrrL fl xunth’kwx xmn8uunx
II
I\~CI~TR~I
no WCS pafio~~ar MII~U. Haao~me onpawn
06 nttAntmnx I uaumx wnwow
wra3niie
rliw unumre no aflpecy: Opraunnrqrrn
0,6~e~nuc1111ux Iiaqsfi, Ceiii~un uu
upoaame nqsunfi,
Hbo-flopn
man Zese~r.
COMO

CONSEQUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los pubticociones
dr lor Nacloner
Unldos
ettbn
en todos parts* dal mundo.
Cons&e
a su Iibrero
Venla~, Nurvo York o Ginebra,

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

UNIDAS

en vento an tibrerioc
y cosos dlstribuidora,
o dlrliorcr
ot Nacionec
Unidos,
Seccibn

1.00 (or equivalent4n

other

currencies)

de

K2135--June

1973-2,050
