64

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Assembly at its thirty-second session on the progress
achieved in this regard, together with the annual report
of the Council of the University.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/118.

Chair on non-alignment within
United Nations University

the

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, by which it adopted the Charter of the
United Nations University,
Noting the proposal of the non-aligned countries to
establish a chair on non-alignment within the United
Nations University,
1. Invites interested countries to enter into consultations with the Council of the United Nations University and the Rector of the University with a view
to implementing the above-mentioned proposal;
2. Further invites the Council of the United Nations
University to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the results of these consultations.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/119.

Economic co-operation among developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3177 ( XXVIII) of 17 December 1973, 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974
and 3442 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, and resolution 92 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development39 on measures
of support by developed countries and international organizations for the programme of economic co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting the programme of economic co-operation
among developing countries, adopted at the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventy-seven, held at
Manila from 26 January to 7 February 1976,40
Noting also the decisions of the non-aligned movement on economic co-operation among developing countries and, in particular, the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation and other relevant resolutions
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,41
30 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Tl.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
40 Ibid., annex V, annex I, resolution 1.
4L See A/31/197.

Noting further the measures set out in the report of
the Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to
22 September 1976,42
Noting that the developing countries have set in motion an irreversible trend towards the consolidation of
their unity and mutual co-operation and noting their
desire to maintain their efforts to strengthen further
such co-operation and solidarity,
Recognizing that, in the context of global economic
co-operation, the achievement of the goal of greater
co-operation and collective self-reliance espoused by
the developing countries will not only promote their
economic development, but also facilitate effective and
meaningful negotiations with the developed countries
on the establishment of a new international economic
order,
Stressing that fundamental structural changes in existing international economic relations on the basis of
equity and justice are important _in providing an cnd~ring solution to the world economic problems so essential
for the promotion of international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the efforts towards mutual co-operation by the developing countries do not diminish the
responsibilities of all other countries for establishing
just and equitable economic relations between them and
the developing countries and for contributing to the development of the developing countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on economic co-operation among developing countries;43
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study the relevant decisions on economic co-operation among developing countries, including the Programme of Action
adopted by the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven,44 the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries45 and the report of the Conference on Economic
Co-operation among Developing Countries, 46 with a
view to formulating appropriate support measures for
the realization of the objectives of economic co-operation among developing countries, and to submit a report
thereon, together with the organizational and financial
implications, to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the medium-term plan of the United
Nations an intersectoral presentation of the activities
envisaged to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions on economic co-operation among developing
countries and, in co-operation with the organizations of
the United Nations system, to secure the same kind of
intersectoral presentation on a system-wide basis;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance
with their established procedures and practices, to support measures of economic co-operation among developing countries, including, as and when requested, the
continued provision of the necessary secretariat support
42 See A/C.2/31/7, part one.
4:i A/31/304 and Add. I.

44 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10),
annex V, part two.
4;:; A/311197, annex III.
46 A/C.2/31 /7.
