A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/98
2 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 95 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/617/Add.1)]
50/98.

Ninth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, as amended,
1/ on the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development as an organ of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 47/183 of 22 December 1992 in which it, inter
alia, emphasized the importance of the Cartagena Commitment, 2/ adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its eighth session,
held at Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from 8 to 25 February 1992,
Expressing its satisfaction with the early and unanimous agreement
reached by the Trade and Development Board, at the second part of its fortyfirst session, on the development-oriented provisional agenda for the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 3/
pursuant to which, under the unifying theme "Promoting growth and sustainable
development in a globalizing and liberalizing world economy", the Conference
will be addressing the following topics:
(a)

Development policies and strategies in an increasingly

1/

See resolutions 2904 A (XXVII), 31/2 A and B and 34/3.

2/
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Eighth Session, Report and Annexes (TD/364/Rev.1) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.II.D.5), part one, sect. A.
3/

96-76405

See A/50/15 (Vol. I), chap. I, sect. A.

/...

A/RES/50/98
Page 2

interdependent world economy in the 1990s and beyond:
(i)

Assessment of the development problématique in the current
context;

(ii)

Policies and strategies for the future;

(b)
Promoting international trade as an instrument for development in
the post-Uruguay-Round world;
Promoting enterprise development and competitiveness in developing
(c)
countries and countries in transition;
(d)
Future work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in accordance with its mandate: institutional implications,
Considering that the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development is a major intergovernmental economic and development
event of 1996 within the United Nations,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Trade and Development Board
that the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development should be held at Midrand, Gauteng Province, South Africa, from 27
April to 11 May 1996, preceded by a one-day meeting of senior officials on 26
April 1996,
1.
Welcomes with appreciation the generous offer made by the
Government of South Africa to host the ninth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
2.
Decides to convene the ninth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at Midrand, Gauteng Province, South
Africa, from 27 April to 11 May 1996, to be preceded by a one-day meeting of
senior officials at the same place on 26 April 1996;
3.
Stresses the crucial importance of the ninth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in considering the topics of its
provisional agenda, 3/ and affirms the need to achieve through the session a
constructive and action-oriented outcome;
4.
Calls upon all Governments to ensure their full participation, at
the highest possible political level, in the ninth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
5.
Invites the Secretary-General to establish a fund to which
voluntary contributions can be made with a view to contributing to the
participation of representatives of the least developed countries in the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
6.
Urges all Governments to take appropriate steps to ensure adequate
preparations at the national, regional and interregional levels and within the
framework of the permanent machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development for the purpose of facilitating a positive and action-oriented
outcome.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
