A /66/PV.131

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-sixth session

131st plenary meeting
Monday, 17 September 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 54 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/66/428/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records.
May I remind Members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”

(Qatar)

May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take a decision in the
same manner as was done in the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee),
unless notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
in paragraph 6 of its report, entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 66/297).
The President: I now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I speak on behalf of Brazil, Uruguay and my own
country, Argentina.
We welcome the endeavours of the Chair of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), Ambassador Ogwu; the Chair of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-51128 (E)

*1251128*

A/66/PV.131

the Working Group of the Whole, Ambassador Gilles
Rivard; and his team, allowing for the adoption of the
substantive report A/66/428/Add.1, which contains
significant recommendations.
It is extremely important that, despite the difficulties
with which we are all familiar, we have managed to
achieve the approval of this substantive report, which is
a step forward, with important recommendations on the
relationship between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
the safety of our Blue Helmets and the need for
peacekeeping operations to possess the necessary
resources and tools to enable them to carry out their
increasingly complex tasks involving the protection of
civilians and its challenges. We cannot lose sight of the
collective progress that we have all achieved.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) is a fundamental space for the voices
of countries contributing troops, police and civilians to
peacekeeping missions; countries hosting operations;
those providing material resources — in brief, all those
involved in such endeavours. The C-34 is the global
forum where, by its very nature, the global partnership,
which is essential to the success of peacekeeping
operations, must necessarily be reflected. Its importance
derives from those shared visions and each specific
contribution. In order for these important contributions
to have an impact, the Committee must be able to fully
address all issues relevant to peacekeeping missions, in
accordance with its own mandate.
With the increasing complexity of peacekeeping
operations, we are obviously dealing with financial
and administrative issues, such as costs for troop
reimbursement, conduct and discipline issues, and
gender and child protection issues. These are structural
issues that have an ever-increasing impact on the daily
lives of our Blue Helmets.
The difficulty in achieving consensus on
problematic issues is also a result of that complexity.
We need to reflect together on how to ensure that the
Committee and its recommendations remain centre
stage, without allowing certain issues to be taboo, even
if they directly affect the functioning of a mission.
Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina have actively
contributed to reaching consensus, understanding the
specificities of national positions on an issue that is so
important for all of our countries. It is crucial that we
work together to create solutions that allow for positive
convergence in a climate of confidence, greater dialogue

2

and openness. It is therefore also vital that we not lose
sight of all the contributions to the Committee’s report.
However important individual contributions may be,
it is all of the recommendations together that make up
our significant contribution and the evidence of the
cumulative progress achieved by our joint efforts.
In the future, it will be important to strengthen this
joint vision and the collective and operational work that
transcends the crises of the day. Our delegations will
continue to pursue this objective, working in the spirit
of the friends of the Committee, all of whom believe
in its relevance and trust that we can move forward
together.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 19 to the
Second Committee. Members will also recall that, at its
108th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2012, the Assembly
decided to consider agenda item 19 directly in plenary
meeting, adopted decision 66/561, and, under the same
item, adopted decision 66/544 B at its 109th plenary
meeting, on 21 May. Members will further recall that,
under agenda item 19, the Assembly adopted resolution
66/288 at its 123rd plenary meeting, on 27 July.
As members are aware, in a letter dated 13 September
2012, I circulated for consideration by Member States
language for an oral decision on an open working group
on sustainable development.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I appreciate the
opportunity to provide an account of the consultations
on the constitution of the working group on sustainable
development goals. In discharge of the task you have
entrusted to me, Sir, I started a process of consultations
with the Chairs of the regional groups in mid-July. This
process continued through the months of August and
September.
During those consultations, different formulas for
the allocation of seats among regional groups were

12-51128

A/66/PV.131

explored. We also discussed the general provisions
contained in paragraph 248 of the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (resolution 66/288) and exchanged views
on the meaning of the word “open” qualifying the
working group.
Consultations have shown that an even distribution
of seats among regional groups is not a formula that is
acceptable to all groups. Therefore, we proceeded to
examine other approaches. Two recent examples were
brought up in our discussions: the establishment of the
Human Rights Council and of the UN-Women Executive
Board. The analysis of the distribution of seats in those
bodies showed that a proportional approach was applied
in a manner that took into account the differences in size
of the regional groups. If was felt that such a basis could
provide a way forward in finalizing the constitution of
the working group on sustainable development goals.
During the discussions, it was noted that the
allocation of seats within regional groups will also
be a complex exercise, given the number of interested
Member States. In this regard, it was suggested that
such a process could be facilitated if the word “open”
qualifying the working group were to be interpreted as
allowing for an inclusive participation of all Member
States and for the possibility of their presenting
proposals. It was felt that such an understanding could
be part of the decision establishing the working group.
I conveyed those elements through an aide-memoire
to the Chairs of the regional groups on 17 August.
During subsequent consultations with the Chairs
of the regional groups, on 5 September it became
clear that neither an even distribution of seats among
regional groups nor a strictly proportional approach
were able to garner consensus. In this context, I
proposed the consideration of a compromise formula,
consisting of an arrangement that would start from
an even distribution and then provide for adjustments
that would take into account the fact that the regional
groups differ in size. The most numerous groups would
be assigned an additional seat and the least numerous
groups would have five seats each. This proposal was
then conveyed in writing to the Chairs of the regional
groups for further consultations.
It is my view that we have tried all possible options.
However, a group of Member States feels that further
consultations are required on how the working group
will be constituted and on the elaboration of the principle

12-51128

of openness to be applied to the working group. In the
light of this, I propose that we defer a decision on the
constitution of the working group.
I take this opportunity to thank the Chairs of the
regional groups for the months of July, August and
September for their cooperation, and I thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of your team for the
trust and support extended to me.
The President: May I therefore take it that the
General Assembly decides to reach an agreement on
the distribution of seats of the open working group,
established pursuant to paragraph 248 of the annex of
resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, among United Nations
regional groups and on the specific representatives who
will be designated by Member States to occupy those
seats at the beginning of its sixty-seventh session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Let us think back to
September 2011, when the current session of the General
Assembly began. We were deep in preparation for the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20). The global economic and financial crisis was
continuing to reverse hard-won development gains and
take a toll on jobs. The transformation in the Arab world
was in its early stages, creating hope and apprehension
side by side.
It has been an eventful year — a period of transition,
a time of tests. The Rio+20 conference produced a solid,
encouraging outcome, including agreement to launch a
set of sustainable development goals and many tangible
commitments that will make a difference.
The General Assembly has been the venue for
important discussions on eradicating poverty and
easing the plight of the vulnerable. It held an important
meeting on nuclear safety and security, as well as the
first-ever High-level Meeting on Non-communicable
Diseases, the leading cause of deaths around the world.
The Assembly focused welcome attention on mediation
and, just last week, adopted the far-reaching resolution
66/291 on human security. When the Security Council

3

A/66/PV.131

was not able to act on the violence and repression in
Syria, the Assembly stepped in proactively and has
maintained its vigilance.
The Assembly has also sought to promote mutual
understanding and a culture of peace across the world,
including through the Alliance of Civilizations. As the
troubling events of recent days make clear, that must
remain a priority. The sixty-sixth session leaves a legacy
of achievement, showing again the invaluable role and
voice of the General Assembly as the Organization’s
leading deliberative body.
I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser for his leadership and strong
commitment as President of this august Assembly
throughout this period of dramatic developments
and complex challenges. His extensive diplomatic
experience has served him well. He has guided the
Assembly with skill and sensitivity and reached out
to partners in civil society, academia, the business
community and the philanthropic world. He and I
have had a very productive working relationship. We
have jointly addressed many pressing problems. We
travelled together to Libya and Somalia. I thank him
for his friendship and collaboration.
In his first remarks to the Assembly as President,
Ambassador Al-Nasser noted that “the sands are
shifting” and that the sixty-sixth session was “our
opportunity to define our place in this decisive moment
in history” (A/66/PV.1). He has helped to meet that
challenge.
Of course, the sands continue to shift. We have
much work ahead. We must press ahead to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by the agreed deadline
of 2015. We must articulate a bold and inspirational
post-2015 development agenda. We must sharpen the
full range of our tools for peace and human rights. We
must strengthen this Organization — its effectiveness,
its representativeness — to cope with an era of
budgetary constraint and to meet the high expectations
of the people of the world.
I thank the General Assembly for its contributions
at the sixty-sixth session.
Mr. President, during your tenure as President of
the General Assembly, the Assembly also instituted
a new observance on the United Nations calendar:
the International Day of Happiness. Let us hope that
through our work, including in the new session that

4

begins tomorrow, we can turn that aspiration into
reality.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I thank all those present here today for joining us
in this closing of the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly. This has indeed been a remarkable and
momentous session. The events of the past year have
formed a moment in history that will remain in our
minds for decades to come. It has been a year when the
impact of the global financial and economic crisis put
the international community to a challenging test. There
have been serious conflicts, but there has also been
renewed hope as countries have emerged from conflict
to peace. Populations across the world have continued
to call for freedom, dignity, peace and justice.
Faced with such challenges and opportunities, I
am proud to say that the General Assembly has stood
strong, active and responsive. New partnerships have
been formed and political commitments renewed, and
we have seen consensus, action and results become the
order of the day. It has been a source of profound honour
and pride for me to lead the United Nations membership
during this critical moment in history. It has been my
privilege to work with all representatives as President
of the General Assembly at this session. I thank them
most sincerely for their cooperation and support and for
their enduring commitment to the mission of the United
Nations.
I would like to note in particular the strong working
relationship and great friendship that I have enjoyed
with the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. Determined to enhance the coherence of the
efforts of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
and I have worked in close partnership throughout
the year. It has been my deep privilege to work with
Mr. Ban, who is a true leader — dedicated, genuine and
relentless in his pursuit of a better world.
Our work during this sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly would not have achieved the results
we have achieved without the full and remarkable
support of the State of Qatar. I wish therefore to
express our very special gratitude and appreciation to
His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the
Emir of the State of Qatar; His Highness Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al-Thani, the Heir Apparent of the State of
Qatar; and His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim
bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister for

12-51128

A/66/PV.131

Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar. Their immense
support for and commitment to the United Nations have
helped us greatly in serving the United Nations and the
world.
As the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly
draws to a close, I would like to highlight what I believe
to be our main achievements during the session. To
start with, there is no doubt that we are living through
an extraordinary moment in the history of the Middle
East and North Africa. Our attention to the region
now extends beyond the Arab-Israeli conflict to
developments concerning the Arab Awakening and
how to support the legitimate aspirations of the citizens
of many of those countries to democratic change.
Today, the legitimate demands of the peoples of the
region for liberty, dignity and social justice continue
to ring out loudly across the region. Recognizing that
those demands are consistent with the basic principles
and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and
with international human rights standards, the United
Nations has been and will remain at the forefront of
international efforts to defend our shared values and
to support those legitimate changes, while respecting
each country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The issue of Palestine has been particularly central
since the beginning of this session. We witnessed an
historic development here in New York when the
President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, transmitted the Palestinians’ application for
membership in the United Nations to the SecretaryGeneral on 23 September 2011. I had the honour to
process, along with the Secretary-General, Palestine’s
first request to join in membership. Although it has
not yet been possible to welcome Palestine as a new
Member to our Organization during my mandate, I am
still hopeful that this will happen in the near future.
It is my conviction that the General Assembly should
continue to work collectively for the attainment of a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
On Libya, the General Assembly made the historic
decision to restore the rights of the new Libyan
authorities both in the General Assembly and in the
Human Rights Council. The Assembly played a key
role in the admission and the adoption of the credential
of the true representatives of the Libyan people. On
1 November 2011, I also made a joint visit to Libya with
the Secretary-General to demonstrate that the United
Nations supported the Libyans as they embarked on

12-51128

that critical journey of reconciliation, reconstruction
and democracy.
The General Assembly also expressed its concern
regarding the ongoing crisis in Syria. In doing so,
the General Assembly carried out its institutional
responsibility related to international peace and
security when there was a deadlock in the Security
Council. In December 2011, the General Assembly
adopted a resolution condemning the continued grave
and systematic human rights violations committed
by the Syrian authorities. In February, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 66/253 A, which led
to the appointment of the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, thereby
implementing Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. In August, the Assembly convened another
timely meeting on Syria (see A/66/PV.124), at which
Member States adopted resolution 66/253 B, aimed at
bringing the crisis to an end. I also organized several
formal and informal meetings of the General Assembly
in order for Member States to be kept informed, to
hear the views of the main United Nations actors and
to express their national positions. I believe that the
General Assembly has a crucial role to play in ensuring
that the violence in Syria ends quickly.
Members will recall that at the start of the sixtysixth session, I identified four key pillars around which
I chose to focus the attention of the General Assembly.
I am very pleased that key advancements have been
made in each area. The first pillar was the peaceful
settlement of disputes. It has been a very significant
year for the role of mediation in the settlement of
disputes. The Assembly has provided space for
extensive deliberations and increased the momentum
around mediation. Beginning with the general debate in
September, many meetings, conferences and seminars
were subsequently held throughout the year here at
the United Nations and outside New York. These
discussions led to the informal high-level meeting of
the General Assembly in May.
I am pleased to see that concrete deliberations and
actions have already taken place to materialize the
ideas emerging from those discussions. The adoption
of the follow-up resolution 66/291 on mediation just
last week reflects the eagerness of the membership to
actively pursue the issue. It is also encouraging that
the next President, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
has proposed “The settlement of disputes by peaceful
means” as the theme for the next general debate.

5

A/66/PV.131

I have always believed that dialogue among
civilizations offers a complementary approach
to preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts.
Therefore, during this session, we have placed a special
focus on the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations.
Its role could be critical, particularly in addressing
disputes emanating from cultural or religious
differences. I see more room in that respect for further
elaboration. The Alliance should also be strengthened
so that it can fulfil its noble mission more effectively. I
will personally invest my time and efforts in supporting
that vision in the future.
I wish at this juncture to take the opportunity to
state that the sad and tragic events taking place around
the Middle East over the past week have served as a
stark reminder of the urgent need for us to cultivate and
promote tolerance, mutual respect and dialogue among
civilizations. We must respect each other’s differences
and uphold the right to freely practice one’s religion.
I deplore and condemn any act that amounts to the
defamation of religions and incitement to hatred and
xenophobia. Let us also recall that violence is never
the answer, and I have strongly condemned the attacks
against consulates and embassies, especially where
diplomatic personnel and ordinary citizens have been
killed or injured.
I implore citizens of the world to open their hearts
and their minds and to celebrate the common values
that bind us all in this one human family. Indeed, just
this past week my presidency convened the first ever,
day-long High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace.
With the participation of a very wide array of actors,
in particular from civil society, the event energized
everybody with the determination to carry forward
their work for the implementation of the Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace. Inspired by the spirited
enthusiasm of all, I have proposed that this High-level
Forum become an annual event, to be held every year on
13 September, the date on which the General Assembly
adopted the United Nations Declaration and Programme
of Action by consensus in 1999 (resolution 53/243).
The second pillar I identified in the sixty-sixth
session was United Nations reform and revitalization.
Recognizing that the United Nations must adapt to the
global realities of the twenty-first century in order to
fulfil its mandate, the United Nations membership has
been occupied this session with revitalizing its General
Assembly. I have worked throughout the year to support
the endeavours of the two co-facilitators on General

6

Assembly revitalization, with the aim of fostering
consensus among the general membership.
At this session, the ad hoc working group on
General Assembly revitalization has discussed many
important topics. A broad consensus has emerged
from these discussions on the importance of General
Assembly revitalization and the urgent need for a
truly viable Assembly. Throughout the session, I have
stressed the pressing need for a balanced approach in
considering the issue, taking into account both the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions,
as well as other administrative initiatives aimed at
enhancing its efficiency.
I would also note the increasingly active role of
the President of the General Assembly and his Office,
as noted in the recently adopted resolution 66/294 on
General Assembly revitalization and the request of
Member States that the Secretary-General submit, in
the context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015, proposals to review the budget
allocation to the Office of the President of the General
Assembly. This is most welcome.
I would like to emphasize that the General
Assembly’s role should never be perceived as a
substitute for the mandate of the other principal organs
of the United Nations.
Rather, the General Assembly offers a complementary,
viable alternative for the international community
to act in moments of deadlock. As I mentioned, that
function has been put into practice during this session
on the issue of Syria.
With respect to Security Council reform, I was
very much aware of the need to strengthen confidence
for that process. I therefore immediately reappointed
Ambassador Zahir Tanin to chair the intergovernmental
negotiations. My intention has always been to work
towards a solution that garners the widest possible
acceptance among the general membership.
I am pleased that, under my presidency, the eighth
round of the intergovernmental negotiations took place.
Spirits were high in that round of negotiations. Many
Member States acknowledged new momentum and an
increased level of candour, interaction and engagement.
Now it is up to Member States to continue to build on
the adavances to date, and to act to crystallize the areas
of convergence.

12-51128

A/66/PV.131

The third pillar I identified in this session was
“Improving disaster prevention and response”. At the
beginning of the session I expressed serious concern
about the humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa. In
December, I undertook a joint official visit to Somalia
with the Secretary-General. We both felt that it was very
important to visit that country in order to demonstrate
that the United Nations and its membership continue to
stand with Somalis on their path to a better future. As
President of the General Assembly, I extended to the
Government and people of Somalia my commitment
to help ensure a better, safer and more prosperous
tomorrow.
In April, we held the General Assembly’s informal
thematic debate on disaster risk reduction. It was
clear during that event that there was unprecedented
international momentum to reduce disaster risk.
Participants emphasized the importance of integrating
disaster risk reduction into any future framework on
sustainable development. I am pleased that the results
of the thematic debate were useful for Member States in
drafting the outcome document for the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20).
Through our discussions, we also heard that
addressing disaster risk requires the multifaceted
engagement of all stakeholders, including the private
sector and civil society. The integration of humanitarian
and development approaches in order to strengthen
local resilience and to mitigate the risk of disasters
is also an essential part of a comprehensive disaster
reduction framework.
Overall, it was clear that the international
community needed to be better equipped to respond to
both natural and man-made disasters. I would like to
note here the relevance of the resolution on improving
the effectiveness and coordination of military and civil
defence assets for natural disaster response (resolution
65/307), which the Assembly adopted during the past
session. I would encourage Member States to build on
that concept.
My fourth and final pillar during my tenure was
“Sustainable development and global prosperity”.
This was of course a landmark year for sustainable
development. The United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development will go down in history
as the moment when the international community
renewed its political will and commitment to tackling

12-51128

the interconnected economic, social and environmental
challenges we face.
The implementation of the Rio+20 outcome
document will require the highest level of political
commitment. I would stress the importance of putting
in place effective means of implementation and
technology transfer, as well as including the whole
range of partners, civil society and the private sector
in that process.
A defining element of Rio+20 was that it launched
an intergovernmental process to define sustainable
development goals after 2015. The role of the General
Assembly is central in that exercise. As requested in the
Rio outcome document, I have appointed Ambassador
Ribeiro Viotti of Brazil to facilitate the process of
establishing an open working group with a view to
developing sustainable development goals. I once again
express my hope that all members will support her in
that important task and exercise flexibility and a spirit
of compromise in the process.
In the field of global economics, our main focus
has been to help strengthen the governance of the world
economy. The empowerment of the General Assembly
in economic matters was sought not for its own sake
but because we deeply believe that the Assembly has
a central role to play in global governance. Forging
legitimate political consensus is what the General
Assembly does best, and that is precisely what is needed
today in global governance. At the high-level thematic
debate on the state of the world economy, world leaders
stressed that without our collective response and strong
leadership, the world economy will continue to face
serious challenges.
During this session, I have reminded the global
community that if we are to rethink the traditional
way we do development, it is also important to
rethink and reshape some of our organizations and
intergovernmental bodies. I co-organized a three-part
seminar series on the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review (QCPR) of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system. The review is a timely
exercise that offers a forward-looking reflection on
the longer-term strategic repositioning of the United
Nations development system within the development
landscape. I would emphasize the importance of the
draft resolution on the review that will be adopted this
fall, which will directly impact the day-to-day work of
the United Nations system and will shape the strategic

7

A/66/PV.131

plans of the more than 30 entities that comprise the
United Nations development system.
In addition to my four pillars, the Assembly of
course tackled many other important topics. I would
like to highlight here just a few more of the Assembly’s
achievements.
Disarmament and international security remained
high on the General Assembly’s agenda throughout the
session. During my discussions with Member States, I
called upon all to maintain a constructive and forwardlooking approach, and to aim at consensus-building to
the maximum extent possible.
I also expressed my concern about the current
status of the disarmament machinery, including during
my visit to address the Conference on Disarmament in
Geneva. Although Member States advanced their work
throughout the session on almost the entire scope of
issues on the agenda of the First Committee, greater
efforts and flexibility from all involved are needed to
advance the multilateral disarmament negotiations.
In the run-up to the 2015 Review Conference
of Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the implementation of disarmament
and non-proliferation commitments in accordance with
the Treaty itself and in line with the plans of action
adopted in 2010 will be crucial for the success of the
Conference. In that context, equally important will be
the realization of real progress at the Conference on
the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. I am aware that some serious
groundwork has been done, and look forward to the
successful convening of the Conference with the
participation of all States of the region.
On peacekeeping, during my intensive exchanges
with them, I expressed my gratitude to Member States
for their dedication and perseverance in ensuring that
the Organization succeeds in fulfilling its mandate.
The importance that all Member States attach to
issues related to peacekeeping cannot be underscored
enough. That is because decisions on financing, on
elaborating policies and guidelines and on reviewing
implementation pertain to the authority of the General
Assembly and its 193 Member States. That has been,
and will be, essential to strengthening the legitimacy of
the actions of the Assembly.

8

The safety and security of our peacekeepers has
been on the Assembly’s agenda on various occasions.
The General Assembly and its Member States have to
continue working closely with host countries, which
bear the primary responsibility for the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel on their respective
territories. I also stressed the importance of a
strengthened global partnership among all stakeholders
in peacekeeping operations, in particular host
countries, troop contributors, regional organizations
and United Nations staff. Member States must continue
to build that partnership and maximize the use of
national capacities, while providing rapid and effective
international assistance.
The intergovernmental process on the reform
of the human rights treaty bodies advanced during
this session. The independence of treaty bodies in
the protection and promotion of human rights should
remain the cornerstone of that reform process.
On 24 September, the General Assembly will hold
its first-ever high-level meeting on the rule of law. The
meeting has generated great interest among Member
States and civil society, indicating its importance in our
societies and in international affairs. Preparations for
the substantive outcome document and other necessary
arrangements have been a priority this session, to
ensure a productive and successful high-level meeting
during the upcoming sixty-seventh session.
Under my presidency the General Assembly held a
thematic debate in June on drugs and crime as a threat to
development. The summary of the proceedings will be
transmitted to the thirteenth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, scheduled to
take place in Doha in 2015.
The third counter-terrorism plenary review in
June (see A/66/PV.120) resulted in the adoption of the
consensual resolution 66/282. The counter-terrorism
seminar that I organized just before the plenary was a
useful occasion for various stakeholders to interact on
that major issue, which affects us all.
On health issues, in September 2011, we had the
first-ever General Assembly high-level meeting on
the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs). It was a landmark meeting, in which
NCDs were given well-deserved priority on the global
development agenda. A mandate was established
and clear responsibilities were allocated. Work on
implementation began this year, and throughout the

12-51128

A/66/PV.131

session I have encouraged Member States to consider
broadening the definition of NCDs to include no less
important diseases such as those affecting mental
health.

the Office of the President to reach out to civil society
should be strengthened, to ensure continuity and an
adequate level of support to this increasingly important
function.

On the crucial issue of the budget, during this
session the Assembly adopted by consensus the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013, totalling
$5.152 billion (resolution 66/263). It also approved by
consensus the financing of the 16 peacekeeping United
Nations missions, in the amount of $7.234 billion
(resolution 66/265). A number of important resolutions
were adopted without a vote on critical issues relating
to policy and administrative and financial matters for
the effective functioning of the United Nations.

I promised a successful session since the beginning
of my tenure. With an outstanding team in my Cabinet,
representing the diversity of the Assembly, we worked
very hard, and I hope we met members’ expectations.
I wish to acknowledge, for the record, the invaluable
support of my outstanding team and the tremendous
roles played by two of Qatar’s most talented diplomats,
my Chief of Cabinet, Ambassador Mutlaq Al-Qahtani,
and my Deputy Chief of Cabinet, Ambassador Tariq
Al-Ansari. They are indeed great assets for their
country and for the Organization.

As President I convened a brainstorming meeting
of the Fifth Committee, followed by a retreat, to initiate
an informal discussion on the long-standing need for
a review of the Fifth Committee’s internal working
methods. There was much convergence in the views
of the Member States. The two events contributed
positively to strengthening the relationship of mutual
trust and good faith among all stakeholders. I believe
that such discussions, both in an informal and formal
setting, should be sustained in coming sessions, not only
as a stocktaking but also as an important trust-building
exercise, with a view to rationalizing and optimizing
the deliberations of the Fifth Committee and bringing
greater efficiency to the work of the Assembly. I wish
the sixty-seventh session great success in considering
the scale of assessments.
Allow me a word on our partners. At the outset
of the session I affirmed my commitment to building
a truly united global partnership. That means a
partnership both inside and outside the United Nations.
I believe strongly that civil society has an important
role to play in achieving inclusive and sustainable
development, peace and security and human rights,
and in ensuring public support for the United Nations
agenda. I was very pleased during this session to
interact with many representatives of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on most of our themes and
debates. Representatives of civil society and the NGO
community were highly instrumental in the success of
the brilliant event we held here in the Hall in February
to mark World Interfaith Harmony Week. Such
representatives have always offered constructive and
meaningful engagement. I made sure during this session
to have an adequate opportunity for interaction with
civil society. I would note, however, that the capacity of

12-51128

I would also like to express my deep gratitude to
the highly professional United Nations colleagues who
have worked diligently, day in and day out, to make
this session run smoothly and successfully. They have
worked quietly and dutifully, many times behind the
scenes, for the success of the Assembly and for the
good of humankind. In particular, I thank the staff of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, who have worked tirelessly and earned
my enduring appreciation. My special thanks go to
the interpreters, security personnel and protocol staff
for all their hard work. I am also especially grateful to
the staff of the Department of Public Information for
their valuable support. To every single person who has
helped and supported us in this session, I say thank you.
I would also like to thank my dear friend, His
Excellency Ambassador Sheikh Meshal Hamad
M. J. Al-Thani, our represenative to the United Nations,
as well as the Permanent Mission of Qatar for their
support.
We have worked as a team. The delegations and
representatives of Member States have guided and
supported me very much during this session of the
General Assembly. It is my great honour to applaud
them for all that we have achieved together during the
sixty-sixth session.
In conclusion, as I look forward, I see the growing
need for a universal and truly legitimate United Nations
as being ever more paramount. For no other organization
in the world maintains an all-encompassing, global
mandate as does the United Nations. And no other
organization has the potential and the responsibility
to build peace and prosperity for all in the way that

9

A/66/PV.131

the United Nations does. My deep belief is that the
forum that the United Nations provides — a forum
for dialogue among civilizations, for peace and for a
universal voice — will continue to be the best way for
the world. I am very confident that the United Nations
will continue to offer humankind the best platform for
a world of peace, security and prosperity for all. I look
forward to a continuing engagement with members to
cherish and realize that world. I thank all members so
much for their support.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We are now coming to the end of
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I would

10

like to invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-sixth session
The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to invite to the podium the President-elect for the
sixty-seventh session, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
to hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

12-51128
