21

R«-solutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
Recalling the stated aim of the parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water23 and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 24 to seek to
achieve the discontinuance of aM test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time,
Taking note of the special report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament on the question of
a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon tests, 25
Believing that the continuance of nuclear weapon
testing will intensify the arms race, thus increasing the
danger of nuclear war,
Convinced that cessation of nuclear weapon testing
would be in the supreme interest of mankind, both as
a major step towards controlling the development and
proliferation of nuolear weapons and to relieve the
deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of radio-active contamination for the health
of present and future generations,
1. Condemns all nuclear weapon tests, in whatever
environment they may be conducted;
2. Reaffirms its deep concern at the continuance
of such testing, both in the atmosphere and under
ground, and at the lack of progress towards a comprehensive test ban agreement;
3. Calls upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water to adhere to it forthwith;
4. Emphasizes once more the urgency of concluding
a comprehensive test ban agreement;
5. Reminds the nuclear-weapon States of their special responsibility to initiate proposals to this end;
6. Calls upon all States to -refrain from the testing
of nuclear weapons, in any environment, pending conclusion of such an agreement;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to give the highest priority to the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban agreement and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
on the progress achieved;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "lJrgent need for
cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

·3258 (XXIX). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 3079 (XXVIU) concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol U of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
28 United Nations.

Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
2373 (XXII), annex.
sect. III. For the printed text, sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session,
S"pplement No. 27 (A/9627).

of 7 December I 970, 2830 (XXVI) of I 6 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972 and 3079
( XXV 111) of 6 December 1973, in six of which appeals have been made to the nuclear-weapon States regarding the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco},26
Reiterating its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
I. Notes with satisfaction that Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which entered
into force for the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America
in 1969 and 1971, respectively, has entered into force
as well during the current year for France and the
People's Republic of China, whose Governments deposited their respective instruments of ratification on
22 March and 12 June 1974;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of. the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), as has already been done
by the other four nuclear-weapon States to which the
General Assembly began to address its appeals in
1967;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3258 (XXIX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco) ".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3259 (XXIX). Implementation of the Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also General
Assembly resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December
1972 and 3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
Firmly convinced that further and continuous efforts
are required to fulfil the objectives of the Declaration,
and thus to contribute to the stren1>thening of regional
and international peace and security,
•·
Noting the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
7
Indian Ocean,2
Further noting the factual statement of the great
Powers' military presence in all its aspects, in the
Indian Ocean, with special reference to their naval
deployments, conceived in the context of great Power

24 Resolution

2 5 A/9708-DC/237,

26 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth

Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/9629 and Add.I).

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

22

rivalry, prepared by the Secretary-General with the
assistance of qualified experts28 pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 3080 (XXVIII),
Deeply concerned that the competitive expansion of
the military presence of the great Powers in the Indian
Ocean would constitute a serious intensification of the
arms race, leading to an increase of tension in the
area,
1
Considering that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires:
(a) The elimination of all manifestations of great
Power military presence in the region, conceived in
the context of great Power rivalry,
( b) Co-operation among the regional States to ensure conditions of security within the region as envisaged in the Declaration,
Further believing that for the realization of the
objective of the Declaration it is necessary that the
great Powers enter into immediate consultations with
the States concerned with a view to adopting positive
measures for the elimination of all foreign bases and
of all manifestations of great Power military presence
in the region, conceived in the context of great Power
rivalry,
1. Urges the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean, the permanent members of the Security
Council and other major maritime users of the Indian
Ocean to give tanl!ible support to the establishment
and preservation of the Indian Ocean as a zone of
peace;
2. Calls upon the great Powers to refrain from increasing and strengthening their military presence in
the region of the Indian Ocean as an essential first
step towards the relaxation of tension and the promotion of peace and security in the area;
3. Endorses the recommendations concerning the
future work of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean, as contained in paragraph 35 of the report
of the Committee;
4. Requests the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean to enter, as soon as possible, into consultations with a view to convening a conference on
the Indian Ocean;
5. Invites an States, especially the great Powers,
to co-operate in a practical manner with the Ad Hoe
Committee in the discharge of its functions;
6. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General
for his efforts in the preparation of the factual statement of the great Powers' military presence in the
Indian Ocean;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue
its work and consultations in accordance with its mandate and to report to the GeneraJ Assembly at its
thirtieth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee.
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2992 {XXVII) of 15 December 1972 by which it decided to establish an Ad
2s Ibid., aMex.

Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean consisting of no
more than fifteen members,
Notinf? that some littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean have expressed deep interest in becoming members of the Ad Hoe Committee in view
of their geographical position and adherence to the
concept of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace,
Noting further that since the establishment of the
Ad Hoe Committee new States have been admitted to
membership in the United Nations,
Recognizing that the establishment and preservation
of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace is a matter
that concerns all littoral and hinterland States,
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Indian Ocean by the addition of
Bangladesh, Kenya and Somalia.

2309th plenary meet~ng
9 December 1974

•

•

•

As a result of the appointments set forth in resolution B
above, the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean is com•
posed of the following Member States: AUSTllALIA, BANGLA•
DESk, CHINA, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, JAPAN, KENYA,
MADAGASCAR, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, PAKISTAN, SOMALIA, SRI
LANKA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, YEMEN and ZAMBIA,

3260 (XXIX).

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972
and 3183 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of intemational peace and for disarmament,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the
world have a vital interest in the success of disarmamenc negotiations and that a1l States should be in a
position to contribute to the adoption of measures for
the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disairmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of
such aims and that the co-operation of all nuclear
Powers would considerably facilitate their attainment,
Bearing in mind the ,report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference29 and
the annex thereto containing a summary of views and
suggestions expressed by Governments on the convening of a world disarmament conference and relateci
problems, inoluding conditions for the realization of
such a conference,
Considering that it does not yet seem possible to
reach a final conclusion with regard to the convening
of a world disarmament conference,
1. Invites all States to communicate to the Secretary-General, before 31 March 1975, their comments
_on the main objectives of a world disarmament conference in the light of the views and suggestions compiled in section II of the summary annexed to the
report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference;
29 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 28 (A/9628).
