United Nations

A/RES/60/126

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 73 (d)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 15 December 2005
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/60/L.36 and Add.1)]

60/126. Assistance to the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/56 of 2 December 2004, as well as previous
resolutions on the question,
Recalling also the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim SelfGovernment Arrangements in Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, by the
Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people, 1 and the subsequent implementation
agreements concluded by the two sides,
Recalling further the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 3
Gravely concerned at the deterioration in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people, in particular children, throughout the occupied territory, which
constitutes a mounting humanitarian crisis,
Conscious of the urgent need for improvement in the economic and social
infrastructure of the occupied territory,
Aware that development is difficult under occupation and is best promoted in
circumstances of peace and stability,
Noting the great economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian people
and their leadership,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety and well-being of all children in the
whole Middle East region,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact, including the health and
psychological consequences, of violence on the present and future well-being of
children in the region,
_______________
1

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
2

05-49516

A/RES/60/126

Conscious of the urgent necessity for international assistance to the Palestinian
people, taking into account the Palestinian priorities,
Welcoming the results of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace,
convened in Washington, D.C., on 1 October 1993, the establishment of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee and the work being done by the World Bank as its secretariat
and the establishment of the Consultative Group, as well as all follow-up meetings
and international mechanisms established to provide assistance to the Palestinian
people,
Welcoming also the work of the Joint Liaison Committee, which provides a
forum in which economic policy and practical matters related to donor assistance
are discussed with the Palestinian Authority,
Stressing the continued importance of the work of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in the coordination of assistance to the Palestinian people,
Noting the upcoming meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee to review the
state of the Palestinian economy, and progress in drawing up a medium-term
development plan for the Palestinian economy,
Stressing the need for the full engagement of the United Nations in the process
of building Palestinian institutions and in providing broad assistance to the
Palestinian people, and welcoming in this regard the support provided to the
Palestinian Authority by the Task Force on Palestinian Reform, established by the
Quartet in 2002,
Noting, in this regard, the active participation of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority in the activities of the Special Envoys of the Quartet,
Welcoming the endorsement by the Security Council, in its resolution
1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003, of the performance-based road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, 4 and stressing the
need for its implementation and compliance with its provisions,
Welcoming also the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and parts of the
northern West Bank as a step towards implementation of the road map,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 5
Expressing grave concern at the continuation of the recent tragic and violent
events that have led to many deaths and injuries, including among children,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;5

2.
Also takes note of the report of the Personal Humanitarian Envoy of the
Secretary-General on the humanitarian conditions and needs of the Palestinian
people; 6
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his rapid response
and efforts regarding assistance to the Palestinian people;

_______________
4

S/2003/529, annex.
A/60/90-E/2005/80.
6
Available from http://domino.un.org/bertini_rpt.htm.
5

2

A/RES/60/126

4.
Also expresses its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations
bodies and intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental organizations that
have provided and continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian people;
Stresses the importance of the work of the United Nations Special
5.
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority and of the steps taken under the auspices of the Secretary-General to
ensure the achievement of a coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities
throughout the occupied territories;
Urges Member States, international financial institutions of the United
6.
Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
regional and interregional organizations to extend, as rapidly and as generously as
possible, economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people, in close
cooperation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and through official
Palestinian institutions;
Calls upon relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations
7.
system to intensify their assistance in response to the urgent needs of the Palestinian
people in accordance with Palestinian priorities set forth by the Palestinian
Authority;
Calls upon the international community to provide urgently needed
8.
assistance and services in an effort to alleviate the dire humanitarian crisis being
faced by Palestinian children and their families and to help in the reconstruction of
relevant Palestinian institutions;
Urges Member States to open their markets to exports of Palestinian
9.
products on the most favourable terms, consistent with appropriate trading rules,
and to implement fully existing trade and cooperation agreements;
10. Calls upon the international donor community to expedite the delivery of
pledged assistance to the Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs;
11. Stresses, in this context, the importance of ensuring the free passage of
aid to the Palestinian people and the free movement of persons and goods;
12. Welcomes the recent agreement on movement and access between the two
sides and the subsequent opening of the Rafah border on 25 November 2005, and
stresses the need to ensure that the commitments made in the agreement are fully
implemented in accordance with the timeline set out in the agreement;
13. Stresses the need for all concerned parties to work together for the
speedy resolution of all outstanding issues relating to disengagement, and welcomes
in this regard the work of the Quartet Special Envoy for Disengagement;
14. Urges the international donor community, United Nations agencies and
organizations and non-governmental organizations to extend as rapidly as possible
emergency economic and humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people to
counter the impact of the current crisis;
15. Stresses the need to implement the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations
of 29 April 1994, fifth annex to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995, 7
_______________
7

A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex.

3

A/RES/60/126

in particular with regard to the full and prompt clearance of Palestinian indirect tax
revenues, and welcomes the progress made in this regard;
16. Suggests the convening in 2006 of a United Nations-sponsored seminar
on assistance to the Palestinian people;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the
implementation of the present resolution, containing:
(a)
people;

An assessment of the assistance actually received by the Palestinian

(b) An assessment of the needs still unmet and specific proposals for
responding effectively to them;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
sub-item entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
63rd plenary meeting
15 December 2005

4
