292

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/151.

--- .
-----Code and to examine it with the required priority in order
to review it, taking into account the results achieved by the
process of the progressive development of international
law,
Bearing in mind that the International Law Commission
should fulfil its task on the basis of early elaboration of
draft articles thereof,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirty-ninth
session, 12
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the subject, 13
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate on this ítem at the forty-second session, 14
Recognizing the importance and urgency of the subject,
1. Agrees with the recommendation in paragraph 65 of
the report ofthe International Law Commission to amend
the title of this tapie in English, in arder to achieve greater
uniformity and equivalence between different language
versions;
2. Invites the Commission to continue its work on the
elaboration of the draft Code of Crimes against the Peace
and Security of Mankind including the elaboration of a list
of crimes, taking into account the progress made at its
thirty-ninth session, 12 as well as the views expressed during the forty-second session of the General Assembly; 14
3. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States regarding the conclusions contained in
paragraph 69 (e) (i) of the Commission's report on the
work of its thirty-fifth session; 15
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to include
the views received from Member States in accordance
with paragraph 3 above in a report to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind", to be
considered in conjunction with the examination of the report of the International Law Commission.
~---

Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns
for States and for the United Nations and that efforts for
strengthening the process of peaceful settlement of disputes should be continued,
1. Again urges ali States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settlement of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field;
3. Calls upon Member Sta tes to make full use, in accordance with the Charter, ofthe framework provided by the
United Nations for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
international problems;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session a report containing the replies of Member States, relevant United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and interested international legal
bodies on the implementation of the Manila Declaration
on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes and
on ways and means of increasing the effectiveness of this
instrument;
5. Decides that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States shall be considered at its fortythird session as a separate agenda item, in conjunction
with the item of the provisional agenda entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".

Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assemb/y,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations
for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution 177 {II) of 21 November 1947,
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and
security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code ofüffences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International Law Commission and submitted to the General Assembly in 1954, 11
Recal/ing its belief that the elaboration of a code of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and
security and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter,
Recalling also its resolution 36/106 of 10 December
1981, in which it invited the International Law Commission to resume its work with a view to elaborating the draft

11 Official Records of1he General A.,semhly. Ninth Se,.,ion. Suppleme11t
No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

94th p/enary meeting
7 December /987

42/152.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law on the work of its
twentieth session

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification ofthe law ofinternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of ali peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975,

12 Ib,d., Forty-second Se,sion, Supplement No. 10 (A/42/10).
13 A/42/484 and Add. l and 2.
14 See Official Records o_f the General Assembly. Forty-second Session.

Sixth Committee, 35th to 49th and 58th meetings, and corrigendum.
15 /bid .. Thirty-eighrh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/38/10).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification ofinternational trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow ofintemational
trade, especially those affecting the developing countries,
would significantly contribute to universal economic cooperation among ali States on a basis of equality, equity
and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in intemational trade and, thereby, to the well-being
of ali peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing and unifying intemational trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at ali levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying international
trade law,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its twentieth session, 16
Considering that legally sound, balanced and equitable
international contracts for the construction of industrial
works are important for all countries,
Being of the opinion that the Legal Guide on Drawing
U p International Contracts for the Construction of Industrial Works adopted by the Commission at its twentieth
session, 17 which identifies the legal issues to be dealt with
in such contracts and suggests solutions to those issues,
will be helpful to all parties in concluding such contracts,
Noting that the Convention on the Limitation Period in
the International Sale of Goods, of 14 June 1974, 18 will
come into force u pon the deposit of one additional ratification or accession,
Being aware that the United Nations Convention on the
Carriage of Goods by Sea, of 31 March 1978, 19 was prepared at the request of developing countries,
Being convinced that widespread adherence to the conventions emanating from the work of the Commission
would benefit the peoples of all States,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its twentieth session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work and for having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Calls upon the Commission to continue to take account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions conceming the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth 2º and seventh2 1 special sessions;
4. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of intemational trade law, to co-ordinate legal activities in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of intemational trade law,
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commis-

16 ]bid., Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/42/17).
17 /bid., chap. III, sect. A. The Legal Guide was subsequently issued as

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.V.I0.
18 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Prescription
(Limitation) in the Jnternational Sale of Gaods, New York,
20 May-14 June 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.74.V.8),
p. 101.
19 Official Records ofthe United Nations Conjerence on the Carriage of
Goods by Sea, Hamburg, 6-31 March /978 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.80.VIII.1), document A/CONF.89/13, annex l.
2 Resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl).
2 1 Resolution 3362 (S-Vll).

º

293

sion, through its secretariat, should continue to maintain
close co-operation with the other intemational organs and
organizations, including regional organizations, active in
the field of intemational trade law;
5. Reaffirms also the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission concerned with training and assistance in the field of international trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor
seminars and symposia, in particular those organized on a
regional basis, to promote such training and assistance,
and, in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to those regional organizations and institutions which have collaborated with the
secretariat ofthe Commission in organizing regional seminars and symposia in the field of international trade law;
(b) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken by the
Commission and its secretariat to collaborate with other
organizations and institutions in the organization of regional seminars;
(e) Invites Governments, international organizations
and institutions to assist the secretariat ofthe Commission
in financing and organizing regional seminars and symposia, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Invites Governments, the relevant United Nations
organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to
make voluntary contributions to allow the resumption of
the programme of the Commission for the award of fellowships on a regular basis to candidates from developing
countries to enable them to participate in such seminars
and symposia;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the completion by
the Commission of the draft Convention on International
Bilis of Exchange and Intemational Promissory Notes; 22
7. Notes with particular satisfaction the completion
and adoption by the Commission of the Legal Guide on
Drawing Up International Contracts for the Construction
of Industrial W orks;
8. Recommends that all efforts should be made so that
the Legal Guide becomes generally known and available;
9. Invites those States which have not yet done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to the following conventions:
(a) Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of Goods, of 14 June 1974; 18
(b) Protocol amending the Convention on the Limitation Period in the Intemational Sale ofGoods, of 11 April
1980; 23
(e) United Nations Convention on the Carriage of
Goods by Sea, of 31 March 1978; 19
(d) United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods, of 11 April 1980;24
10. Requests the Secretary-General to make increased
efforts to promote the adoption and use of the texts emanating from the work of the Commission and to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report
concerning the status of the conventions;
11. Recommends that the Commission should continue its work on the topics included in its programme of
work;
22 Official Records of the General Assemhly. Nmy-s,,cond Session.
Suf¡Iement No. 17 (A/42/ 17), annex l.
Official Records of the Unized Nations Conference on Contracts far
the International Sale ofGoods, Vienna, JO March-l l Apri/ /980(United
Nations publication, Sales No. F.82. V.5), p. 191.
24 lbid., p. 178.

294

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

12. Expresses its appreciation for the important role
played by the International Trade ~aw Branch of the C::,ffice of Legal Affairs of the Secretanat, as the substantive
secretariat of the Commission, in assisting in the structuring and implementation of the work programme of the
Commission and invites the Secretary-General to consider taking ~hatever measures may be necessary, within
existing resources, to provide the Commission with adequate substantive secretariat support.
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/153.

Draft Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with the object of promoting
the progressive harmonization and unification of the law
of international trade,
Reaffirming its conviction that divergencies arising from
the laws of different States in matters relating to international trade constitute one of the obstacles to the development of world trade,
Being aware that the Commission, at its fourth session in
1971, decided to proceed with work directed towards the
preparation of uniform rules applicable to a special negotiable instrument for optional use in international transactions in order to overcome the divergencies arising out of
the existence oftwo main systems oflaw governing negotiable instruments, 25
Recalling that, in its resolution 41/77 of 3 December
1986, it requested the Commission to complete, at its
twentieth session, the work on the draft Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory Notes 26 and decided to consider the draft Convention
during its forty-second session with a view to its adoption
or other appropriate action,
Taking note of the draft Convention adopted by the
Commission at its twentieth session, 22
Recognizing that Governments should be given sufficient time to study the draft Convention,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the work achieved by
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law in the preparation of the draft Convention on International Bilis of Exchange and International Promissory
Notes;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the attention of ali States to the draft Convention, to ask them to
submit the observations and proposals they wish to make
on the draft Convention before 30 April 1988 and to circulate these observations and proposals to ali Member States
before 30 June 1988;
3. Decides to consider, at its forty-third session, the
draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange and
International Promissory Notes, with a view to its adoption at that session, and to create to this end, in the framework of the Sixth Committee, a working group that will
meet for a maximum period oftwo weeks at the beginning

25 See O./ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixlh Session,
Supp/ement No. 17 (A/8417), chap. 111, sect. A.
26 /bid., Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/41/17), annex l.

of the session, in order to consider the observations and
proposals made by States.
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/154.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representa•
tives

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report ofthe Secretary-General,27
Emphasizing the important r_ole of diplomatic an~ ~onsular missions and representat1ves, as well as of m1ss1ons
and representatives to international interg~we':"men_tal organizations and officials of such orgamzat10ns, 1~ the
maintenance of international peace and the promot1on of
friendly relations among States, and also the need for enhancing global understanding thereof,
Convinced that respect for the principies and rules of international law governing diplomatic and consular relations, in particular those aimed at ensuring t?e inviolability of diplomatic and consular m1ssions and
representatives, is a basic prerequisite for the normal conduct of relations among States and for the fulfilment of the
purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations,
Concerned at the continued failure to respect the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives and at the serious threat presented by such violations
to the maintenance of normal and peaceful international
relations, which are necessary for co-operation among
Sta tes,
A/so concerned at the abuse of diplomatic or consular
privileges and immunities, particularly if acts of violence
are involved,
Alarmed by the acts of violence against diplomatic and
consular representatives, as well as against representatives
to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such organizations, which endanger or take innocent lives and seriously impede the normal work of such
representatives and officials,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of such illegal
acts,
Emphasizing the duty of States to take ali appropriate
steps, as required by international law:
(a) To protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions, as well as of missions to international intergovernmental organizations,
(b) To prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives, as well as on representatives to intemational intergovemmental organizations and officials of
such organizations,
(e) To apprehend the offenders and to bring them to
justice,
Noting that, in spite ofthe call by the General Assembly
at its previous sessions, not all States have yet become parties to the relevant conventions conceming the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Welcoming the measures already taken by States in conformity with their international obligations to enhance the
27 A/42/485 and Add.1-5 and Add.5/Corr. l.
