226

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

at the invitation of the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering
Power,
RecalUng its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 36/62 of 25 November 1981
on the question of five Territories, including Montserrat,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power,2 1
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations to help
the people of Montserrat realize their aspirations in accord­
ance with the objectives set forth in the Declaration,
Recalling that the administering Power has the respon­
sibility to ensure that the people of Montserrat are kept fully
informed of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the Declaration,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size, limited resources and lack
of infrastructure,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Montserrat; 22
i. Approves also the report of the United Nations vis­
iting mission to Montserrat in 1982;20
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Mont­
serrat to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Reiterates the view that such factors as size, geo­
graphical location, size of population and limited natural
resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation
of the process of self-determination in accordance with the
Declaration, which fully applies to Montserrat;
5. Commends, for appropriate action, the conclusions
and recommendations of the visiting mission23 to the Gov­
ernment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and North­
ern Ireland, as the administering Power, and to the
Government of Montserrat;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
visiting mission for the constructive work accomplished and
to the administering Power, the territorial Government, the
Legislative Council and the people of the Territory for the
close co-operation and assistance extended to the mission;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take the nec­
essary measures to promote the political, economic and
social development of Montserrat;
8. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of Montserrat, to launch programmes
of political education so that the people of the Territory may
be fully informed of the options available to them in the
exercise of their right to self-determination and independence;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to inten­
sify and expand its programme of aid in order to accelerate
the development of the economic and social infrastructure
of the Territory;
10. Requests the administering Power, in the light of
the conclusions and recommendations of the visiting mis­
sion, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-seventh Session,
Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras. 64-66.
22 Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I),
chap. XXVIII.
23 A/AC. 100/722, sect. IV.
21

agencies and other organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem, as well as other regional and international bodies, in
the strengthening, development and diversification of the
economy of the Territory;
l l . Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the admin­
istering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem­
bly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/28.

Question of Western Sahara24

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to self­
determination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 De­
cember 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolutions 35/19 of I I November 1980 and
36/46 of 24 November 1981 on the question of Western
Sahara,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,25
Having heard the statements made on the question of
Western Sahara, in particular the statement of the repre­
sentative of the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia
et-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro, 26
Recalling its resolution 36/80 of 9 December 1981 on co­
operation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity,
Recalling all the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity on the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling also the decision of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 24
to 27 June 1981, to organize throughout the Territory of
Western Sahara a general and free referendum on self­
determination, 27
Taking note of the various decisions adopted by the Im­
plementation Committee on Western Sahara of the Organ­
ization of African Unity concerning the establishment of
appropriate machinery to enable the people of Western Sa­
hara to express themselves freely and democratically on their
future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of West­
ern Sahara to self-determination and independence in ac­
cordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity and the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as with
the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the Organization of African Unity;
24 See also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/411.

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev.1), chap. IX.
2• Ibid., Thirtv-seventh Session, Fourth Committee. 20th meeting,
paras. 2-8.
27 See A/36/534, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.103 (XVIII)

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity with a view to promoting a just and definitive solution
to the question of Western Sahara;
3. Remains convinced that only negotiation between
Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Sa­
guia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro could create the objective
conditions for the return of peace in north-west Africa and
would guarantee the fair conduct of a general, free and
orderly referendum on self-determination in Western Sahara;
4. Appeals, to that end, to the two parties to the dispute,
Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Sa­
guia el-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro, to enter into negotiations
with a view to achieving a cease-fire in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 36/46 and the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations to
co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity in
the fair and impartial organization of the referendum;
6. Requests, to that end, the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps to ensure that the United Nations par­
ticipates effectively in the organization and conduct of the
referendum and to report to the General Assembly and the
Security Council on this subject and on the measures re­
quiring a decision by the Council;
7. Urges the Secretary-General to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity with a view to the implementation of the pertinent
decisions of the Organization of African Unity and of the
present resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to continue to consider the situation in Western Sahara as
a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982

37/29. Information from Non-Self-Governing Terri­
tories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Ar­
ticle 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations28 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the question, 29
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to study
the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in ac­
cordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to take such
information fully into account in examining the situation
with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 36/49 of 24 November 1981,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970
(XVIII),
28
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I), chap. VII.
29
A/37/501.

227

Deploring the fact that some Member States having re­
sponsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased to transmit information under Arti­
cle 73 e of the Charter,
l . Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Ar­
ticle 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Terri­
tory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms
of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power con­
cerned should continue to transmit information under Arti­
cle 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the ex­
piration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to dis­
charge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly
resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established pro­
cedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its thirty­
eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982

37/30. Question of East Timor
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to self­
determination and independence in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Dec­
laration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun­
tries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and other relevant United Nations
resolutions,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to East Timor30
and other relevant documents,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
question of East Timor, 31
Taking note of resolution 1982/20 adopted on 8 Septem­
ber 198232 by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Dis­
crimination and Protection of Minorities,
Having heard the statement of the representative of Por­
tugal, 33 as the administering Power,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Indonesia, 34
Having heard the statements of the representative of the
Frente Revolucionaria de Timor Leste lndependente and of
various petitioners, as well as of the representatives of non­
governmental organizations, 35
30
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I), chap. X.
ll
A/37/538.
32
See E/CN.4/1983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1982/43 and Corr.I, chap. XXI.
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 17-19.
4
' Ibid .. 23rd meeting, paras. 22-37.
" Ibid .. 15th-18th meetings.
