A/57/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

50

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 14 November 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hussein
(Ethiopia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in Central America: procedures for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace and
progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/57/384,
A/57/584)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/57/336)
Draft resolution (A/57/L.20)
Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak in my capacity as the Acting
President of the Central American Integration System
(SICA). I would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for the presentation of the report we
are now considering.
The recent history of Central America is a living
example of the timeliness and soundness of the
fundamental principles of the United Nations. Twenty
years ago, when the General Assembly considered this
item for the first time, our region had plunged into a
deep political, economic and military crisis. Some
countries had domestic strife. Large Powers were vying

(Czech Republic)

for control of the region. Various armed groups tried to
seize power. There were hundreds of thousands of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Innumerable
violations of human rights were committed. Illicit
trafficking in arms endangered the entire region.
At that time, the main concern of the international
community was to stop the armed conflict. Twenty
years later, the situation could not be more different.
The region is at peace now. Democracy has been
consolidated. Only last year, free elections were held in
Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. All of our
nations have undergone very deep-rooted political
transformations, as well as economic and social
changes, with a view to promoting economic
development and building more democratic, more just
and more equitable societies. Fundamental rights are
being fully observed.
Today, each one of our countries has a human
rights defender. This radical improvement is due, above
all, to the very strong commitment of our peoples and
Governments to peace, democracy and respect for
human dignity.
The progress achieved, however, would have
been impossible without the continuous political and
economic support of the international community in
general and of this Organization in particular. In the
last two decades, all of the human development
indices — life span, literacy rate, level of education
and gross domestic product (GDP) per capita — have
systematically improved. At the current time, our
Governments are committed to continually improving

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-69281 (E)

*0269281*

A/57/PV.50

these indices through the implementation of social
programmes aimed at alleviating poverty and
unemployment,
improving
public
security,
strengthening the judicial system, consolidating public
administration
and
fighting
corruption.
Our
Governments are, inter alia, making renewed efforts to
combat common crime and transnational organized
crime, which in recent years have menaced the security
of our citizens.
Over the last two decades, our region has enjoyed
some periods of economic growth. However, in the past
year our economies have deteriorated due to an
unfavourable international economic climate and to a
fall in exports. Regrettably, our economies continue to
be highly sensitive to fluctuations in world markets.
For that reason and to ensure sustainable economic
development in the region, our countries are
negotiating a series of trade agreements with our
counterparts outside the region. As well, our countries
are making significant efforts to adapt, strengthen and
further boost the process of Central American
integration, especially in the economic, social, cultural
and tourism sectors.
Our Governments have committed themselves to
combating the availability of, and traffic in, small
arms. A regional meeting was recently held in San
José, Costa Rica, to coordinate implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted at the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. At the conclusion of
the San José meeting, a plan was adopted for national
and regional implementation of that Programme of
Action.
In the area of the environment, our countries are
carrying out efforts to consolidate the Meso-American
Biological Corridor. The Corridor consists of a system
of natural areas under special administration, multipleuse areas and interconnecting areas; its purpose is to
protect biodiversity and to contribute to the quality of
life of the inhabitants.
Unfortunately, Central America is highly
vulnerable to natural disasters. In recent years, we have
been the victim of the devastating hurricanes Mitch,
Keith and Michelle, the earthquakes in El Salvador in
January 2001 and a drought that afflicted the entire
region. Those natural disasters caused the loss of many
human lives and substantial material losses. In
response to those disasters, our Governments adopted a

2

series of measures to reduce risks and to minimize the
effects of natural disasters. Among them are the
adoption of the Strategic Framework for the Reduction
of Vulnerability and Disasters in Central America and
the Central American Five-Year Plan for the Reduction
of Vulnerability to and the Impact of Disasters, 20002004.
Without doubt, the situation in Central America
has improved substantially in the last two decades.
However, the process has not yet been completed. We
must now consolidate the achievements made and must
continue to make progress in the building of societies
that are more just, democratic and peaceful. We trust
that, on this new path, we will be able to continue to
count on the support of the international community,
including the United Nations.
In conclusion, I wish to refer to the draft
resolution on this subject, issued today in document
A/57/L.20. As the principal sponsor, my delegation
welcomes any suggestions for the improvement of this
text and invites all other delegations to join the list of
sponsors. If necessary, we will request the publication
of a revised version.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico shares solid historic, cultural and geographic
links with the Central American countries and gives
high priority to its bilateral relations with each of them,
as well as with the region as a whole. The Government
of Mexico has systematically supported the
Governments and the peoples of Central America in
their efforts to achieve peace and national
reconciliation, to strengthen their democratic
institutions and to achieve post-conflict social and
economic development. That support is reflected in the
great number of concrete bilateral and regional
cooperation activities in the political, scientific and
technical, cultural and educational and economic areas,
as well as in emergency humanitarian assistance.
With respect to regional cooperation, my
delegation wishes to mention the fifth summit of the
Tuxtla dialogue and coordination mechanism, held in
June of this year in Mérida, Mexico. On that occasion,
heads of State or Government of Central America and
Mexico adopted the Mérida Declaration, whose main
goal is to create a Meso-American community of
nations as a means of achieving greater levels of wellbeing and sustainable development in the region,
within a framework of democracy, respect for human

A/57/PV.50

rights and sustained and permanent peace. The leaders,
inter alia, affirmed their support for the Puebla-Panama
Plan, a proposal by Mexico to promote economic
development, with a sustainable regional vision for
strengthening communication links in Central America,
in particular the southern part of my country. As well,
Mexico has actively participated in regional efforts to
create the Meso-American Biological Corridor.
The armed conflicts in Central America have now
been overcome. However, a sustained effort is still
required of the Governments and the peoples of Central
America, with the sustained support of the international
community, to fully meet the commitments of the peace
agreements and so that the root causes of those
conflicts can be dealt with effectively. In that context,
the role of the United Nations has been — and must
continue to be — fundamental.
We have carefully studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central America
(A/57/384) and the specific reports on Guatemala
(A/57/584) and on the work of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
(A/57/336). One can see from the latter two reports
that, although there has been some progress in meeting
the commitments entered into under the peace
agreements, much remains to be done to achieve a
solid, lasting and irreversible peace in Guatemala. In
particular, we are concerned at the increase in human
rights violations, a situation that without doubt
diminishes Guatemalans’ hopes for the peace process.
Mexico considers that the presence of
MINUGUA in Guatemala has been very positive; it has
contributed certainty
and
reliability
to
the
implementation of the peace agreements. This function
has been broadly recognized by all political parties and
by civil society and the people of Guatemala. This is
why my Government, which has been fully committed
to the peace process in Guatemala from the very outset,
supports the request of the Government of Guatemala
that the Mission continue as part of this process until
the end of 2004, bearing in mind the election period
that is approaching and the governmental transition
that is scheduled for 2004. In this respect, my
delegation notes with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA), which recommends extending that
mandate until 31 December 2003, pursuant to a
previous agreement. It also mentions the intention of

the Secretary-General to begin consultations with
Member States of the Organization concerning the
request from Guatemala.
My delegation believes that an extension of the
mandate of the Mission beyond 2003 should be agreed
on, while we clearly establish which tasks the
Government of Guatemala needs to carry out in order
to consolidate the peace process.
We are in consultation with Member States,
especially with friends of the peace process, with
respect to the draft resolution on the renewal of the
mandate of MINUGUA, which traditionally has been
introduced by my delegation. I am confident that in the
coming days we will be able to distribute and submit
the text and we hope that text will be adopted by
consensus.
Concerning consolidation of peace in El
Salvador, my Government acknowledges the efforts of
the Government of El Salvador in fulfilling the final
commitments under the peace agreement so that the
United Nations might conclude its work of verification
of that process before the end of this year. In this
regard, Mexico welcomes the measures adopted by the
Government of El Salvador in order that the fund for
the war victims is adequately established. As the
headquarters of the peace agreement a decade ago and
a friend of the peace process, Mexico supports the
aspiration of the Government of El Salvador to end this
period in a successful way and as quickly as possible.
Likewise, the Government of Mexico is
encouraged by the efforts undertaken by the
Governments of Guatemala and Belize within the
Organization of American States to find a solution to
the territorial dispute between those two countries. This
is an example for the region and shows again that
differences of this nature can be solved through
negotiation.
To conclude, let me reiterate the commitment
made by my Government to work actively with each
one of the brother countries of the region for the sake
of long-lasting peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It
is my honour to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the Secretary-General for the presentation
of the report on the situation in Central America, as
well as the thirteenth report on human rights of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala

3

A/57/PV.50

(MINUGUA). The contribution made by the United
Nations in Central America during the last decade has
led to important achievements that are reflected in the
growing strength of the democratic institutions and the
consolidation of peace, as well as the promotion and
respect for human rights in Central America. The
report on the situation in Central America mentions all
of this and this is why I would like to point out that
these results have led to a visible improvement in the
living conditions in large areas of Central America
previously afflicted by long years of armed conflict and
whose current and future populations, especially those
who belong to the most vulnerable sectors, can now
look to the future with promise.
Two decades have already passed since we began
the peace process in Central America and indeed from
the very outset Colombia was permanently attentive to
the unfolding of that process, not as a passive observer
but as a friendly country profoundly interested in
stimulating and supporting a firm and long lasting
peace. It might seem paradoxical that a nation like
mine, which has been confronting a domestic conflict
for over four decades now, is trying at the same time to
find solutions to achieve peace in other areas. But
reality has shown that accompanying others during a
peace process enriches one’s own vision of peace and
allows us to complement the efforts of others and the
application of models that have some elements in
common within their individual conditions and
realities. So please allow me to reiterate the very strong
commitment of my country to the consolidation of a
long-lasting peace in Central America, faced with the
need to promote profound transformations that will
lead to economic and social development in the region.
Colombia, as a member of the group of friends of
Guatemala, recognizes the very strong efforts made by
our brother country, Guatemala, in fulfilling the
conditions of the peace agreement, as well as the
preponderant role that MINUGUA has played in this.
Continuing the presence of MINUGUA in Guatemala
means an essential guarantee to reach the objectives
that have been proposed since the peace was signed.
Colombia believes in the commitment of the people
and Government of Guatemala to fulfil the peace
agreement conditions. This is why we support the
request to extend the mandate of MINUGUA beginning
1 January 2003.
Concerning El Salvador, we would highlight the
efforts that have led the Government to conclude its

4

fulfilment of the peace agreement, which means a true
advance toward new stages of coexistence and progress
in this country. As a member of the group of friends of
the Secretary-General, we would likewise reiterate the
need to have the Secretary-General formalize the final
moment of verification here. If we do not have this
final touch, we will be maintaining a situation of
uncertainty for no good reason.
Mr. Flores (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Denmark spoke earlier on behalf of
the European Union, and my delegation fully supports
his statement. Nevertheless, in the light of the very
close ties that bind my country to the region, and
because Spain belongs to the Group of Friends of
Central America and Guatemala, I should like to make
some additional remarks.
Spain is pleased that the political and economic
dialogue between the European Union and Central
America is continuing to make headway, as was
confirmed by the Ministerial Conference held last May
at Madrid under the presidency of Spain. At that
Conference, the countries of the region made a
commitment to consolidate integration, democracy and
social and economic advances. Spain will continue,
both within the European Union and in other forums, to
make every effort to support those objectives.
The progress made in the negotiations on the
territorial dispute between Guatemala and Belize, the
efforts undertaken by President Bolaños of Nicaragua,
and, above all, the tenth anniversary of the signing of
the El Salvador peace agreements, which we will
commemorate this year, give us considerable grounds
for hope in this respect. However, a great deal remains
to be done.
Spain would like at the outset to thank the
Secretary-General for the quality and timeliness of the
reports submitted by the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA), whose regional
deployment is playing an especially effective role in
the follow-up to the implementation of the peace
agreements in Guatemala.
In this respect, however, we note with regret the
overall deterioration of the situation in the country this
past year, especially in the area of human rights, as was
noted by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mrs. Hilani.

A/57/PV.50

Our country views with deep concern the
continuing threats and extortion attempts against
persons and institutions working for the defence of
human rights; the lack of progress made on the
Agreement on the Identity and Rights of Indigenous
Peoples; and the re-emergence of civil defence patrols.
We are particularly concerned at the growing climate of
impunity, as was evidenced by the overturning of the
Gerardi convictions and the legal problems related to
the application of the death penalty, the promised
moratorium on which has not yet been implemented.
Spain is nevertheless confident that the
commitment undertaken by President Portillo before
the General Assembly last September with respect to
the implementation of all aspects of the peace
agreements will become a reality. Our country is aware
of the efforts made by President Portillo to promote
national reconciliation, which have led to recent
legislative advances in specific areas, such as
decentralization and racial discrimination. Our
Government supports those fully.
Throughout this process, MINUGUA has
provided invaluable assistance. Spain deems it
advisable that next year the Mission draw up a
transition plan identifying the Guatemalan institutions
and organizations that would take over MINUGUA’s
functions. Given this necessary transition and the fact
that general elections will be held in the country at the
end of the next year, Spain would suggest an extension
of MINUGUA’s mandate beyond the end of 2003,
along with a gradual reduction of its staff, with a view
to facilitating the transition process and ensuring the
initial stability of the incoming Government.
Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The item on the situation in Central America
has been under consideration by the General Assembly
since 1983, at a time when the region was in the throes
of a political crisis. Internal conflicts in certain
countries had not only led to instability and
confrontation within and among the countries of the
region, but had also become a factor for confrontation
within the context of the cold war — a situation that
was in turn negatively affecting the economic and
social development of the peoples of Central America.
Today, nearly two decades later, we are pleased at
the positive outcome of the efforts deployed to address
the situation: the decision of the Central American
Governments to shoulder their responsibilities towards

their peoples; the assistance of the United Nations; and
the solidarity, support and cooperation of the
international community, in particular that of friendly
countries, all of which have an interest in seeing peace
and stability take root in Central America.
The positive evolution of the situation in Central
America has been reflected annually in the reports
submitted by the Secretary-General on that item, in
particular since 1987, when the General Assembly
expressed its support for the agreement on “Procedure
for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in
Central America”, signed on 7 August 1987, and
requested the Secretary-General to provide his support
and good offices to the Governments of the region to
achieve those objectives — a mandate that was fully
reaffirmed and supported by the Security Council in
1989. Those resolutions became the basis for a greater
involvement on the part of the United Nations in the
quest to resolve Central American problems.
The complex and difficult process of
peacemaking in Central America has led to substantive
changes that have benefited the peoples of the region,
which today enjoy greater freedom and democracy and
whose human rights and fundamental freedoms are
better safeguarded. In the economic and social fields,
Governments are working to expand opportunities from
the perspective of human-centred national development
programmes.
However, as the Secretary-General stated in his
most recent report on the situation in Central America,
it must be noted that the peoples and the Governments
of the region continue to face serious challenges,
which, although they are not exclusive to our countries,
must be addressed with the same intensity and priority
that were accorded to the resolution of the Central
American crisis and of the internal conflicts. This will
enable us to avoid any delay in achieving our goals and
to take advantage of our resources and our potential, in
order to continue to promote the development and
consolidation of the democratic institutions — those
resulting from the peace process as well as others —
that are necessary to enhance the quality of life of our
peoples.
The support of the United Nations and of the
international community will be pivotal in this respect,
because while we must continue to combat those
structural factors that led to the political and military
crisis, we are doing so with limited financial and

5

A/57/PV.50

natural resources, dealing all the while with the
consequences of natural disasters. It will always be
helpful for our own efforts to be complemented by
assistance, in order to minimize not only the region’s
vulnerability to the forces of nature but also the
negative conditions resulting from an international
economic environment that is affecting the primary
economies of the countries of the region, and in order
to consolidate the objectives of peace, freedom,
democracy and development.
I should like to refer to a specific aspect of the
situation of my country that is linked to the
implementation of the Peace Agreements.
During the 1980s — a period that could be called
the “lost decade”, as far as the political, economic and
social development of our people is concerned — El
Salvador was involved in an internal armed conflict
that fortunately came to an end with the signing of the
El Salvador Peace Agreements on 16 January 1992.
The implementation of the provisions of those
Agreements was verified and monitored by the United
Nations — a process that began even earlier, in 1991,
when the United Nations began a limited operation to
verify the San José Agreement on Human Rights,
which was subsequently incorporated into the Peace
Agreements.
The transition from war to peace provided a
stimulus for the Salvadoran people. During that
transition period they had to fully implement all of the
commitments undertaken in the Peace Agreements and
set out again on the path towards normal living
conditions, free from the fear and violence that had
profoundly affected all elements of society.
We firmly believe — and our conviction is shared
by friendly countries that directly participated in or
closely followed the development of the peace process
in El Salvador — that by the tenth anniversary of the
signing of the Peace Agreements, on 16 January this
year, the commitments and obligations set out in those
Agreements had been fully discharged.
In that context, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s comments that we have reached the final
stage of the United Nations verification process in El
Salvador. This can now be formalized with the
confirmation of the commitment to the efficient and
effective functioning of the Fund for the Wounded and
War-Disabled — the final outstanding issue relating to
the verification process.

6

It is important to reaffirm the political will shown
by the Government of El Salvador during the entire
process of implementing of the Peace Agreements and
to provide information about the measures taken in this
respect, with the approval by the Republic of a law and
the consequent allocation of financial resources from
the national budget for the adequate functioning of the
Fund for the Wounded and War-Disabled, which will
provide assistance to the beneficiaries.
It should be pointed out — and this is
encouraging — that the report of the Secretary-General
is able to conclude that the situation in El Salvador
continues to evolve positively. Although not all of our
problems have been resolved, there is no doubt that a
very profound transformation has taken place within
Salvadoran society itself, in particular as a result of the
will and efforts of the people and the Government of El
Salvador, as well as the interested political forces that
want to establish a peaceful, democratic, just and
equitable society.
We would like to stress that we have been able to
rely on the unconditional support of the international
community and the United Nations, and we express
heartfelt thanks to them. We would like in particular to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, as well
as to his predecessors, and to all of the personnel of the
United Nations who in one way or another participated
in the verification effort. We are confident that they
will be able to continue their excellent work where it is
required in other parts of the world.
In conclusion, my Government would like to
reaffirm its steadfast commitment and determination to
continue along the road towards the consolidation of a
society in harmony — one that works for the economic
and social progress not only of all the people of El
Salvador, but also of the whole of Central America.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My colleague, Ambassador Bruno Stagno of Costa
Rica, has already spoken on behalf of all of the
countries members of the Central American Integration
System and, of course, we fully associate ourselves
with his statement. I will therefore limit myself to
speaking exclusively about the situation of Guatemala
and, in particular, the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA).
In this respect, I would like first of all to thank
the Secretary-General for having submitted the reports

A/57/PV.50

contained in documents A/57/384 and A/57/584. I
should also like to thank the Group of Friends of the
peace process in Guatemala, who, as the representative
of Mexico stated earlier, are preparing a draft
resolution to be introduced shortly at this meeting. I
should like in particular to acknowledge the work of
the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United
Nations, whose officials are coordinating the
consultations on that draft resolution.
In recent years, at about this time, we have
considered the situation in Central America in general
and the situation in Guatemala in particular. As the
Assembly is aware, MINUGUA has been operating in
my country since 1994. Its original objective was to
verify compliance with an agreement on human rights,
but its mandate was widened in 1997 to include support
for parties that had signed the Peace Agreements in
December 1996 by carrying out tasks in the areas of
verification, facilitation, public information and good
offices.
Those Agreements are a work in progress,
characterized by advances, as well as by shortcomings
and even by setbacks. The presence of MINUGUA in
Guatemala has been a vital element in that process.
Speaking in this Hall in September during the third
plenary meeting, President Alfonso Portillo paid tribute
to the role of the Mission, calling it the “critical
conscience of the State”.
Given the delay in the implementation of the
Peace Agreements that became apparent during 2000,
as a result of a number of factors whose origin and
scope are described in the reports that the SecretaryGeneral has periodically submitted to us, it was
decided that the mandate of MINUGUA should be
extended until the end of 2003, with its functions being
progressively transferred to national entities or, where
possible, to other United Nations bodies. That process
is now under way, and the size of the Mission has been
progressively reduced year by year with a view to its
final withdrawal.
We have before us a number of reports of the
Secretary-General that provide an account of the
current status of the implementation of the Peace
Agreements. Among them, I should like to mention the
seventh report on the verification of compliance with
the peace agreements (A/56/1003); the thirteenth report
on human rights (A/57/336); the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central America,

already cited; the report of the Secretary-General on
the renewal of the mandate of MINUGUA (A/57/584);
and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of Olara Otunnu, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict (A/57/402), which
contains an account of Mr. Otunnu’s visit to Guatemala
from 24 to 28 February this year.
Together, those reports present a mixed picture of
progress in some areas and of stagnation and even
setbacks in others. Although we think that some of the
reports — especially that concerning the situation in
Central America — underestimate the progress, we
recognize that shortfalls in compliance with the peace
agreements have been accumulating and that many of
the objectives originally pursued are far from being
attained. Some of the areas in which setbacks have
been observed relate precisely to sensitive matters,
such as respect for human rights and the strengthening
of civil society.
This is not the time to apportion blame for the
less than satisfactory picture before us. Certainly, the
Government led by President Alfonso Portillo has
acknowledged its share of blame, related less to
intentions than to the implementation of commitments.
It must also be pointed out that the dynamic of the
process has persistently generated resistance on the
part of various pressure groups that have felt
themselves to be adversely affected by particular
actions. Moreover, in certain circles, recalcitrant
attitudes persist with regard to much-needed
reconciliation. Equally noteworthy are the surrounding
circumstances: an economy very adversely affected by
external factors — particularly by the falling prices of
basic commodities — that result in high unemployment
and in pressures on public-sector finances. Such
pressures make it difficult to meet the financial
implications of the commitments undertaken.
At any rate, although all participants in the
process have reaffirmed their full alignment with the
agreements, the fact is that many tasks remain
outstanding. They have been organized and
rescheduled by the parties signatory to the process, in
broad consultation with civil society. The tasks to be
accomplished in the period 1997-2000, and
subsequently envisaged for the period 2001-2003,
apparently will not be completed. But at least it is
intended that they be reinvigorated, as agreed during
the most recent meeting of the Consultative Group,
held at Washington in February, whose work is

7

A/57/PV.50

summarized in two recent reports on progress with
regard to follow-up. For all of those reasons, it is
essential to extend the presence of the Verification
Mission.
But there is more: under the current scheme, the
Mission would be withdrawn just as the current
Administration concludes its term at the end of 2003,
in a transitional period during which it would be
desirable to maintain a United Nations presence in
Guatemala for an additional year — that is, through
2004 — to ensure that the logic of the peace
agreements continues into the future. That is why,
when President Alfonso Portillo addressed the
Assembly on 12 September, during the general debate,
he pointed out:
“My Government’s term of office will
expire in a little over a year, by which time the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA) will be planning to withdraw. The
Mission has played a fundamental role as the
critical conscience of the State and has actively
supported the fundamental changes that have
taken place. We appreciate the work that it has
done and we would like here to request the
extension of its mandate to the end of 2004 so
that it may accompany us as we make the
transition to a new Administration. Our hope is
that MINUGUA will hand over its functions in an
orderly manner to national bodies and, where
appropriate, to the programmes and agencies of
the United Nations.” (A/57/PV.3, p. 8)
Moreover, not only the Government is requesting
a United Nations presence for a limited additional
period. For example, at last month’s intersectoral
roundtable on dialogue, the culture of peace and
reconciliation, chaired by the Archbishop of Guatemala
and attended by more than 200 representatives of civil
society organizations, many statements to that effect
were heard. Along the same lines, Special
Representative Olara Otunnu, states in his report, after
noting what he describes as the very positive effects of
MINUGUA, that there is “widespread concern,
particularly within civil society, about the plans not to
extend MINUGUA beyond the end of 2003” (A/57/402,
para. 20).
Finally, we are aware of the practical and, above
all, budgetary difficulties that the extension of
MINUGUA would entail. But, I must emphasize that

8

we are proposing to extend, not to perpetuate, its
presence. As we have previously pointed out, we
accept the idea of a gradual and progressive reduction
of the Mission’s personnel, followed by its final
withdrawal. We do not think it would be inconsistent
with that policy to envisage withdrawal at the end of
2004 rather than of 2003, particularly if we take into
account the fact that we would be contemplating a very
reduced presence in the final year compared with the
previous years. Therefore, we trust that the States
members of the Assembly will join us in our aspiration,
which will enable us to capitalize on the Organization’s
considerable investment in effort and resources to
support Guatemalans in the consolidation of their
process of peace, democracy and development.
Mr. Brown (United States): Today we are here to
address an important item, “The Situation in Central
America: procedures for the establishment of a firm
and lasting peace and progress in fashioning a region
of peace, freedom, democracy and development.” The
situations are different in each of the countries of the
region, but all are of vital importance to the United
States, as Central America is tied intimately to our
country by geography, history and, most importantly,
people. We have welcomed large numbers of Central
Americans into the United States and we value the
productive contributions they make to our society and
the ties of kinship they have forged between our
nations.
In the past year, the nations of the region have
made significant progress on a set of objectives that
serves to bind them together. Economic integration is
deepening, bringing with it a series of important
benefits. The United States has announced its intention
to embark upon free trade agreement negotiations with
the region. This agreement, when concluded, will have
an enormous positive impact on the region’s economic
growth and development.
We applaud the completion of the facilitation
process between Belize and Guatemala, under the
auspices of the Organization of American States and
with a significant contribution from Honduras, on their
centuries-old border dispute. We note with concern,
however, remaining border disputes in the region and
urge Central American nations to resolve border issues
for the greater good of the region and its inhabitants.
Central America is an example to the world of
what can be accomplished when nations unite in

A/57/PV.50

common goals. Not many years ago, the region was
rife with bloody civil wars. Today, civilian authorities
are firmly in control of all of the armed forces, which
continue to professionalize and to find more
constructive roles in society, such as disaster relief and
assisting with border security. The Salvadoran peace
accords of 1992 have come to a successful conclusion
and we urge the Secretary-General to formally
recognize that fact.
In Guatemala, though there has been progress in
the peace process that began in 1996, much more
remains to be accomplished, especially in the human
rights and military reform areas. We endorse the
recommendation that the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala remain to monitor progress
through 2004.
Despite the many advances, the region still has a
great deal of work to do. The Governments realize that
corruption is a cancer that affects the entire society and
literally takes food out of the mouths of hungry
children. Intimately tied to corruption is the emergence
of transnational criminals in the region. We urge the
nations to participate fully in the Inter-American
Convention
Against
Corruption’s
Follow-Up
Mechanism, reduce impunity and go after corruption in
their ranks. We ask each nation to redouble its efforts
in the fight against international criminal organizations
and the illegal, illicit transfer of arms, drugs and human
beings. Each country should sign and ratify the
remaining international anti-terrorism treaties.
We are pleased with the successes of the past and
look forward to the new millennium with great hope,
pledging to work hand in hand with the countries of
Central America on all issues of mutual interest.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolution A/57/L.20 will be taken at a later date.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 30 (continued)
The role of the United Nations in promoting a new
global human order

Draft resolution (A/57/L.10)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
30 at its forty-third plenary meeting on Monday, 4
November 2002.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/57/L.10, the
following countries have become sponsors: Benin,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
the Gambia, Jordan, Lebanon, Mali and Zimbabwe.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/57/L.10. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution
(resolution 57/12).

A/57/L.10

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 30?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 167
South American zone of peace and cooperation
Draft resolution (A/57/L.7)
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On 27
July 2002, the South American presidents, meeting in
Guayaquil, Ecuador, decided to declare the South
American subregion a zone of peace and cooperation.
The South American zone of peace and
cooperation is not similar to the zones of peace that the
non-aligned countries declared during the cold war to
free some regions from the East-West conflict. The
zones of peace of that time were directed towards
rejecting the rivalries among the super-Powers and
their blocs. Even better, the South American Zone of
Peace and Cooperation is oriented to reject any
hypothesis of war-like conflict among the South
American democracies.
The empirical experience of contemporary
international relations shows that democracies do not
promote armed conflicts among themselves. In this
context, the South American democracies want to
consolidate this tendency by means of the South
American Zone of Peace and Cooperation.

9

A/57/PV.50

In its first stage, the zone of peace and
cooperation would be aimed at promoting transparency
and fostering confidence-building measures relating to
defence and security among the South American
countries, including the eradication of weapons of mass
destruction, of anti-personnel mines and the illicit trade
in small and light weapons. Later on, in Peru’s view,
the zone of peace and cooperation would proceed to an
effective and gradual limitation of defence
expenditures and then to a further complex stage —
that being, disarmament.
This zone of peace is not a geopolitical objective
in itself. Its ultimate goal should be to release resources
with the aim of reducing poverty in South America,
since poverty is imperilling the democratic
Governments of our countries.
The South American zone of peace would also
serve to create a favourable atmosphere for cooperation
and to confront jointly the evils of terrorism, drug
trafficking, organized crime and subversion against
democracy, all of which are today’s main threats to
sub-regional security.
Since the General Assembly has already been
informed about the objectives of this zone of peace and
cooperation, I would now like to present draft
resolution A/57/L.7, entitled “South American zone of
peace and cooperation”. In its preambular paragraphs,
the draft mentions the regional and subregional efforts
that are the basis for the proposed zone of peace and
cooperation. It recognizes the firm intent of the States
of South America, taking into account the security
needs of each country, to adopt measures to contribute
to an effective and gradual limitation of defence
expenditures in the region, with the aim of having more
resources available for the economic and social
development of their peoples.
This is a very important issue, because by
fostering trust, transparency and the control of military
expenditure, we are seeking to prevent the risk of a
new arms race in the subcontinent. Furthermore, the
cost of the latest generation of technological weapons
and equipment is nearly inaccessible and — why not
say so — even immoral, in light of the social demands
of our countries. This goal, far from being utopian, is a
realistic and sensible approach.
In the first operative paragraph, the General
Assembly welcomes the declaration of the South
American region as a zone of peace and cooperation.

10

This aspect is important, because the declaration shows
the praiseworthy effort that seeks to contribute to
reinforcing international peace and security at this
critical moment when the international community is
threatened by international terrorism and by the
proliferation and development of weapons of mass
destruction.
The subsequent operative paragraphs commend
and welcome the commitments included in the
declaration of the zone of peace, such as the decision to
ban the use, or threat of use of force among the South
American States, the proscription of weapons of mass
destruction, the eradication of anti-personnel mines in
the region, the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons, the fostering of transparency and the gradual
limitation on arms purchases.
Finally, the last operative paragraph calls upon
the States of the international community to contribute
to and cooperate with the objectives set forth in the
declaration regarding a South American zone of peace
and cooperation.
The South American countries hope that this draft
resolution, which is a subregional contribution to
international peace and security, will be approved by
consensus by this Assembly.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation takes special pleasure in
expressing its full support for the draft resolution
contained in document A/57/L.7 under agenda item
167, “South American zone of peace and cooperation”.
Ecuador and the other countries of South America
base their international relations on the strictest respect
for the norms and principles that are part of the legal
tradition and, among others, those set forth in the
United Nations Charter and the Organization of
American States (OAS). Hence, the strengthening of
peace and security and peaceful settlement of disputes,
the defence and promotion of human rights, nonintervention in domestic affairs of other States,
regional integration and harmonious development of
our peoples are genuine pillars of our legal tradition
and our role in the international community.
Over 30 years ago, the Andean countries began
the first subregional integration process in Latin
America. To date we have substantially moved

A/57/PV.50

forward, and today Andean integration covers all
aspects of life in the society — trade in goods and
services; free circulation of people and capital;
harmonization of macro-economic policies; physical
integration; migration; the social dimension; and,
naturally, a common foreign policy.
In this respect, the Andean Commitment to Peace,
Security and Cooperation contained in the Declaration
of Galapagos of 17 December 1989, as well as the
Lima Commitment and Andean Charter for Peace and
Security, adopted in June 2002, are instruments that
guide our external policies and which underscore our
decision to live in peace. Our vision is shared by the
international community and our unequivocal decision
to cooperate in the benefit of development and the
well-being of our peoples.
As regards South American regional issues, we
have sponsored the setting up of a free trade zone
between the Andean community and the Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR), as well as
strengthening and deepening relations between the two
subregional associations. In that context, the Brasilia
Communiqué, endorsed at the first meeting of the
Presidents of South America in 2000, and the
conclusions of the first meeting of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Andean Community,
MERCOSUR and Chile, held in La Paz last year, are
particularly relevant to defining a common vision that
establishes the foundation and actions for creating a
South American zone of peace and cooperation.
Threats to international peace and security and to
democratic stability and the monitoring of human
rights by their very nature are different at the beginning
of the twenty-first century. Armed conflicts between
States and regular armies occur less frequently today,
but terrorism, organized crime, drug-trafficking and
ethnic and religious violence, underdevelopment,
poverty and extreme inequality and social injustice are
serious dangers that must be confronted jointly by all
members of the international community in order to
make progress in building a more secure, just and
united world.
During the second meeting of the Presidents of
South America, held in Guayaquil on 27 July 2002, a
Declaration on a South American zone of peace and
cooperation was adopted. It is undoubtedly a historic
event that reflects the best traditions of understanding
and peaceful coexistence between the peoples of the

region. The South American peace zone, whose basis,
mechanisms and guidelines are clearly reflected in the
draft resolution before us today, is the expression of
our firm decision to live in peace, confront threats to
international peace jointly and cooperate effectively for
the harmonious development of our peoples within a
framework of democracy and social justice.
In conclusion, I wish to refer to an issue of
special interest and significance to my country that
rightly illustrates the positive direction of the relations
and effective cooperation between the peoples of our
region. Four years ago, through a long process of
peaceful negotiation, with the participation of
Argentina, Brazil, Chile and the United States, Ecuador
and Peru resolved the territorial dispute that had
divided them since independence. Today, our countries
are experiencing a period of mutual cooperation.
Increased trade, closer political, cultural and
diplomatic links, a common view of problems of the
contemporary world, faith in law, commitment to
regional integration and the fostering of confidence are
singularly strong in our bilateral relations at the
beginning of the twenty-first century. The real benefits
of peace, security and cooperation are limitless.
Mr. Moura (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Brazil
welcomes Peru’s introduction of the Declaration
regarding a South American zone of peace and
cooperation, adopted by the Presidents of South
America.
Meeting at Guayaquil in July 2002, the Presidents
reaffirmed our belief in democratic values and
principles and in the defence of human rights, essential
to advancing the structuring process, and in a common
South American space. They also reaffirmed the
necessary commitment to the main principles of this
Organization: the search for peaceful solutions to
conflicts and the prohibition of the use or threat of use
of force.
The Guayaquil Consensus, a corollary to a
process begun by the Presidents of South America at
Brasilia in 2000, recognizes the importance of
expanding and strengthening the regional infrastructure
as a basic factor in the integration of the economic area
of South America and in the development of its
countries. In that context, the Presidents recognized
that the interrelationship between infrastructure and
development must be explored within the context of the
principle of open regionalism, based on the results of

11

A/57/PV.50

the analysis of five basic principles: a geo-economic
perspective, social sustainability, economic efficiency,
environmental
sustainability
and
institutional
development.
Convinced that the physical integration of the
South American area will optimize the mobilization of
the region’s immense economic potential, the
Presidents agreed to strengthen and expand South
American integration processes through active policies
to accelerate economic growth in a sustainable manner,
reduce external vulnerability, improve the distribution
of wealth and reduce poverty levels in the region.
The Declaration regarding a South American
zone of peace and cooperation, which we are
considering today, is framed within that context. It
expresses the dedication and aspiration of our peoples
to achieve a fruitful future of peaceful coexistence,
lasting cooperation and well-being.
The Declaration regarding a zone of peace and
cooperation in South America places into context our
political willingness to continue to carry out actions of
coordination and cooperation with a view to shaping a
joint South American area.
The basic postulates that mark our region’s
trajectory in the area of disarmament and nonproliferation, which were already part of many regional
initiatives and subregional documents, are reaffirmed
in that document: the prohibition of all weapons of
mass destruction, including nuclear ones, the
commitment to establish a regime for the gradual total
eradication of anti-personnel landmines and the
decisive effort to implement the recommendations of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons.
The Guayaquil Declaration is the fruit of a
lengthy and ongoing process of dialogue between our
countries on bilateral and subregional bases that has
enabled us to build an atmosphere of trust and stability.
Examples of that process are the Declaration of
MERCOSUR, Bolivia and Chile as a Zone of Peace,
adopted at Ushuaia in 1998, the Declaration of
Galapagos of 1989 and the Lima Commitment of 2002,
which created the Andean region zone of peace.
Brazil is proud to belong to a region that is free
of international conflicts and has also consistently had
one of the lowest levels of military expenditure, which
is basically directed at replacing obsolete equipment.

12

Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the fact that the General Assembly is
taking up the Declaration regarding a South American
zone of peace and cooperation, adopted at Guayaquil,
Ecuador, on 27 July 2002.
This Declaration is an annex to the Guayaquil
Consensus, by which the Presidents of South America
drew up an ambitious plan of physical integration,
modernization and development of subregional
infrastructure in an area where weapon expenditures
are among the lowest in the world.
The countries of the subregion have been
developing an intensive effort aimed at consolidating,
through confidence-building measures, a very friendly
and productive relationship. That is part of the change
in our concept of international security, which has been
taking place since our countries regained their
democratic institutions.
In that regard, we understand security to represent
that which allows for the consolidation of basic values,
such as representative democracy, respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and
trade liberalization. This new concept of security,
together with the processes for regional and
subregional integration, have changed the security
framework and have enabled us to see a neighbour no
longer as a potential enemy or competitor but as a
friend and partner, eliminating possible conflicts.
Argentina was a pioneer in the promotion of that
kind of initiative, whose objective is to establish in the
region a new dialogue with a cooperative focus. There
is no doubt about the importance of peace in the
process of physical, economic and trade integration.
The zone of peace of MERCOSUR, Bolivia and Chile,
adopted in Ushuaia, Argentina in 1998, represents an
especially significant precedent in the creation of an
environment of peaceful and cooperative security in the
Southern Cone.
The declaration of a South American Zone of
Peace and Cooperation reflects once more, this time
comprehensively and in a political document, the
various commitments already assumed by the countries
in the subregion through legal instruments. It is our
intention to continue working on the consolidation and
promotion of those commitments in the framework of
dialogue in the Committee on Hemispheric Security of
the Organization of American States, which is

A/57/PV.50

responsible for the analysis and consideration of all
issues related to security in the hemisphere.

the overall well-being of our peoples and of the region
as a whole.

Mr. Talbot (Guyana): Guyana is pleased to join
sister South American republics in co-sponsoring draft
resolution A/57/L.7, on the South American zone of
peace and cooperation. We welcome and support the
timely initiative of the delegation of Peru to include
this item on the agenda of the present session of the
General Assembly.

We therefore look forward to the contribution and
cooperation of States of other regions in the
achievement of the objectives of the declaration on a
South American zone of peace and cooperation.

At Guayaquil, on 27 July of this year, the leaders
of our continent, recalling the commitment adopted in
the Brasilia Communiqué of 1 September 2000 to
create a South American zone of peace, declared South
America to be a zone of peace and cooperation. They
further declared, inter alia, that
“in South America the use of, or the threat
of the use of, force between States shall be
banned, in keeping with the principles and
provisions of the United Nations Charter and of
the Charter of the Organization of American
States.”
The adoption of that Declaration represents an
important milestone in the relations of the countries of
South America. It is a historical decision in the best
tradition of understanding and peaceful coexistence
among the peoples of the region.
In its implementation, our countries face many
common challenges, not least of which is the
deleterious impact on our societies of persistent
poverty and inequality, transnational crime, the illicit
trade in drugs and in small arms and light weapons and
the threat of international terrorism. These all threaten
to nullify the hard-won freedoms and most cherished
values of our peoples. They must be confronted with
determination and resolve.
The challenges to which I refer will be
surmounted only through the fullest and most effective
cooperation of all concerned. Through declaring South
America as a zone of peace and cooperation, the
leaders of our continent have made a solemn
commitment to create conditions necessary for success
in addressing these challenges.
My Government subscribes fully to the objectives
set forth in the Guayaquil Declaration. We stand ready
to cooperate fully with all countries in the region and
beyond to promote peace, security, development and

Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution before the General Assembly today, entitled
“South American zone of peace and cooperation”, is
directly and closely related to the fundamental
concepts underlying the very existence and reason for
being of the United Nations.
The Preamble to the Charter of the Organization
states that one of its purposes is “to practice tolerance
and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours, and to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security”. It then adds as a
fundamental purpose “the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples”.
At the second meeting of Presidents of South
America, held in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on 26 and 27
July 2002, devoted to the approval of the Guayaquil
Consensus on Integration, Security and Infrastructure
for Development, the South American heads of State,
in accordance with the aforementioned purposes of the
Charter, issued a formal declaration establishing South
America as a zone of peace and cooperation. As the
declaration of the Presidents states, this is a historic act
reflecting the best tradition of understanding and
peaceful coexistence among the peoples of the region
and is intended to become an integral part of a concrete
reality in South America.
Cooperation for peace and the development of
common actions in the area of security are necessary to
ensure and to maintain the pace of progress towards
political, economic and social integration among the
countries of South America and to further the
development and well-being of the peoples.
Ongoing
dialogue,
whether
bilateral
or
multilateral, has been fundamental for creating, on
solid bases, a climate of growing transparency and trust
that preserves and ensures peace and friendship among
our peoples. That was made especially clear in those
moments when our democratic institutions were put to
the test as a result of the economic crises that have
afflicted many countries in our region.

13

A/57/PV.50

The regions of Latin America and the Caribbean
in general, and South America in particular, have
persevered in their commitment to peace and security,
as demonstrated by the multiple bilateral and
subregional initiatives of trust and cooperation. Some
of those experiences are truly unprecedented, such as
the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, at the request of the
Governments of Argentina and Chile, on a standardized
common methodology for the measurement of defence
spending of the two countries.
We note with satisfaction that this programme,
also known as a standardizing methodology for defence
expenditures, has been received with interest by other
countries in our region, leading to conversations for
developing similar efforts. Based on the existence and
implementation of common methodologies for the
accounting of defence spending, it is possible to
optimize the common efforts aimed at rationalizing and
reducing expenses of this type, generating greater
confidence and transparency at the bilateral,
subregional and regional levels.
Peace and development are two notions that are
indissolubly linked. The South American Presidents,
upon subscribing to the Guayaquil Consensus on
Integration,
Security
and
Infrastructure
for
Development and, in that context, declaring South
America to be a zone of peace and cooperation, did
nothing more than to recognize that the threats,
concerns and other challenges to the peace and security
of nations are of a varied nature and multidimensional
scope, including political, economic, social, health and
environmental aspects, among others, that go far
beyond the traditional military aspect of the question.
From this multidimensional perspective, military
institutions, in conjunction with civil society, have an
important role to play in building a continent of peace
that, united and in solidarity, plays an active role in the
international system.
South America is a region in which peaceful
coexistence has been the norm. Dialogue and the
privilege of choosing peaceful options for the
settlement of conflicts have been the rule.
For years, the States of South America have
assumed and rigorously adhered to the commitment to
entirely prohibit from the region weapons of mass
destruction. More recently, we have done the same with
regard to the prohibition of anti-personnel mines and

14

have assumed the commitment to achieve as quickly as
possible their eradication, as well as to implement the
recommendations of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Accordingly, the Government of Chile has given
these policies, which involve both disarmament and
humanitarian issues, its vigorous and resolute support.
For more than a decade, it has steadfastly supported the
development of numerous initiatives in confidencebuilding and transparency at the regional, sub-regional
and bilateral levels. Naturally, it was with great
satisfaction that Chile subscribed to the Guayaquil
Consensus on Integration, Security and Infrastructure
for Development and to the declaration of South
America as a zone of peace and cooperation.
We acknowledge the different circumstances and
situations that exist in other regions of the world in the
area of peace and cooperation for development, and we
hope that this initiative will be an additional and
constructive asset for the international community as a
whole in its ongoing search for ways to promote
peaceful co-existence and the development and wellbeing of peoples.
Ms. Rivero (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Perhaps we do not have much to add to what has
already been said by the preceding speakers. But we
understand that in the dynamics of the processes that
exist in every region of the world, what matters is the
vision that the countries of the region have. This is why
Uruguay would like to express in this debate its firm
support for the declaration of the South American Zone
of Peace and Cooperation, endorsed during the second
meeting of the Presidents of South America last July in
Guayaquil.
For Uruguay, this declaration of peace and
cooperation is not and end in itself. Rather, it contains
a broader commitment, like that originally expressed in
the Brasilia Communiqué of 2000. It is clear that the
development and implementation of confidencebuilding measures, full observance of international
instruments related to nuclear and conventional
disarmament, and non-use of the threat of force all
naturally point to the creation of an area of peace that
extends beyond the borders of individual countries. But
it must also be obvious that an area of peace cannot be
the final objective, but rather the beginning of
something more ambitious.

A/57/PV.50

The geographical contiguity of our countries,
which in other times fuelled conflict, has today become
a factor that promotes unity and cooperation. Indeed,
our region is distinguished in the international scene
for having once and for all overcome territorial
disputes in a peaceful and negotiated way, showing our
spirit of compromise and our adhesion to international
law. This spirit, though it shows that there is a firm
determination to bolster security in the region, is even
more important in that it allows us to have active
cooperative processes, many of which are currently
being implemented.
The national priorities with respect to
strengthening democracy and respect for and defence
of human rights, individual and collective, are several
of the common elements of what could be called the
“South American agenda”. They are common not
because they are called common, but because they are
considered to be indispensable in order to reach a state
of security in which the process of developing our
countries can be accelerated.
These actions, aimed at consolidating peace,
security, cooperation and development, are the
foundations of this broader commitment that we
mentioned at the beginning of our intervention. Our
countries have undertaken a dialogue on regional
security that takes into account the humanitarian, social
and economic aspects of the question. Uruguay
believes that that dialogue is the natural process
towards a true regional integration. The declaration of
South America peace and cooperation, which we hope
will receive the international community’s recognition
today, is a step in this direction.
Uruguay does not see peace solely as an absence
of conflict. We see it as a situation that includes other
positive elements such as security and freedom. They
form the sole context that will allow our Governments,
which are responsible for providing for the well-being
and prosperity of their peoples, to meet the
commitment that has been given to them and is
expected of them.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour for me to speak on behalf of Colombia in
the plenary of the fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly on item 167, whose inclusion in the agenda
was requested by the Permanent Mission of Peru.
My country, along with other South American
sister nations, sponsored draft resolution A/57/L.7,

which welcomes the declaration of our Presidents in
which they declared South America to be a zone of
peace and cooperation. This declaration, adopted in
Guayaquil, Ecuador, on 27 July, is one of the results of
the Brasilia Communiqué of 1 September 2000. In that
document, the Presidents of South America — in
developing the spirit of harmony and understanding
between our countries, with our geographic proximity
and our shared values — agreed to a wider and deeper
regional cooperation and solidarity in order to deal
with fundamental issues such as democracy, trade,
infrastructure for integration, illicit drugs and
connected crimes, and information, knowledge and
technology.
In the declaration, which we hope that the
General Assembly will welcome today, our countries
propose to form the South American Zone of Peace and
Cooperation on the basis of strengthening our
cooperation and consultation mechanisms in the area of
defence and security. For the Government of Colombia,
committed to implement a democratic security and
defence strategy to confront terrorism and the global
problem of illicit drugs that finances it, cooperation
from the entire international community and the South
American region is fundamental.
Our region must strengthen its cooperation in the
areas of intelligence; police operations; control of
trafficking in, and the diversion of, chemical
precursors; control of the illicit trade in arms,
munitions and explosives; and the fight against moneylaundering, as agreed in the Brasilia communiqué,
where our Presidents decided to create a joint
mechanism for periodic consultations among
institutions in charge of the combat against drug
trafficking and related crimes.
We must undertake a major regional effort to
overcome illicit drug trafficking, because, as President
Uribe of Colombia stated recently before the General
Assembly, “We have only managed to seize 20 per cent
of the drugs that are shipped from our country.” We
should fully acknowledge the shared responsibility of
producing, transit and consuming countries — a
principle that our Presidents, several years ago,
determined to be fundamental in relations and
cooperation among States.
Colombia welcomes the definitive solution that
has been found to territorial disputes among the
countries of our region, which has made possible the

15

A/57/PV.50

Declaration on South America as a zone of peace and
cooperation. Nevertheless, our democratic stability and
the integrity of the political, economic and social
structures of our countries still face grave threats, such
as terrorism, corruption and extreme poverty. That is
why, like other countries of the region, we believe that
democracy in Latin America should be strengthened
through the ongoing promotion and safeguarding of the
rule of law and human rights.
The democratic security and defence strategy
adopted by Colombia to fight the violence in the
country aims to consolidate the rule of law and to
guarantee human rights for all Colombians: our
farmers, so that they are not displaced from their land;
our businessmen, so that they are not victims of
kidnapping; our journalists, so that they are not
threatened; our labour leaders, so that they can exercise
their duties freely; and our human rights defenders, so
that they can work without intimidation.
Democratic security, as President Uribe has said,
is aimed at protecting all citizens of a pluralistic nation
that is open to fraternal and creative debate — a nation

16

that can count on the solidarity of its South American
brothers in its fight against violence and terrorism.
For this reason, we welcome today the South
American zone of peace and cooperation, because we
see it as a resolute commitment in the fight against
threats to the security of our States — a commitment to
coordinated action and concerted common strategies to
confront together these serious threats to the security of
our countries and to the stability of our region.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/57/L.7.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.7?
Draft resolution A/57/L.7 was adopted (resolution
57/13).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 167?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
