A /77/PV.57

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

57th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 18 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 142 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the General Assembly
(A/77/702)
The President: I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/77/702, which
contains a letter from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the General Assembly, in which he
informs the Assembly of Member States in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the
General Assembly if the amount of its arrears
equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions
due from it for the preceding two full years. The
General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such
a Member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure
to pay is due to conditions beyond the control of
the Member.”

May I therefore take it that the General
Assembly takes note of the information contained in
those documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/77/L.44)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.44.
Mr. Bat-erdene (Mongolia): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.44, entitled
“Education for democracy”. My delegation initiated
this biennial resolution in 2012, based on our strong
belief in the interdependent and mutually reinforcing
link between education and democracy. We also believe
that it has a transformative power that is essential for
peace, sustainable development and human rights.
We conducted several rounds of informal
consultations on the draft resolution, which were
organized in an open and transparent manner and during
which the text was enriched with several proposals
from Member States. The text has important language
that calls on Member States to work with relevant
stakeholders to take steps to close the digital divide and
promote digital inclusion by addressing the challenges

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

N2301823 (E)

*2301823*

A/77/PV.57

18/01/2023

associated with access, affordability, digital literacy
and digital skills. The updated text has been improved
with paragraphs on the Transforming Education
Summit, which was convened by the Secretary-General
in New York in September 2022, and its pre-summit,
which was hosted by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in Paris in June
2022. If adopted, the draft resolution would be the
second General Assembly resolution to include a
reference to that significant summit. We believe that
by including those paragraphs, the draft resolution
will contribute to the country-level implementation of
national commitments made during the Transforming
Education Summit process. The draft resolution also
requests the Secretary-General to submit a full report
on education for democracy. I take this opportunity
to extend our sincere gratitude to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its support and commitment to preparing a stand-alone
report within its existing reporting obligations.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to express
our sincere thanks to all delegations that engaged
very constructively in the informal and bilateral
consultations. I also wish to extend our gratitude to the
Member States that co-sponsored our draft resolution.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the sponsors, I would
like to express our hope that, as in previous years, the
draft resolution will receive the unanimous support of
Member States and wide co-sponsorship.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/77/L.44, entitled
“Education for democracy”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.44 and in addition to those delegations listed
therein, the following countries have become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
2/8

Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands, the Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Türkiye, Uruguay and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.44?
Draft resolution A/77/L.44 was adopted
(resolution 77/268).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
has asked to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I take the floor to explain our position with regard
to resolution 77/228, which was just adopted. At the
outset, I would like to thank the Permanent Mission
of Mongolia to the United Nations for facilitating that
biennial resolution. My delegation joined the consensus
on its adoption.
We would like to refer to our previous position and
observations regarding the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The Islamic Republic of Iran considers
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
UNESCO’s Education 2030 Framework for Action,
as well as the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030,
adopted at the World Education Forum in 2015, as
absolutely non-legally binding voluntary instruments
that merely set out a number of non-obligatory
recommendations. My delegation has announced that
the Islamic Republic of Iran is not committed to those
parts of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the Education 2030 Framework for Action or the
Incheon Declaration that in any way that contradict
Iran’s national laws, regulation and policies, as well
as Islamic principles and cultural and religious norms
and values. Accordingly, the Islamic Republic of Iran
has no legal obligation vis-à-vis the implementation of
those instruments.
Moreover, with regard to all domestic development
and education issues, nationally developed instruments
and programmes shall enjoy absolute priority and
will be considered as the main reference for action.
N2301823

18/01/2023

Considering the references in resolution 77/268 to
the 2030 Agenda for the Sustainable Development
and the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030, my
delegation disassociates itself from the fifth and
eleventh preambular paragraphs and from paragraph 4
of the resolution.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its stage of
its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
(d) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/77/689)
Draft decision (A/77/L.47)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft decision A/77/L.47.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation has always supported the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as a key
United Nations structure for enabling the international
community to coordinate solutions to environmental
issues and for supporting the environmental pillar of
sustainable development. On the issue of the election of
the Head of the UNEP secretariat, our initial concern
was that a constructive solution needed to be found
through a transparent process and a comprehensive
call for candidates, which is the standard for such
processes. Unfortunately, that call on our part — and
on the part of several other delegations — was not
heeded. We would like to express our disappointment
about the lack of consensus in the procedure for the
presentation of a candidate for the post of Executive
Director of UNEP. The Secretary-General nominated
Ms. Inger Andersen of Denmark for the consideration
of the General Assembly, despite a number of written
objections from Member States during the negotiation
process among regional groups.
Another important point is that some delegations
seek to portray the current situation in a way that
suggests that Russia is dissatisfied with the actions
of UNEP and its leadership purely in the context of
the Ukraine issue. Allow me to note that we began to
express our concerns about UNEP’s work and its bias
in favour of the largest donor countries long before the

A/77/PV.57

special military operation. I therefore urge the General
Assembly not to narrow the scope of the problem.
Unlike some delegations, we are paying attention to
the environmental protection situation in a number
of different parts of the world in which the interests
of developing countries continue to be undermined.
It is important to consider the following reasons for
our concerns.
First, the leadership of UNEP has been monopolized
by representatives of the Western countries: six of the
seven UNEP Executive Directors over the past 30 years
have come exclusively from that group of countries.
And despite our appeals, the Secretary-General has
not even offered to nominate candidates from other
countries for the Assembly’s consideration.
Secondly, we underscore that the international civil
servant heading the main environmental protection
structure in the United Nations must play the role of an
impartial mediator who takes into account the interests
of all countries, including those most severely affected
by environmental degradation. Ms. Andersen, by
contrast, has openly promoted European environmental
priorities, allowing herself to politicize her work and
sideline the interests of developing countries. Such
favouritism towards donor countries is clear in the
implementation of UNEP’s resolutions, its scientific
activities and the preparation of its reports.
For those reasons, I would like to reiterate the
Russian Federation’s objection to Ms. Andersen’s
candidacy and urge that it be taken into account during
the formal consideration thereof. However, before we
consider that issue, we ask the Assembly to consider
draft decision A/77/L.47, which, if I may, I will
now introduce.
The first preambular paragraph recalls section II,
paragraph 2, of resolution 2997 (XXVII), which decided
that the secretariat of the United Nations Environment
Programme should be headed by the Executive Director
of the Programme, who should be elected by the
Assembly upon nomination by the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, as I already noted, the nomination made
this year by the Secretary-General runs counter to
the principle of equitable geographical representation
and the existing established practice of issuing a call
for nominations.
The second preambular paragraph recalls United
Nations Environment Assembly resolution 5/13, entitled
“Due regard to the principle of equitable geographical

N23018233/8

A/77/PV.57

distribution, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article
101 of the Charter of the United Nations”. Since
1992, the head of UNEP has been a position occupied
by representatives of the West, who have not only
advanced the priorities of developed countries on
the environmental agenda but have also ensured that
60 per cent of the professional-level posts in UNEP are
occupied by representatives of the Group of Western
European and Other States.
Allow me also to recall that the draft decision calls
upon Member States to cooperate with UNEP in order
to raise awareness about vacant posts among their
citizens. The operative paragraph contains a request
for the Secretary-General to afford Member States an
opportunity to submit candidacies in order to ensure a
transparent and fair selection process for this vacancy.
We recall that in 2018, when the question of the election
of the UNEP Executive Director was last on the
agenda, the Secretary-General did not circumvent the
procedure of consultations with Member States, giving
them an opportunity to present their own candidates
for this high-level and important position — just like in
many other cases when electing senior United Nations
officials.
We have no doubt that there are a great many
competent candidates in the countries of the global
South who have the necessary experience and leadership
qualities and who would be able to lead UNEP with
dignity and provide value. Continuing to submit
exclusively Western candidates when representatives of
developing countries have no opportunity to participate
in the competition is unfair.
In that regard, I call on the membership to support
draft decision A/77/L.47, which will allow all countries
to have an opportunity to present their candidates for
this position. I would note that Russia does not intend
to put forward a candidate and is acting purely in the
interests of developing countries. Since there is still
sufficient time before June, when Ms. Andersen’s
term comes to an end, we feel that it would be fairest
to return to the question of elections after conducting
a transparent competition for nominations and once
again submitting candidates for the position of UNEP
Executive Director to the General Assembly.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.47.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
4/8

18/01/2023

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I take the floor on behalf
of Denmark to request a recorded vote on draft decision
A/77/L.47, presented by the Russian Federation.
If adopted, the proposal before us would reject the
Secretary-General’s nomination of Ms. Inger Andersen
for a second term as Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Let me be clear — Denmark strongly supports
the principles of equitable geographical distribution
of staff across the United Nations system, and it is of
course no secret that Ms. Andersen and I share the
same nationality. Denmark is requesting a vote on the
Russian proposal for more important reasons than the
fact that the Executive Director happens to be Danish.
In our view, what is at stake is not just the continuity
of the strong leadership of UNEP by Executive
Director Andersen and Deputy Executive Director
Mrema of Tanzania — a leadership that demonstrated
their qualities just weeks ago in Montreal, when the
landmark biodiversity agreement was adopted. What is
at stake today is also the authority of the SecretaryGeneral and the integrity of our established procedures
for reappointments. After the Secretary-General’s
consultations before the nomination, it was cleared
that Ms. Andersen had broad support among Member
States. And, in our view, no credible objections have
been made to her obvious merits or achievements as
Executive Director of UNEP. The reappointment of
the Executive Director of UNEP has followed all the
rules and procedures. In our view, there is simply no
legitimate reason to question that.
In conclusion, I encourage one and all to not support
and to vote against draft decision A/77/L.47 today in
order to show support for the Secretary-General, his
nomination and the continued work of UNEP.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): The European Union
(EU) and its member States support the proposal of
the Secretary-General to renew Ms. Inger Andersen’s
mandate as Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). The SecretaryGeneral engaged in transparent consultations with
regional groups since October 2022 on this matter.
Ms. Andersen’s work has been widely supported by
the United Nations membership, and no alternative
candidate has been proposed.
N2301823

18/01/2023

In that context, we see the draft decision before us
as (A/77/L.47) an attempt to disrupt the leadership of
UNEP and undermine the authority of the SecretaryGeneral. We call on all Member States to reject the draft
decision in order to protect the integrity of UNEP and
of the United Nations system, as well as the SecretaryGeneral’s authority.
Ms. Andersen stewarded the fifth United Nations
Environment Assembly in 2022 towards some of its
most ambitious outcomes, including our collective
effort to agree on a global plastic agreement. Important
processes are currently being launched through the
fifth United Nations Environment Assembly, the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and
the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity. The integrity of UNEP should be protected,
with an Executive Director who has demonstrated
leadership and commitment over the past four years.
The EU and its member States strongly support
the principle of equitable geographical distribution of
staff across the United Nations system. We supported
the adoption of resolution 5/13 by the United Nations
Environment Assembly in February 2022, on due regard
to the principle of equitable geographical distribution in
accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations. The resolution also welcomed
the ongoing efforts made by the Executive Director to
address that issue in the recruitment of staff.
In that respect, we strongly welcome the nomination
of Elizabeth Maruma Mrema of Tanzania to the position
of UNEP’s Deputy Executive Director. Last month, as
Executive Secretary of the secretariat of the Convention
on Biological Diversity, she helped secure the historic
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.
Finally, we wish to reiterate our strong support
to the work of UNEP and its headquarters in Nairobi
and our full confidence in the Secretary-General in the
exercise of his prerogative.
Ms. Carty (United States of America): The United
States opposes the draft decision (A/77/L.47) introduced
by the Russian Federation, which seeks to undermine
the Secretary-General’s authority in his nomination of
the incumbent Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), Ms. Inger Andersen.
The United States supports the long-standing practice

A/77/PV.57

of appointing the Secretary-General’s selected nominee
to the position of UNEP Executive Director.
We also warmly welcome the recent nomination of
Elizabeth Maruma Mrema of Tanzania to the position
of UNEP’s Deputy Executive Director.
For three months, the Secretary-General consulted
with regional groups in an open and transparent
manner regarding his intention to nominate Ms. Inger
Andersen. During that time, no alternative candidate
was proposed. Executive Director Andersen has
effectively led UNEP since 2019 and guided the fifth
United Nations Environment Assembly of 2022 towards
key successes.
We particularly commend Ms. Andersen’s own
commitment to increasing geographic diversity at
UNEP through various recruitment initiatives. In fact,
during the past quarter, the largest number of UNEP
staff selections were from the Group of Asia-Pacific
States, at 29 per cent, followed by the Group of African
States, at 25 per cent.
We support the Secretary-General’s decision to
nominate Ms. Andersen for a second term, and we
believe that we should honour his choice. We reiterate
our strong support for the work of UNEP and for its
being headquartered in Nairobi. We express our
full confidence in the Secretary-General’s choice to
nominate Ms. Andersen for re-election. We call on all
Member States to vote against the draft decision.
Mr. Rae (Canada): We appreciate the opportunity
to participate in this discussion, although I have to
confess that I think that it is highly unusual that we are
put in this position by the Russian delegation today.
Before we vote on draft decision A/77/L.47, I would
like to express my deep regret that we are faced with
such an unjustified attempt to prevent the renewal of
Ms. Inger Andersen’s mandate as Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
as the Secretary-General asked us to do. We are proud
to indicate our strong support for Ms. Andersen’s
re-election, which, in normal times and in ordinary
circumstances, would be completely uncontroversial
and fully aligned with the past practice of allowing
Executive Directors to serve two consecutive terms.
Like other speakers, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank her and to commend her for her
excellent work thus far as Executive Director of UNEP.
Since the start of her term in 2019, we all know that

N23018235/8

A/77/PV.57

she has been a positive force in fulfilling UNEP’s
important mandate in ensuring that the environment
portfolio remains a top priority for the United Nations
and its Member States. We saw that at first hand in the
context of the fifteenth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held
Montreal in December 2022, with Ms. Andersen and
Ms. Elizabeth Maruma Mrema of Tanzania directly
helping to deliver the Kunming-Montreal Global
Diversity Framework.
Why are we here? Why have the Russians put forward
this proposition? They say that it is in order to achieve
regional diversity, of which everyone is in favour, and
for which the selection process in every agency in
every part of the Organization allows. The fact of the
matter is that the Secretary-General has a mandate. He
is required to nominate senior-level United Nations
officials, and Canada’s view has always been that,
even when he does not choose a Canadian, we should
support him. The draft decision is not only obstructive
to the re-election of someone who has demonstrated
strong leadership as the Executive Director of UNEP; it
also directly undermines the Secretary-General as the
Head of this Organization. Canada has no intention of
joining that effort on the spurious grounds that were put
forward by the Russian delegation.
As mentioned by my colleague from Sweden, the
Secretary-General, as he always does — we know
that; that is what he does — engaged in transparent
consultations with all regional groups on the position
since October. The consensus from that discussion was
that Ms. Andersen’s work was widely supported. No
other alternative candidate was suggested by any of
the regional groups. The question therefore is: why are
we now questioning her suitability to serve a second
term? We all know why — politics. It is not about Inger
Andersen. It is not about her qualification to serve a
second term as the Head of UNEP and to be re-elected,
as is normally the case, unless someone is not able to
fulfil the obligations. It is about politics. We should at
least be honest with ourselves and recognize that that is
what we are dealing with.
On the question of equitable geographic
representation, we agree that it remains an important
issue, which is why, for example, Canada joined
many other delegations in adopting United Nations
Environment Assembly resolution 5/13, on equitable
geographical representation in the Organization, in
February 2022. The issue of equitable representation
6/8

18/01/2023

exists in every single organ and every body of the
United Nations. As a country, we will continue to
wholeheartedly support all efforts to make all United
Nations bodies diverse and inclusive and to ensure that
senior management reflects the entire world that it is
meant to serve.
But we are not going to allow this issue to stop the
process of nominating Inger Andersen as Executive
Director. I am therefore urging all Member States not
only to support Ms. Andersen’s re-election, but also
to object, and vote against, attempts to undermine an
effective United Nations. Such politicization of the
United Nations Executive Director position exemplifies
what is wrong with us at the moment — our collective
inability to serve our citizens, and the fact that we
would rather take every possible opportunity to throw
a wrench into the works of the General Assembly,
to cause mischief and to take away from our solemn
obligations to ensure the efficient, effective and fair
processes of representation of the United Nations.
This is not about protecting the environment;
it is about playing politics. That is why we will vote
against the draft decision, and we hope that we will
be given the opportunity to join the consensus on the
re-election of Ms. Andersen in an effort to show the
strong support of States Members of the United Nations
for the UNEP mandate and for the mandate entrusted to
the Programme’s Executive Director.
Mrs. Kavaleuskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus is convinced that, as a multilateral body that
develops the global environmental agenda, the United
Nations Environment Programme must be outside the
political ambitions of a group of States and should
take into account the interests of the entire developing
world. We also believe it important to take into account
the principles of fair geographical representation in
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and
we support opening up the call for candidates for the
position of Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme. We feel that that will be
made possible through the adoption of draft decision
A/77/L.47, which is under consideration. In that regard,
we are inclined to support the draft decision, which,
in our view, ensures the transparency of the selection
process for that high-level position and the participation
of candidates from other regions in it.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft decision A/77/L.47, entitled “Election
N2301823

18/01/2023

of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
decision and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/77/L.47, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft decision: Belarus,
Nicaragua and the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Burkina Faso, Central African
Republic, China, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia,

A/77/PV.57

Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft decision A/77/L.47 was rejected by 77 votes
to 13, with 63 abstentions.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I simply wanted to say that Equatorial Guinea’s
vote on draft decision A/77/L.47 was not recorded.
The President: I would like to remind delegations
that at the beginning of today’s meeting, we considered
a letter of the Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly containing a list of the countries that
are in arrears in their payments to the budget of the
United Nations and those that for the time being are not
permitted to vote. Unfortunately, Equatorial Guinea is
on that list. That is why its vote was not recorded.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme.
As stated in the note of the Secretary-General,
the General Assembly, in section 2, paragraph 2 of
resolution 2997 (XXVII), of 15 December 1972,
adopted at the Assembly’s twenty-seventh session,
decided that the secretariat of the United Nations
Environmental Programme should be headed by the
Executive Director of the Programme, who should
be elected by the Assembly on the nomination of the
Secretary-General for a term of four years.
In decision 73/416 of 20 February 2019, the
General Assembly, following the nomination of the
Secretary-General, elected Inger Andersen of Denmark
as Executive Director of the Programme for a fouryear term of office beginning on 15 June 2019 and
ending on 14 June 2023. In accordance with resolution
2997 (XXVII), the Secretary-General nominated

N23018237/8

A/77/PV.57

Ms. Andersen for re-election as Executive Director
of the United Nations Environment Programme for
another term of four years, beginning on 15 June
2023 and ending on 14 June 2027. In that connection,
I should inform members that objections have been
raised to Ms. Andersen’s re-election, as we just heard
in the debate a few minutes ago. In the light of those
objections, pursuant to rule 92 of the rules of procedure
the election shall be held by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind representatives that pursuant to rule 88 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point
of order on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition,
ballot papers will be given only to the representative
seated directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until the ballots have
been collected. Ballot papers will now be distributed.
The voting has thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323, of
8 September 2017, the name of the candidate nominated
by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2997
(XXVII), of 15 December 1972, adopted at the twentyseventh session, contained in document A/77/689,
has been printed on the ballot papers. I request
representatives to use only those ballot papers that
have been distributed. Members wishing to vote for
a nominated candidate are requested to put an “X” in
the box next to the name printed on the ballot paper. A
blank ballot paper will be considered an abstention.

8/8

18/01/2023

Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible candidate, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Australia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Guyana,
Lebanon and North Macedonia acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11 a.m. and resumed
at 11.15 a.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required simple majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Inger Andersen (Denmark)

167
0
167
31
136
69
136

The President: As a result of the voting, Ms. Inger
Andersen (Denmark) has obtained the required majority
and is therefore elected as Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme for a term of
four years, beginning on 15 June 2023 and ending on
14 June 2027. I take this opportunity to extend to her
the congratulations of the Assembly on her re-election
and to thank the tellers for their assistance.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d)
of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

N2301823
