250

General Assembly- f'ortieth Session

l. Welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights to fulfil his mandate
and takes note of his interim report on the situation of
human rights in Guatemala, 187 submitted in accordance
with Commission rcsolution 1985/36;
2. Expresses the hope that the recent elections will be
the first step in a process lcading to complete and effective
enjoyment of human rights by the people of Guatemala;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a new Government and
Congress are to take oflk,e on 14 January l 986, following a
second round in the presidential elcctions on 8 December
1985, and that a new Constitution, which provides, ínter
alía, for the establishment of a national commission on
human rights as well as a commissioner for human rights,
is to take effect on the same date in January 1986;
4. Reiterares its deep concern at the continuing grave
and widespread violations of human rights in Guatemala,
particularly thc violence against non-combatants, the
widespread repression, killings, including extrajudicial
executions, the practice of torture, disappearances and
secret detention, as well as at practices such as the displacement of rural and indigenous populations, their confinement in development centres and their forced participation in civilian patrols organized and controlled by the
armed forces;
5. Strongly urges the Government of Guatemala to
take ali measures necessary to halt violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly enforced
and involuntary disappearances, as well as to take effective
measures, within the framework of the Constitution, to
ensure that all its authorities and agencies, civilian as well
as military, fully respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all Guatemalans, such as trade unionists,
catechists and the predominantly indigenous rural and
peasant population;
6. Again requests the Government of Guatemala to
investigate and clarify the fate of those who have disappeared and whose whereabouts continue to be unknown,
and to include within the framework of such an investigation the publication of the ful! details of the report of the
Tripartite Commission;
1. Further urges the Governmcnt of Guatemala to
establish the necessary conditions to ensure the independence of the judicial system and to enable the judiciary to
uphold the rule of law, including the right of habeas
corpus, and to prosecute and punish speedily and effectively those who are responsible for violations of human
rights, including members of the military and security
forces;
8. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to allow
independent and impartial bodies to function in the country to monitor and investigate alleged human rights violations, as well as to respect and protect human rights
defenders such as the Mutual Support Group;
9. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to guarantee to the rural and indigenous population the freedom
to choose their place of residence and freedom from forced
participation in civilian patrols;
10. Calls upon ali parties to the conflict to apply fully
the principies and rules of international humanitarian law
and reiterates its appeal to the Government of Guatemala
to admit the International Committee of the Red Cross to
the country, and subsequently to facilitate its operations
for the alleviation of the suffering of the Guatemalan
people;
l l. Calls upon ali Governments to refrain from intervening in any way in the interna! situation in Guatemala,
187 A/40/865, annex.

which could intensify the interna! am1ed conflict and
increase violations of human rights;
l 2. Deeply deplores the continuing gross violations of
human rights arising from that conflict, which are largely
duc to the failure ofthe military and security forces to conduct their activities with the necessary respect for protecting the human rights of ali Guatemalans;
13. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other
parties concerncd to continue co-operating with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights;
14. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur, as well as
other information pertaining to the human rights situation
in Guatemala, and to consider further steps for securing
effective respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali in that country including, if so requested by
the Government of Guatemala, the provision of appropriate technical assistance under the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights;
15. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at its forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/141. Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran
The General Assembl.v,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter ofthe
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights6 and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 24
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation
to promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this
field,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolutions
1982/27 of 11 March 1982 27 and 1983/34 of 8 March
1983, 28
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/54 of 14 March 1984, 29 in which the Commission expressed deep concern at the continuing serious violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and requested its Chairman to
appoint a special representative to make a thorough study
of the situation of human rights in that country,
Taking note, in particular, of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1985/39 of 13 March 1985, 30 by which
the Commission decided to extend the mandate of its Special Representative for one year and requested him to
present an interim report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session on the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, including the situation of minori ty groups such as the Baha'is, and a final report to the
Commission at its forty-second session,
Mindful of resolution 1985/ 17 of 29 August 1985 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection ofMinorities, 181 in which the Sub-Commission
expressed its alarm at the continuing reports of gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
lslamic Republic of Iran,
Regretting that the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran has still not extended its full co-operation to the
Commission on Human Rights and its Special Represen-

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Tbird Committee

151

tative, in particular by not allowing the Special Representative to visit the country,

40/142.

Taking into account the specific and detailed allegations
ofgrave and extensive violations ofhuman rights to which
the Special Representative refers in his interim report on
the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran 188 and to which the Govemment of that country has
not responded,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature and ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Mindfu/ of the fact that the year 1986 marks the thirtyfifth anniversary of the entry into force ofthe Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that genocide is a crime under
intemational law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the
United Nations,
Expressing its conviction that implementation of the
provisions ofthe Convention by ali States is necessary for
the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
Bearing in mind that the fortieth anniversary of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War is
being commemorated in 1985,
1. Once again strongly condemns the crime of genocide;
2. Reaffirms the necessity ofintemational co-operation
in order to liberate mankind from such an odious scourge;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the fact that many
States have ratified the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide or have acceded
thereto;
4. Urges those States that have not yet become parties
to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without
further delay;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the status of the Convention;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider at its forty-second session the question of promoting
the full implementation of the Convention and to submit
its observations and proposals thereon, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

Endorsing the conclusion of the Special Representative
that continued monitoring ofthe human rights situation in
the Islamic Republic of Iran is called for,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe interim report of
the Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic oflran and ofthe general observations contained
therein; 189

2. Expresses its deep concern over the specific and
detailed allegations of violations of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran to which the Special Representative refers in his interim report, and, in particular, those
related to the right to life, such as summary and arbitrary
executions, the right to freedom from torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the right
to liberty and security ofperson and to freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention, the right to a fair tria!, the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion and to freedom of expression, and the right of religious minorities to
profess and practise their own religion;
3. Endorses the conclusion of the Special Representative that, on the basis of the information available to him,
specific and detailed allegations concerning grave violations of human rights cannot be dismissed, and urgently
appeals to the Govemment ofthe Islamic Republic oflran
to respond satisfactorily to these allegations;
4. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
lran, as a State party to the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 7 to respect and to ensure to ali
individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in that Covenant;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study carefully the final report of the Special Representative, as well as other information pertaining to the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and
to consider further steps for securing effective respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali in that
country;

6. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to extend its full co-operation to the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights, and, in
particular, to permit him to visit that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary
assistance to the Special Representative;
8. Decides to continue its examination of the situation
of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is,
during its forty-first session in order to examine this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985
188 A/40/874

Status of tbe Convention on tbe Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

40/143. Summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assemb/y,_
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 6 which states that every human being has
the right to life, liberty and security of person,
Having regard to the provisions of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7 which states that
every human being has the inherent right to life, that this
right shall be protected by law and that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling a/so its resolution 34/175 of 17 December
1979, in which it reaffirmed that mass and flagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the Commission on Human Rights to
take timely and effective action in existing and future cases
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 36/22 of 9 November
1981, in which it condemned the practice of summary or
arbitrary executions, and its resolutions 37 /182 of 17
December 1982, 38/96 of 16 December 1983 and 39/ I I O
of 14 December 1984,
18 9 lh1d .. sect. 11.
