United Nations

A/RES/58/216

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 94 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/484/Add.7)]

58/216. Sustainable development in mountain regions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/24 of 10 November 1998, by which it proclaimed
2002 the International Year of Mountains,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/189 of 20 December 2000 and 57/245 of
20 December 2002,
Recognizing chapter 13 of Agenda 21 1 and all relevant paragraphs of the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2 in particular paragraph 42 thereof, as the
overall policy frameworks for sustainable development in mountain regions,
Noting the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in Mountain
Regions (“Mountain Partnership”), launched during the World Summit on
Sustainable Development with the committed support of thirty-eight countries,
fifteen intergovernmental organizations and thirty-eight organizations from major
groups, as an important approach to addressing the various interrelated dimensions
of sustainable development in mountain regions,
Taking note of the Bishkek Mountain Platform, 3 the outcome document of the
Bishkek Global Mountain Summit, held in Bishkek from 28 October to 1 November
2002, which was the concluding event of the International Year of Mountains,
Takes note of the report transmitted by the Secretary-General on the
1.
International Year of Mountains, 2002; 4
2.
Welcomes the significant results achieved during the Year, which
substantially increased awareness of and strengthened interest in sustainable
_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
A/C.2/57/7, annex.
4
A/58/134.

03 50748

A/RES/58/216

development and poverty eradication in mountain regions, as well as acting as a
catalyst for long-term effective action to implement chapter 13 of Agenda 211 and
paragraph 42 of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;2
3.
Notes with appreciation that a growing network of Governments,
organizations, major groups and individuals around the world know that mountains
are globally important as the source of most of the Earth’s freshwater, as
repositories of rich biological diversity, as popular destinations for recreation and
tourism and as areas of important cultural diversity, knowledge and heritage;
Also notes with appreciation the effective role played by Governments,
4.
as well as major groups, academic institutions and international organizations and
agencies, in the activities related to the Year, including the establishment of seventyeight national committees or similar mechanisms;
Appreciates the work undertaken by the Food and Agriculture
5.
Organization of the United Nations as the lead agency for the Year, as well as the
valuable contributions made by the United Nations Environment Programme, the
United Nations University, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Children’s Fund;
Underlines the fact that there remain key challenges to implementing
6.
sustainable development and eradicating poverty in mountain regions as well as
challenges in the areas of national involvement, international cooperation, support
for partnerships and mobilization of financial resources, and against this
background:
(a) Encourages the United Nations system to enhance efforts to strengthen
inter-agency collaboration to achieve more effective implementation of chapter 13
of Agenda 21 and paragraph 42 of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
(b) Also encourages the continued establishment and development of
mountain-related national committees, focal points and other multi-stakeholder
mechanisms at the national level for sustainable development in mountain regions;
(c) Supports national efforts, within the framework of national development
plans, to develop goals and strategic plans for the sustainable development of
mountains, as well as enabling policies and laws, programmes and projects;
(d) Encourages transboundary approaches, where the States concerned agree,
to the sustainable development of mountain ranges and information-sharing in this
regard;
(e) Also encourages Member States to collect and produce information and
to establish databases devoted to mountains so as to capitalize on knowledge to
support interdisciplinary research, programmes and projects and to improve
decision-making and planning;
(f) Supports the development and implementation of global, regional and
national communication programmes to build on the awareness and momentum for
change established by the Year;
(g) Stresses the importance of capacity-building and educational programmes
to enhance awareness of good practices in sustainable development in mountain
regions and the nature of relationships between highland and lowland areas;
(h) Calls for the improvement of mountain women’s access to resources and
the strengthening of their role in their communities and cultures, and in this context
2

A/RES/58/216

takes note of the recommendations of the Thimpu Declaration adopted at the
Celebrating Mountain Women conference, held at Thimpu from 1 to 4 October 2002;
7.
Notes the entry into force of the nine Protocols to the Convention on the
Protection of the Alps as a contribution to regional cooperation for sustainable
development in that mountain region;
Notes also the adoption and signing of the Framework Convention on the
8.
Protection and Sustainable Development of the Carpathians by the countries of the
region;
Notes further that a consultative process has been conducted with all
9.
Mountain Partnership stakeholders, in particular donor countries, with a view to
determining the best options for further assisting all stakeholders in the
implementation of the Partnership;
10. Takes note of the conclusions of the first global meeting of the members
of the Mountain Partnership, held in Merano, Italy, on 5 and 6 October 2003, 5 at the
invitation of the Government of Italy;
11. Notes that the next global meeting of the members of the Mountain
Partnership will be organized during the second half of 2004, and welcomes in this
context the offer of the Government of Peru to host the meeting;
12. Also notes in this context that the Mountain Partnership is a cooperation
mechanism that is dynamic, transparent, flexible and participatory in nature and that
it is open to all Governments, including local and regional authorities, as well as to
intergovernmental, non-governmental and other organizations whose objectives and
activities are consistent with the vision and mission of the Partnership;
13. Further notes that Mountain Partnership members committed themselves
to implement the Partnership in accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolution 2003/61 of 25 July 2003, and calls upon them to comply with the criteria
and guidelines agreed in the decision taken by the Commission on Sustainable
Development at its eleventh session; 6
14. Invites the international community and other relevant partners to
consider joining the Mountain Partnership;
15. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, to continue their constructive collaboration in the context
of the follow-up to the Year, taking into account the inter-agency group on
mountains and the need for the further involvement of the United Nations system, in
particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations University, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, international
financial institutions and other relevant international organizations, taking into
account the recommendations formulated in the Bishkek Mountain Platform;3
16. Encourages Governments, the United Nations system, the international
financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other relevant United
Nations funding mechanisms, such as the Global Mechanism of the United Nations
_______________
5

A/C.2/58/8, annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A.

6

3

A/RES/58/216

Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Drought
and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, as well as all relevant stakeholders
from civil society organizations and the private sector, to provide support, including
through voluntary financial contributions, to local, national and international
programmes and projects for sustainable development in mountain regions;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the status of sustainable development in mountain regions,
including an overall analysis of the challenges that lie ahead and appropriate policy
recommendations, under a sub-item entitled “Sustainable development in mountain
regions” of the item entitled “Environment and sustainable development”.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

4
