General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

108

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1923 (LXIII) of 6 May 1975, in which the Council
approved the recommendations concerning the establishment of a co-operative arrangement among youth
research and information centres, 58
l. Requests Member States, the United Nations
organs and specialized agencies concerned to give
greater attention to the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples, especially when establishing their policies and programmes regarding youth;
2. Addresses a solemn appeal to all States, as well
as to intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, to take appropriate action to foster among youth respect for all people, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, regard
for human values and devotion to the ideals of peace,
freedom and progress and to the cause of human rights;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to promote international awareness of the situation and needs of youth and practical action to ensure
the full participation of youth in the life of society,
through United Nations activities in the field of youth
and, as appropriate, with the co-operation of the
specialized agencies concerned;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the measures that have been taken to implement the Declaration to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council, with recommendations on how that process may be
strengthened;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
progress report on the establishment of a co-operative
arrangement among youth research and information
centres to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Policies and
programmes relating to youth".
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/130.

Role of youth

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the profound importance of the role of
youth and the necessity of its participation in shaping
the future of humanity,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the
energies, enthusiasm and creative abilities of youth in
the task of nation-building, the economic, social and
cultural advancement of peoples, the preservation of
world peace and the promotion of international cooperation and understanding,
Noting that the dynamic and active involvement of
youth can be a very powerful factor in influencing in a
positive manner the response from other sections of
society for accelerating the process of reform and development,
ns E/CN.5/503, paras. 5-12.

Conscious of the enormous sacrifice made by youth
and the sufferings inflicted on it in wars of all kinds,
Convinced of the necessity of meeting the legitimate
needs and aspirations of youth in this age of great
scientific, technological and cultural progress and of
opportunities for education,
Bearing in mind the valuable contribution that youth
can make to the evolution of co-operation among
States on the basis of equality and justice and to the
ushering in of the new international economic order,
Appreciating the active participation of youth in the
global movement to promote peace, disarmament and
national liberation and in the struggle against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, foreign domination
and alien occupation,
Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on the
Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 2037 (XX)
of 7 December 1965,
I. Considers that the development process as well
as the promotion of international peace and security
would benefit greatly by the integration and involvement of youth in all related activities;
2. Considers it necessary to disseminate among
youth, through appropriate education, ideas of peace,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
human solidarity and dedication to the objectives of
progress and development;
3. Urges all States, to that end, to undertake such
further steps as may be necessary and appropriate to
ensure the full and effective participation of youth in
the process of development and co-operation;
4. Invites all relevant organizations within the
United Nations system to give special attention to
programmes connected with education and the participation of youth in development;
5. Invites States to promote international exchanges
between youth and youth organizations of their respective countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to collect from
the Governments of Member States and relevant organizations in the United Nations system the latest
information concerning the present and future role and
the participation of youth in the development and
nation-building process, as well as in the promotion of
international co-operation and understanding, and to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session a preliminary report for further consideration
of the role of youth in promoting the objectives of the
United Nations.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/131.

United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2659 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2770
(XXVI) of 22 November 1971, 3022 (XXVII) of 18
December 1972, 3125 (XXVIII) of 13 December
1973 and 3140 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Ta king note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1966 (LIX) of 30 July 1975 on youth policies

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and programmes relating to the role of the United
Nations Volunteers programme,
Recognizing the important role of youth in the realization of the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially those concerning economic and
social progress and development,
Convinced that the active participation of the younger
generation should be an integrated component of the
over-all development process,
Believing that the United Nations must intensify its
efforts to implement practical programmes to assist
younger people to play constructive roles in the development of their societies, including the means of
financing such programmes,
Acknowledging the role in the achievement of national and international development goals that has
been entrusted to the United Nations Volunteers programme and the potential of that programme for the
advancement of the role of youth in development,
l. Considers the United Nations Volunteers programme to be a major operational unit of the United
Nations for the execution of youth programmes, especially of pilot projects to increase the participation of
youth in development activities and training programmes for youth workers, such programmes to be
undertaken only after consultation with the Governments of the recipient countries concerned;
2. Decides to expand the terms of reference of the
Special Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Volunteers to include the receipt of additional contributions
for the purpose of implementing youth programmes
requested by developing countries;
3. Appeals to Governments and all other potential
sources for contributions to the Special Voluntary
Fund for the United Nations Volunteers to help finance
such youth programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme:
(a) To hold joint intersecretariat consultations at
least once every year to discuss the implementation of
the programmes described above on the basis of principles and programme objectives laid down by the
relevant policy-making bodies;
( b) To take whatever administrative action is
necessary within existing resources to implement the
course of action described above with effect from 1
January 1977;
( c) To study the best ways and means of ensuring
the participation, to the fullest extent possible, of
youth and youth organizations in the planning and
implementation of youth programmes launched by the
United Nations Volunteers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a progress
report on the implementation of the present resolution
with recommendations for further action.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/132.

Channels of communication with youth
and youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1967, 2633 (XXV)

109

of 11 November 1970, 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November
1971, 3022 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3140
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on channels of communication with youth and international youth organizations, 59
Convinced that the pre-conditions of effective channels of communication are the promotion of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the existence of practical opportunities for
youth and youth organizations to participate in the
work of the United Nations at the national, regional,
interregional and international levels,
Invites the Economic and Social Council to prepare,
through the Commission for Social Development at its
twenty-fifth session, appropriate recommendations concerning the best channels of communication between
youth and youth organizations and the United Nations
at the national, regional, interregional and international
levels, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/133.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling also that it decided at its thirtieth session
that the voluntary fund for the International Women's
Year, established by Economic and Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, should be extended to cover the period of the Decade, 60
A ware that some countries, particularly the least
developed ones, have limited financial resources for
carrying out their national plans and programmes for
the advancement of women and for the implementation
of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Objectives of the International Women's Year61
adopted by the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, held at Mexico City from 19 June to
2 July 1975,
Recognizing the necessity for continuing financial
and technical support for these programmes,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Voluntary Fund for the Decade, 62
I . Adopts the following criteria and arrangements
for the management of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women:
(a)
Criteria:
The resources of the Fund should be utilized to
supplement activities in the following areas designed to
09 A/10275.

r.o See Official Records of the General Assembly Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034) p. 100 ite{ns 75 and
76.
'
'
r,i Report of
the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A.
' 2 E/5773.
