S/PV.8067

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8067th meeting

Wednesday, 11 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/824)
Special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic review of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/826)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31930 (E)
*1731930*

S/PV.8067

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/824)
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the strategic review of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/826)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/824, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2017/826, which contains the
special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic
review of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou: I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to brief them
2/10

11/10/2017

today on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I would first like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest condolences and sympathy to the families,
as well as to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania, for the deaths of the two Tanzanian
peacekeepers killed in an attack on 9 October by the
Allied Democratic Forces on the Mamundioma base of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I condemn it and all attacks on MONUSCO personnel,
who serve the cause of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As the Council is aware, in recent months the
challenges related to the implementation of the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement of
31 December 2016 have unfortunately persisted. The
broad consensus achieved among key political actors
with the Agreement’s signing has not been maintained
consistently throughout the year, specifically as that
relates to the transitional oversight mechanism — the
Conseil national de suivi de l’accord — and to the
implementation of confidence-building measures for
sealing the Agreement and the electoral timelines.
Recently, discussions have centred on the notion that
elections will most probably not be held before the end
of 2017, unlike what was foreseen in the Agreement.
That has generated new political debate around the
varying interpretations of the Agreement, particularly
with regard to the implementation of the transitional
arrangement in the future. Regrettably that has led
in turn to the re-emergence of a climate of political
uncertainty and tension.
It was in the light of those developments that on the
sidelines of the opening of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session, the United Nations convened a
side event on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The meeting welcomed the authorities’
commitment to respecting the Constitution and
stressed the need for further confidence-building
measures to establish conditions conducive to ensuring
the successful conclusion of the electoral process. The
participants once again reaffirmed the centrality of the
Agreement of 31 December 2016 and the importance
of ensuring its full implementation in order to pave the
way for the timely holding of free, fair, peaceful and
credible elections. The discussions during the event
acknowledged the progress made by the Independent
National Electoral Commission with the voter
17-31930

11/10/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

registration process and stressed the need for publishing
an electoral calendar as soon as possible and providing
a budget for the elections. The Congolese stakeholders
were also urged to step up their efforts to prepare for
the timely holding of free, fair, peaceful and credible
presidential and legislative elections in accordance
with the Agreement and, at the same time, to take
additional confidence-building measures to establish
an environment conducive to a successful conclusion of
the electoral process.
In that regard, I would like to turn to two specific
points — progress with regard to the holding of elections,
and the establishment of conditions conducive to that.
With regard to the first point, although the publication
of an electoral calendar and a budget remain key
milestones in the political process and will be essential
to lowering political tensions and uncertainty as to a way
forward, it is important to note that progress has been
made with voter registration. As of mid-September,
the Electoral Commission had registered more than
41 million voters. Women represented 48 per cent of
registered voters, a slightly lower figure than in 2006,
2011 and 2016. In early September, voter-registration
training began in the Kasai and Kasai Central provinces,
the last remaining provinces in the country to undergo
that process.
However, there is still uncertainty about the
registration of members of the diaspora, the mode of
voting and the timeline for enacting critical legislation.
Regrettably, the financial resources required to ensure
sustained progress towards the holding of elections
are not yet forthcoming. The Commission is still
underfunded, and the multi-partner basket support
fund for the Project of Assistance to the Electoral Cycle
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, managed
by the United Nations Development Programme, has
reached only 6 per cent of the estimated $123 million
required. Nor has MONUSCO been provided with any
additional resources to support the updating of the
voter registry or the broader electoral process. That is
in large part due to the uncertainties about the electoral
calendar and the political process going forward. The
establishment of conditions conducive to the holding
of elections depends largely on the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
I have consistently reminded all stakeholders of
their responsibility to ensure respect for rights and
freedoms during this period of heightened political
uncertainty. That will require full implementation of

S/PV. 8067

all the confidence-building measures stipulated in the
Agreement, ensuring the opening of the political space
and full respect for human rights, including respect
for everyone’s political rights and freedoms, including
freedom of opinion and expression and the right to
peaceful assembly. The United Nations is concerned
about the fact that journalists, political opponents
and civil society activists continue to be subject to
intimidation, harassment and violence, mostly in
connection with their activities and the expression of
their opinions concerning the political process. I have
repeatedly called for such actions to stop and for the
rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be fully respected
so as to establish conditions conducive to the holding of
credible and peaceful elections.
(spoke in French)
In these politically uncertain circumstances, the
security situation in several regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has deteriorated further, with
an increase in targeted attacks on the national security
forces by Mayi-Mayi groups. In North Kivu, repeated
Mayi-Mayi attacks on Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) positions have been
taking place in an environment marked by tensions
between the Hutu and Nande communities. The socalled Allied Democratic Forces have also attempted
to seize several FARDC positions. In South Kivu,
Mayi-Mayi groups have been carrying out attacks
on several strategic FARDC installations since the
end of June. Less than two weeks ago, Mayi-Mayi
Yakutumba mounted an attack on Uvira, the secondlargest city in South Kivu province, and was only
repulsed thanks to a rapid and robust response from
MONUSCO and exemplary coordination with the
FARDC. The complexity of the current situation in
South Kivu was tragically illustrated on 15 September
when, in clashes with Burundian asylum seekers,
Congolese security forces resorted to excessive force,
resulting in 37 Burundians killed and 117 wounded.
One FARDC soldier was also killed, and six FARDC
soldiers and one national police officer were wounded.
That tragedy should never have happened. We should
add that, following that incident, two members of the
FARDC were arrested, and MONUSCO initiated an
investigation into the Blue Helmets’ response during
those events.
Besides the situation in North and South Kivu, in
Tanganyika province the clashes between the Twa and

17-319303/10

S/PV.8067

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Luba militias have again increased, against the backdrop
of a resurgence in Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga activities
and emerging divisions among several Twa militias.
The security situation in the western part of the country
remains volatile, following major clashes between the
Bundu Dia Mayala political-religious sect and security
forces in Kinshasa and Kongo Central. Violent incidents
continue in the Kasai region, involving clashes between
Kamuina Nsapu militia and security forces as well as
inter-ethnic conflicts. I firmly condemn the attacks by
the Kamuina Nsapu, the recruitment of children and the
targeting of schools, churches and other protected sites,
as well as the incidents of disproportionate use of force
and deliberate targeting of civilians attributed to the
Congolese armed forces. The violence must stop and its
perpetrators must be held accountable.
The impact of the deteriorating security situation
on civilian life is clearly visible. Between June and
August, MONUSCO identified 1,329 cases of violations
or abuses of human rights. Armed groups carried
out 533 attacks, while State actors accounted for 769
violations, of which 27 per cent were attributed to the
armed forces and 24 per cent to national police. On top
of that, the worsening humanitarian situation is clear
evidence of the impact of the conflict on the civilian
population. We estimate that about 8.5 million people,
including 5.5 million children, are currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. The number of internally
displaced persons has reached 3.8 million, and more
than 621,000 Congolese have sought refuge in various
areas of the subregion, such as Angola, Zambia and so
forth. In the Kasai region alone, some 2.8 million people
are facing critical levels of food insecurity, and more
than 1.5 million children continue to face the risk of
violence, displacement and loss of access to education
and medical services.
Despite the significant challenges that the evolving
situation presents, MONUSCO has continued to adjust
its deployment and presence to better adapt its footprint
to the priorities set out in resolution 2348 (2017), with a
view to maximizing its effectiveness in the face of budget
cuts. It has modified its sector boundaries to enable the
force to redeploy its troops in the eastern provinces
and to intervene with more flexibility throughout the
country. The Mission has also improved the mobility of
the Intervention Brigade and strengthened its presence
in the Kasai region, largely through redeployments of
civilian, military and police personnel.
4/10

11/10/2017

In order to respect the ceiling on military personnel
numbers authorized under resolution 2348 (2017) and
to meet the new budget requirements, the Mission
will soon complete the repatriation of 1,687 military
units. MONUSCO is also in the process of introducing
and testing a new strategy of protection by projection,
specifically aimed at areas affected by the closure of
MONUSCO bases and designed to provide the mission
with greater flexibility in fulfilling its mandate to
protect civilians.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
MONUSCO’s commitment to supporting, through
its good offices, the principles of the Agreement of
31 December 2016, which represent the only viable way
to create the necessary conditions for holding credible
and peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Publishing a realistic electoral calendar,
establishing a budget for the elections, implementing
measures to ease tensions and ensuring respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms are the main conditions
that must be now be met in order to advance the political
process. In that regard, while United Nations support is
essential, it is not enough. Regional actors, including
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the Economic Community of Central
African States, have a key role to play in helping all the
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to meet the challenges they are facing and in advancing
the political process for the holding of elections. In
that context, the recent visit of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission represents a significant
reinforcement of the international community’s
collective efforts to help the Democratic Republic of
the Congo make progress towards holding elections.
Only through joint efforts, in solidarity and synergy,
can the obstacles facing the Democratic Republic of the
Congo be overcome.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by welcoming the presence of
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also
thank Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and reiterate
17-31930

11/10/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

our appreciation for his entire team and the staff of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the work they are doing in very difficult conditions.
I would like to once again reaffirm Uruguay’s
commitment to establishing peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I speak not
just as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council but also as representative of a country that
has been contributing troops to MONUSCO for the
past 17 years without interruption. I would like to
outline Uruguay’s assessment of three aspects of the
situation — the accumulating political delays, their
impact on the security, humanitarian and human rights
situations, and the role of MONUSCO in dealing with
the current situation.
First, we are concerned about the fact that the
broad consensus reached between the key political
actors through the signing on 31 December 2016 of
the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
is rapidly eroding, thanks to significant divisions
among the signatories. The continuing delays in
the implementation of the Agreement, thanks to the
lack of genuine commitment among parties, have
seriously jeopardized the possibility of holding
elections before the end of the year, as stipulated in
the Agreement, and have done nothing but heighten
the political and institutional uncertainty. In order to
deal with this, Uruguay strongly urges all the political
stakeholders who signed the Agreement — including
the Government, which has a special role to play by
virtue of its sovereign responsibilities — to create the
conditions necessary to advance the political process.
There is no more time to lose.
Uruguay endorses the repeated requests by the
Secretary-General, the Council and the African Union
for the speedy publication of a credible calendar for the
holding of elections, in accordance with the provisions
of the agreement. It would not only significantly reduce
uncertainty among the Congolese people but would
also enable the various partners — including the United
Nations, whose technical and financial support remain
important for the conduct of elections — to better
determine the type of support they will have to provide.
Secondly, the stagnation of the political process
is clearly having a negative effect on the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation. It is always
the civilian population that suffers most in such crises.

S/PV. 8067

As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/824) points
out, the security situation has continued to worsen in
many areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the past few months. We also continue to be concerned
about the number of human rights abuses and violations
documented by MONUSCO, including the continuing
shrinking of the democratic space and violations of
civil and political rights, especially the right to peaceful
assembly and freedom of opinion and expression.
We urge the Government authorities to take
decisive action to end impunity. That will involve strong
Government measures aimed at bringing to justice any
individual responsible for human rights violations,
including members of the national police and armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With
regard to the militias operating in the country, a truly
horrifying video has been circulated recently of a public
rape and execution that took place in April in the city of
Luebo in Kasai province. While many were responsible,
the main perpetrator was Kalamba Kambangoma, the
head of the Kamuina Nsapu rebel group. Acts such as
these make us reflect and urge that such evidence be
brought before the International Criminal Court so
that the murderer and his followers can be sentenced
as soon as possible. Those realities, exacerbated by
a fragile economic situation, have led to a worrying
humanitarian situation, with more than 8.5 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance and almost
4 million displaced from their homes. I reiterate
once again that those negative trends cannot improve
as long as the political actors do not make tangible
progress with the political process. Hence the crucial
importance of the immediate and full implementation
of the Agreement of 31 December 2016.
Thirdly, Uruguay acknowledges the efforts that
MONUSCO has continued to make with the goal
of turning its force into a more agile, flexible and
receptive instrument. However, in that regard I should
reiterate my delegation’s views as expressed during the
renewal of the mandate in March (see S/PV.7910) and
the previous briefing session in July (see S/PV.7998).
We are concerned about the reduction in MONUSCO
troop numbers at a time when there the violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is increasing
significantly. We have taken note of the special report
(S/2017/826) of the Secretary-General on the recently
published strategic review of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We acknowledge the

17-319305/10

S/PV.8067

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

comprehensive and serious work done at the direction
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and it
is important to us. We should also emphasize that the
Secretariat has already clearly indicated the limits of
the tasks that MONUSCO can carry out in its present
configuration and given the current situation on the
ground. We encourage MONUSCO to continue focusing
on the Mission’s two strategic priorities, the protection
of civilians and support for the implementation of the
Agreement of 31 December 2016.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
condolences to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania for the death of two of its Blue Helmets
as a result of the deliberate attacks perpetrated by the
Allied Democratic Forces armed group. We firmly
condemn those attacks and call for those responsible to
be brought to justice.
Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
welcome the presence of Mr. Léonard She Okitundu,
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Bolivia is also grateful for the briefing
from Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We thank him for
his mediating efforts and his support to the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in strengthening
the security and stability in the country.
We deplore the recent attack on MONUSCO
by the Allied Democratic Forces, offer our deepest
condolences to the families, the people and the
Government of Tanzania for their loss of two members
of their contingent in that attack and hope that the
injured recover swiftly. We condemn the current
climate of violence and the deterioration of the security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
regret that the new areas of conflict that have emerged
include disputes over access to natural resources,
conflicts between armed and intercommunal groups
and ethnic violence.
We firmly condemn the actions that have
resulted, as Mr. Sidikou mentioned, in approximately
8.5 million people, including 5.5 million children,
needing humanitarian assistance. We deplore the fact
that 3.8 million people have been internally displaced,
an increase of 16 per cent since January, according
6/10

11/10/2017

to the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2017/824).
We also condemn all actions aimed at intensifying
intercommunal tensions and inciting violence, as well
as any acts of sexual exploitation. We believe that all
such acts, including those in which the national police
have participated, should be duly investigated and the
people responsible brought to justice and tried in the
appropriate courts.
Bolivia supports the political initiatives and
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/825) on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which seeks, among other things, to have a positive
effect on the plans for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as for the repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration of the various insurgent groups,
both Congolese and foreigners, operating within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also commend
MONUSCO’s increased efforts to bring security to
civilians, and we encourage it to continue working for
peace and stability in the region, in coordination with
the military forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in accordance with its mandate.
The current political stalemate and uncertainty
about elections are crucial issues that must be resolved if
we are to put an end to insecurity in the region. Progress
on the political situation is essential, and we reiterate
that the principles of preventive diplomacy and good
offices aimed at reaching a negotiated political solution
that respects the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must not be neglected. In that regard, we
note the convening of a forum for reconciliation in the
Kasai region in Kananga on 19 September, and we call
on the parties to implement the confidence-building
measures contained in the political agreement.
In that regard, Bolivia believes that the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo signed on
31 December 2016 between the Government and the
opposition represents a solid foundation establishing
a road map for organizing presidential elections
in accordance with the country’s Constitution and
resolution 2277 (2016). We believe that the Agreement
should be respected and supported by all stakeholders
with the aim of holding peaceful, credible, inclusive
and timely elections that can lead to a peaceful transfer
of power. In that regard, we call on the signatories to
17-31930

11/10/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Agreement to create the conditions that can enable
the political process to make progress and materialize.
We also call for the adoption of an agreed-on
election calendar to be published by the Independent
National Electoral Commission and for the completion
of voter registration, in accordance with the Agreement.
As updated by 10 September, voter registration had
reached 41 million, of which we would like to emphasize
that 48 per cent are women. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Special
Envoy for the the Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO
for using their good offices in collaboration with national
political stakeholders and Government authorities to
encourage implementation of the Agreement.
Strengthening dialogue and cooperation with
regional and subregional partners is key to preventing
and settling conflicts. We therefore commend the call
by the Southern African Development Community for
the publication of an elections calendar and by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union for providing
the Electoral Commission with the necessary resources
to implement the Agreement of 31 December 2016.
Bolivia urges them, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Economic Community
of Central African States to hold periodic consultations
with the United Nations, the African Union and other
international stakeholders so as to ensure that the
region and the international community support the
implementation of that agreement.
Finally, I would like to say that we are firmly believe
that it is African initiatives and the Congolese people
and their institutions who should make decisions about
the future of their country. Our duty is to support those
decisions and respect their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. It is our belief that that will be
a decisive factor in the promotion of peace and stability
and the development of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, it is my
honour to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October, andhow honoured we are to see France
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today.
I would also like to thank you sincerely for taking the

S/PV. 8067

initiative to organize this meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to assure you of
our support and cooperation throughout your mandate.
I would be remiss if I did not once again express
my gratitude to the Council, on behalf of the Congolese
Government and people, for its remarkable continued
efforts to help my country restore much-needed stability
and harness the energy it needs for its development.
I would also like to welcome and express my esteem
for Secretary-General António Guterres for his
commitment and personal involvement in the quest for
peaceful solutions to the situation in my country.
Before I proceed, on behalf of the Government
of my country, I would like to strongly condemn the
attacks on peacekeepers perpetrated by the Allied
Democratic Forces in North Kivu, which resulted in
the death of two Tanzanian Blue Helmets and injured
18 others. My country offers its deepest condolences to
the United Nations and the Government of Tanzania, as
well as to the victims’ families.
My delegation takes note of the reports of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2017/825) and on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/2017/824), issued on 29 September and
2 October respectively, and we thank Mr. Maman Samba
Sidikou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who has just presented them. While we appreciate the
reports’ content, we believe it is important to clarify a
number of points that deserve the Council’s attention.
In that regard, I would like to say a few words about
the political situation in my country, with particular
emphasis on the implementation of the Comprehensive
and Inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December 2016
and the electoral process, as well as on the security
situation and the strategic dialogue.
With regard to the implementation of the
Agreement, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report of 15 August 2017 (S/2017/712), following the
establishment of a Government of National Unity,
the Conseil national de suivi de l’accord was created.
It is functioning and is headed by a member of the
Rassemblement opposition. I will come back to that in
a moment.

17-319307/10

S/PV.8067

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to the electoral process, as the Council
knows, the process of updating the electoral register
has entered its final phase with the enrolment of voters
in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces, as well as in the
territories of Luilu and Kamiji in Lomami province,
all of which have been in turmoil in the wake of the
deplorable events involving the Kamuina Nsapu militia.
Of 45 million expected voters, 42 million have already
been registered. As we can see, my country is well and
truly on the road to holding elections. The question
that everyone on the Council has asked today is about
the electoral calendar. In answer to that, I can say that
the Conseil national de suivi de l’accord, together with
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
the Government, has begun evaluating the electoral
process, and that the calendar will be published as soon
as that is done. The Council is no doubt aware, however,
that the Commission published draft calendars on two
previous occasions, in 2014 and 2015, which were not
only systematically rejected by the opposition but
also did not receive the expected support from the
international community. As a result, the elections have
been postponed until now.
Moreover, for logistical, financial, security and
legal reasons, the President of the Independent National
Electoral Commission announced several months ago
that the three elections planned for December could not
take place at that time. That announcement continues
to give rise to differing views on the legitimacy of
my country’s institutions thereafter. It seems hardly
necessary to affirm in that regard that the institutions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, like those of
other States around the world, derive their legitimacy
from the Constitution. The Comprehensive and
Inclusive Political Agreement, signed at Kinshasa’s
Interdiocesan Centre and based specifically on our
desire to organize peaceful, credible and transparent
elections, also commits the signatories to respect for
the Constitution. Paragraph 2.1 of chapter 2 of the
Agreement states that
“[t]he parties commit to respecting the
Constitution of 18 February 2006, as amended in
2011, and the laws of the Republic, and to organize
presidential, legislative, national and provincial
elections, as well as local elections, in conformity
with the Constitution.”
As for the possibility of postponing the elections,
paragraph 4.2 of chapter 4 of the Agreement states that
8/10

11/10/2017

“[t]he parties agree to organize elections
in a single presidential, legal, national and
provincial sequence in December 2017 at the
latest. Nevertheless, the Conseil national de suivi
de l’accord, the Government and the Independent
National Electoral Commission can unanimously
evaluate the timeline required for the finalization
of election dates.”
A second evaluation meeting is planned for 12 to
14 October 2017 in order to make that decision. To
conclude this point, it is important to underscore
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is firmly
committed to the irreversibility of organizing the
elections, as President Joseph Kabila Kabange stated
from the rostrum of the General Assembly Hall (see
A/72/PV.19). But we must ensure that they are strong
elections that will be conducive to a peaceful transition
of power and can avoid the unfortunate turmoil that
marked the previous elections, in 2006 and 2011.
On the security front, both reports mention the
activities of armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in certain
States of the Great Lakes region. With regard to my
country specifically, our armed forces are continuing
their fight to eradicate such groups in collaboration with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Given those negative forces’ unconventional operating
methods, my country is of the view that MONUSCO
should aim at maximum effectiveness by providing
the Intervention Brigade with the means that can
enable it to fulfil the tasks assigned to it under
resolution 2348 (2017).
As regards the former combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), in my statement to the Council in
August (see S/PV.8026), I brought members up to date
on the political and military activities of those ex-rebels
in the neighbouring countries where they had found
refuge, a situation that has also been brought to the
attention of the authorities of those countries. For that
reason, my Government has appealed to the Council to
put pressure on the countries involved to comply with
their commitments under the Addis Ababa agreement,
and that we should also consider imposing sanctions
on the former M-23’s leaders. The disappearance
of more than 900 M-23 members cantoned in the
Bihanga military camp is very worrying. According
to information from various sources, including the
tripartite meeting of the Democratic Republic of the
17-31930

11/10/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8067

Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan
in Kinshasa from 2 to 4 September, they will be joining
various armed groups operating in the Central African
Republic, Burundi and South Sudan as well as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council will
agree that this development could harm peace and
stability in the entire region.

neighbouring provinces and in Angola, is beginning to
return. In order to restore their confidence and promote
peaceful coexistence, the President of the Republic, at
the end of his visit to the provinces concerned with the
purpose of reassuring the people, initiated and presided
over a forum on peace, reconciliation and development,
involving all the stakeholders in those provinces.

With regard to these issues, President Kabange and
his Ugandan counterpart, President Yoweri Museveni,
decided at their most recent meeting to coordinate
their efforts to eradicate negative forces in the region
and to launch joint operations shortly. The report also
mentions the possibility of Uganda’s granting refugee
status to these former rebels, a possibility that my
country will verify through the appropriate channels
before discussing it with the Ugandan Government.
If the persons concerned meet the requirements of the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, the
decision of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees will be final.

As I emphasized to the Council two months ago, the
major remaining challenge in that part of the country
is a humanitarian one. Caring for the internally and
externally displaced persons who are returning demands
that we mobilize all our partners for urgent assistance.

In my various statements I have always brought
up the issue of the 340 combatants of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda who are still
waiting to be repatriated in transit sites in Kanyabayonga
in North Kivu, Walungu in South Kivu and Kisangani
in Tshopo. I once again reiterate my Government’s call
to the international community to repatriate them to
their countries of origin or, failing that, to a third-party
country outside the Great Lakes region.
Concerning the combatants of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army quartered in Munigi, Dungu and Goma
in North Kivu, my Government appreciates the efforts
made in that regard by MONUSCO in collaboration with
the Governments of South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those efforts have resulted in
the repatriation of eight of them and the relocation of 58
others to Ethiopia, Kenya and Sudan. My Government
hopes that those efforts will continue until all those still
in the transit sites are either repatriated or relocated to
third-party countries.
To bring this chapter to a close, I should briefly
mention that calm returned yesterday to the provinces of
Kasai and Kasai Central, which suffered terrorist attacks
by the Kamuina Nsapu militia. Investigations have been
opened to shed light on the exact circumstances of the
crimes committed, establish accountability for them
and identify their perpetrators with a view to punishing
them. The local population, which had sought refuge in

With regard to the strategic dialogue — beyond the
first phase, which was held in March 2016 — resolution
2348 (2017) provides for the dialogue between the
Government and MONUSCO to continue. In that
regard, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo believes that the withdrawal of the United
Nations forces should be carried out gradually in three
phases. The first should be carried out in areas where
MONUSCO’s presence is no longer necessary, the
second in areas where the concentration of forces is
greater than the threat, and the third in the areas where
threats persist or new challenges are emerging. With
regard to the composition of MONUSCO’s contingents,
we believe that the Intervention Brigade should be
the last force to leave the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, given the nature of its actions
and its origin.
This morning I have heard concern and even
uncertainty from members of the Council regarding the
implementation of the Agreement and the organization
of the elections. I will try to put that into perspective.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is no worse than in other countries in similar
circumstances. With regard, first, to the comments about
the disproportionate use of force, there is absolutely no
deliberate policy for using disproportionate force. If such
cases occur, it is individuals who are responsible, and
those individuals would be punished and condemned.
With regard to freedom of expression and the freedom
to demonstrate, I would like to remind the Council that
we are bound by the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, which cannot be broken — its
freedoms are absolute, but their interpretation can be
relative. Restrictions do exist, but such restrictions are
necessary in all democratic societies. In our country,
an instance of people inciting to insurrection through
a demonstration clearly does not fall within the context

17-319309/10

S/PV.8067

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the democratic exercise of the freedom of expression.
Public order requires and takes precedence over the
exercise of that freedom.
That is why I would like to assure the Council of
the determination of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to see the Agreement of
31 December implemented, which it is doing, despite
all the concerns I have heard today.
As far as the organization of elections is concerned,
the main condition for getting that done is determining
who the electors are. And as I said earlier, the voter
registration process will be finalized in around 30 days.
After that, and as the Independent National Electoral
Commission has promised, the electoral calendar will
be published, and we will know when the elections are
to take place. I wanted to put the concerns that I have
just heard into perspective.

10/10

11/10/2017

In its quest to achieve peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my Government
appreciates the support that it has received from
international and regional organizations, including
the African Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, the Southern African
Development Community and many others. This is
an opportunity for my country to pay tribute and
express our gratitude to them, as well as to the troopcontributing countries. I would like to reiterate the
gratitude of my Government to all members of the
Council for their commitment to the cause of peace in
my country.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-31930
