S/PV.8914

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8914

th meeting
Thursday, 2 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Dime-Labille
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Mark
Ms. Elmansouri
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36454 (E)
*2136454*

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

international-standard trials fully reflecting the nature
of the crimes committed against Iraqi communities by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez, Permanent Representative of Mexico,
for his service as President of the Council for the month
of November. I am sure I speak for all the members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador de la Fuente Ramírez and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ritscher.
Mr. Ritscher: I am very honoured to be able to
address the Security Council this morning for the first
time as Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
and to present to members the seventh report on
its activities.
In the two months since my appointment, I have
had the opportunity to engage with survivors, national
authorities, non-governmental organizations and
international partners, as well as with all parts of our
team in Baghdad, Dohuk and Erbil. I have seen first-hand
the work being conducted across Iraq, in collaboration
with our national partners, to secure vital evidence
capable of building a comprehensive legal basis for
2/17

02/12/2021

Knowing from experience the challenges national
authorities face in pursuing justice for those crimes, I
believe we now stand at a turning point, a moment of
perhaps unexpected hope. Through the establishment
of structural case briefs addressing crimes committed
against all impacted communities in Iraq, through the
development of detailed case files tying the actions
of specific ISIL members to those crimes and by
harnessing advanced technology to serve this purpose,
we can now envision a new landscape in which those
who believed themselves to be out of reach of justice
are held accountable in a court of law. If we maintain
our collective commitment, if we strengthen our unity
in addressing the inherent challenges that the scale
of ISIL criminality presents, I believe we have the
opportunity to turn the tide from impunity to justice.
A week ago, I stood at a mass grave outside Mosul
containing the remains of the victims of executions
carried out by ISIL at Badush Central Prison in June
2014. I listened to the story told by one survivor who
had to go through that horror, and now has to carry
its magnitude as he seeks to move on with his life. I
also saw the commitment demonstrated by the national
authorities and our team members, as well as other
partners, working in that remote location, despite
the security challenges, to support the collection of
evidence that may lay the foundations for justice and to
ensure that families will be able to bury the remains of
their loved ones.
Together, we recommenced work to exhume the
bodies of those killed and collect forensic evidence
for use in identifying those ISIL members responsible.
By working with survivors and empowering them
to provide their testimonies, we have established an
account of those attacks that bears the hallmarks of
ISIL’s violence against many communities of Iraq.
Evidence collected shows the detailed preparation
for the attack by senior ISIL members, followed by
the launch of the assault on the morning of 9 June.
Prisoners captured were led to sites close to the prison,
separated based on their religion and humiliated. At
least 1,000, predominantly Shia, prisoners were then
systematically killed.
Through our analysis of digital, documentary,
testimonial and forensic evidence, including internal
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

ISIL documents, we have identified a number of
individual ISIL members responsible for carrying
out those crimes. Through the synthesis of that data,
I can also announce to the Council today that we
have finalized our initial case brief in relation to this
investigation, detailing our conclusion that crimes
committed by ISIL members at Badush Central
Prison constitute crimes against humanity of murder,
extermination, torture, enforced disappearances,
persecution and other inhumane acts, and the war
crimes of wilful killing, torture, inhumane treatment
and outrage upon personal dignity. By establishing that
comprehensive structural analysis of crimes committed
at Badush prison, as we did previously with respect
to attacks in Sinjar and Tikrit, we seek to strengthen
the basis on which justice can be built together with
national authorities.
Evidence collected on the Badush Central Prison
attacks serves to underline the detailed planning
undertaken by ISIL in carrying out their atrocities. That
methodological and strategic approach is seen even more
clearly in two other key lines of investigation that have
accelerated in the past six months: on the development
and use of chemical and biological weapons by ISIL and
on the financial mechanisms through which it sustained
its campaign of violence.
Forensic analysis of battlefield evidence made
available to us by Iraqi authorities has shown that ISIL’s
development and deployment of chemical weapons
was not an opportunist exploitation of fortunate
circumstances; it was a strategic priority implemented
in line with a long-term vision.
Our evidence shows that ISIL clearly identified,
and then seized, chemical-weapon production factories
and other sources of precursor material, while also
taking over the University of Mosul campus as a hub
for research and development. Small teams of qualified
technical and scientific experts, some brought in from
abroad, worked to adapt and enhance the programme.
Through an analysis of internal ISIL manuals on
chemical-weapon production, we see the programme
diversify and become more sophisticated as new
expertise arrives.
The results can be seen in the more than 3,000
victims of chemical-weapon attacks carried out by ISIL
that our team has identified to date. Investigations in
relation to attacks in Taza Khurmatu show the successful
use of multiple rocket artillery projectiles containing

S/PV. 8914

a sulphur mustard agent. Medical records from local
hospital facilities show children and adults admitted
for burns, skin infections and respiratory problems,
as well as longer-term effects, including harm to the
reproductive health of both men and women, birth
defects, miscarriages, stillbirths and long-term health
consequences for children born to exposed parents.
As with all of ISIL’s activities, its confidence
that its documents and internal structure would
never be uncovered forms the basis for the hope of
accountability. Through the analysis of detailed records
ISIL left behind, we have identified individual ISIL
members who are allegedly responsible for leading the
development of the programme and the implementation
of major attacks.
I can inform the Council today that, in my next
briefing, I will present the results of a structural case
brief detailing our findings in relation to ISIL’s use of
chemical weapons, including legal characterization of
the crimes committed in its implementation.
It is essential that those who financially supported
and profited from ISIL crimes also be brought to
justice. That imperative, combined with a drive to
understand the economic mechanisms at the heart of
ISIL’s operations, have guided the work of our dedicated
Financial Crimes Unit.
In recent months, our investigations have uncovered
the inner workings of the central ISIL treasury,
Bayt Al-Mal — or “House of Money” — the central
department responsible for the collection, storage,
management and movement of its wealth. We have
identified a network of senior ISIL leadership who also
acted as trusted financiers, diverting wealth that ISIL
gained through pillage, theft of property from targeted
communities and the imposition of a systematic and
exploitative taxation system imposed on those living
under ISIL control. That work has underlined the
extensive financial exploitation by ISIL of the most
vulnerable communities of Iraq for the personal benefit
and profit of its most senior members.
Given the scale of damage inflicted on Iraq
through that economic exploitation, I am pleased to
inform the Council that our work with Iraqi authorities
in support of prosecutions of those responsible has
deepened significantly. That is reflected in our recent
sharing of a comprehensive case brief with the Iraqi
judiciary, in line with our mandate and terms of
reference, detailing the use by ISIL of money service

21-364543/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

02/12/2021

businesses as key facilitators of their financing. I look
forward, in the coming months, to expanding this type
of cooperation to hold those who wished to profit from
ISIL crimes accountable.

evidence, we can already tie the actions of individuals
to the commission of these crimes. The evidence
collected pursuant to our mandate is now capable of
supporting trials.

That enhanced engagement with Iraqi authorities
has been reflected across our work in the past six
months. It also reflects a personal priority for me as
I take up leadership of the team to identify additional
channels through which we can deliver meaningful
assistance to our Iraqi counterparts in the highest spirit
of cooperation.

Building on that momentum, and in line with our
terms of reference, I wish to underline my commitment,
at the request of the Government of Iraq, to work with
all partners in establishing a domestic legal framework
that allows us to harness this evidence in prosecuting
ISIL members for international crimes in Iraq. I am
grateful for the positive discussions I have already
held with Iraqi counterparts in that regard since
my appointment.

I am also cognizant that our work in implementing
our mandate will not be satisfied through the collection
of evidence alone, or through the establishment of an
archive or historical record, as valuable as that might
be. To deliver on the promise made through resolution
2379 (2017), we must put this evidence to work before
competent courts.
Reflecting that imperative, we have redoubled our
efforts to share knowledge with national authorities
in areas that may ultimately support the development
of joint case files and the conduct of proceedings in
Iraq. That includes the implementation of a digitization
project under which 25,000 documents are now being
processed every day, as well as ongoing assistance in
the excavation of mass graves and the exploitation of
digital evidence.
In taking forward our collaboration with
Iraqi authorities, I am conscious of the leadership
demonstrated by the Government of Iraq in seeking
the assistance of the international community through
resolution 2379 (2017). Our goal must be to repay that
commitment by providing tangible assistance in the
conduct of international-standard trials that reflect the
profound impact of ISIL atrocities on all communities
of Iraq.
As I indicated in my report, I believe the steps
to deliver this are clear and achievable. By the end of
2022, UNITAD will have established a cross-cutting
and comprehensive legal basis for the prosecution of
ISIL members for international crimes committed
against a broad range of communities, as well as
its chemical-weapons programme and financial
support systems.
Through our effective engagement with survivors
and witnesses, and by exploiting the extensive digital
fingerprints left behind by its members in battlefield
4/17

This week, we have seen what comprehensive
justice means to communities and survivors. Two days
ago, a landmark moment was reached in the Higher
Regional Court in Frankfurt, Germany, through the
first-ever conviction of an ISIL member for the crime
of genocide. The facts of that case resonate deeply,
both because of their brutality and because of their
relative normality under ISIL — a 5-year-old Yazidi
girl, purchased along with her mother as part of ISIL’s
enslavement of their community, left to die chained
outside in 50°C heat in Fallujah.
It was with a deep sense of responsibility that
I led the team in charge of prosecuting that case in
my former role, and I am delighted that the foresight
shown by the Security Council and the Government of
Iraq has led to the provision of meaningful support by
UNITAD, assisting German prosecutors in securing
that conviction.
For the first time, the Yazidi community has seen
an ISIL member prosecuted in a court of law for the
genocidal acts committed against it. The words of Nadia
Murad, Yazidi survivor and Nobel Peace Prize laureate
following the judgment yesterday should underline
our collective responsibility as we continue this work.
She said: “When survivors seek justice, they look for
someone to give them hope that justice is possible.”
In concluding, allow me to underline the key
message I wish to share with the Council today. We
now have the chance, collectively, to make such
prosecutions the norm, not a celebrated exception.
In cooperation with Iraqi authorities and those of the
Kurdistan region, together with survivors and with the
support of the Council, we are building the evidence
that can deliver meaningful justice for all those who
suffered from ISIL crimes in Iraq. If we maintain our
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8914

unity, we can capitalize on the opportunity that is now
before us.

ensure that the Government of Iraq can move ahead
with prosecutions.

Next week, I will return to Iraq to attend a returnof-remains ceremony at Kocho village, Sinjar, where
UNITAD is supporting the dignified burial of victims
of mass killings carried out by ISIL fighters in August
2014. To the survivors and families of victims present,
I will bring the same message that I have brought to
the Council today. Justice has been slow, but there is
now hope.

We also welcome the progress that UNITAD
has made towards establishing a legal basis for the
prosecution of perpetrators for the horrific mass killing
at Badush prison in 2014, as we have heard today. We
note the ground gained towards persecuting senior
leaders of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
by the Financial Crimes Unit within UNITAD. The
United Kingdom supports UNITAD’s ongoing focus
on investigations into the crimes committed by ISIL
against minority communities and into the development
and use of biological and chemical weapons by ISIL.

I underline my commitment to the Security Council
today to do everything in my power to deliver on the
promise we have made to these families and all those
impacted by the crimes of ISIL in Iraq.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ritscher for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): First, I should
like to welcome Christian Ritscher’s appointment
as Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD) and the
momentum with which he is taking forward the work
mandated by the Security Council in resolution 2379
(2017). It is clear from the crimes described today by
the Special Adviser and from the powerful words of
Nadia Murad that he quoted how important it is to hold
Da’esh to account. We continue to strongly support the
work of UNITAD to that effect.
We also welcome the significant efforts of the
Government of Iraq to progress accountability for
Da’esh perpetrators, as the Special Adviser said.
Above all, we commend the close collaboration
between UNITAD and the Government of Iraq. For
example, the strengthening of legal and judicial
frameworks is essential for the prosecution of Da’esh
crimes, and this is an area where UNITAD can add
particular value to national efforts. The United Kingdom
encourages UNITAD’s other efforts to support the
Iraqi authorities, including through specialist training
provided to Iraqi judges, capacity-building efforts and
the sharing of evidence in financial investigations.
We look forward to seeing continued efforts to
secure an evidence-sharing mechanism that would
provide assurances on the use of the death penalty and

We will therefore continue to support UNITAD’s
work to address the heinous crimes committed by
Da’esh. It is vital that we collectively hold perpetrators
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
to account.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I trust that under, your excellent stewardship, the
Council’s work this month will be a huge success. The
Chinese delegation will offer you its full cooperation.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Mexico
on an excellent job done as President of the Council
last month.
I thank Christian Ritscher, Special Adviser and
Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
for his first briefing to the Council and welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
committed appalling atrocities in Iraq. Its remnants are
still making waves today. It is of great important for the
United Nations, at the request of the Iraqi Government,
to collect evidence of the crimes committed by ISIL
and to assist Iraq’s accountability efforts on the
premise that respecting Iraq’s judicial sovereignty is of
great significant for efforts to combat terrorism and to
uphold justice.
According to the briefing of the Special Adviser,
over the past few months UNITAD has overcome
the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and resumed normal operations. It has completed
basic investigations of the case of mass executions

21-364545/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

at Badush prison, in Mosul. Its investigation into the
alleged development and use of biological and chemical
weapons by ISIL has also made some initial headway.
It is gathering increasing evidence of ISIL’s crimes.
China commends these achievements.
UNITAD’s extensive use of new technologies
in evidence collection is a showcase for the use of
science and technology to improve the effectiveness of
counterterrorism work. At the same time, regrettably,
despite UNITAD’s more than three years of operations,
the extensive evidence available to it has yet to yield
concrete results in accountability for terrorists.
Resolution 2379 (2017) explicitly stipulates that the
Iraqi Government is to be the primary recipient of
criminal evidence. Setting preconditions for the transfer
of evidence will not contribute to bringing terrorists
speedily to justice.
China welcomes UNITAD’s sharing of information
with Iraq on its investigative findings about the
financing of ISIL and hopes that UNITAD can begin
the comprehensive and systematic transfer of evidence
to Iraq as soon as possible. In sharing information
collected in Iraq with other Member States, UNITAD
should have Iraq’s consent and follow the principles of
transparency and non-discrimination.
During the reporting period, UNITAD continued
its close corporation with the Iraqi Government. Since
assuming his post, the Special Adviser has engaged
widely with parties in Iraq. A number of Iraqi staff
members of UNITAD continue to flourish. These are
all welcome developments. We support UNITAD in
maintaining good cooperation with the Iraq Government
and its continued assistance with the Government’s
capacity-building needs, inter alia, in evidence
collection and digitalization. At the request of the Iraqi
Government, UNITAD can also support Iraq’s conduct
of trials of relevant cases. In so doing, UNITAD should
fully respect Iraq’s judicial sovereignty.
UNITAD is a temporary and transitional
arrangement for the United Nations in supporting Iraq’s
accountability efforts. It should not become a permanent
body. Its May report contained some preliminary ideas
about the completion strategy. China hopes that, in its
next report, UNITAD can flesh out the strategy for the
Council’s deliberations.
Terrorism is a real threat. All countries should
uphold true multilateralism, abandon geopolitical
considerations and ideological biases and join forces
6/17

02/12/2021

to combat all terrorist organizations listed by the
Council. Along with the rest of the Council, China
stands ready to continue to advance international
counterterrorism cooperation.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for your kind words and wish
you every success in your leadership of the Council this
month. To that end, you can count on the support of
my delegation.
Mexico thanks and welcomes Mr. Christian
Ritscher, who has today presented his first report in his
capacity as Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), and we wish him every success in the
exercise of his functions. We welcome the representative
of Iraq to this meeting.
I begin by noting that the report reflects an efficient
transition, which has allowed for continuity in the
investigative work on the ground. That is clearly good
news. We highlight the progress made on the dossier
on the June 2014 mass executions in Badush prison,
which includes a structured body of evidence for the
prosecution of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL).
The investigation into ISIL’s use of chemical
weapons and the involvement of the University of Mosul
are of particular significance. Redirecting an academic
institution towards the development of weapons of
mass destruction is truly regrettable. It is contrary to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and represents the complete abrogation of the
values for the culture of peace that are appropriate to
educational institutions. That leads us to consider the
importance of strengthening the tools at the disposal of
the international community and the need for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We are pleased that the report reiterates the close
cooperation of the Iraqi authorities with UNITAD,
particularly in three specific areas: the digitization of
documentary evidence, training and technical support
for the excavation of graves; and the provision of
courses for judges in international criminal law. We
also note the work of UNITAD’s financial crimes unit in
investigating ISIL’s funding and resource management.
Clarifying such activities may be crucial to disrupting
ongoing operations, while improving strategies to
combat terrorist financing more effectively.
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

As we have said on other occasions, exhumations
of victims must be carried out with respect and dignity
in order to promote psychosocial healing. We highlight
the scheduling of another ceremony for the return
of remains to relatives this month in the village of
Kocho. Those memorial ceremonies help to process
the mourning to which the relatives of victims of the
atrocious crimes committed by ISIL are entitled.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of ensuring that
the crimes committed by ISIL do not go unpunished.
We trust that the evidence that was, and continues to
be, collected by UNITAD will serve to assist national
and international courts, including the International
Criminal Court, in the prosecution and trial of the
perpetrators of such atrocities. In that regard, we
welcome this week’s ruling by a court in Frankfurt
against Taha Al-Jumailly, the first member of the
Islamic State to be tried for genocide against the Yazidi
community. Truth, together with the delivery of justice,
is the best way to repair the social fabric and build
sustainable peace.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council as you usher in the Council’s winter
season. I take this opportunity to also thank the entire
team of Mexico for its very successful presidency
in November.

S/PV. 8914

way in other countries beyond Iraq. The Russian
delegation welcomes the significant developments in the
investigations of crimes against the Sunni, Christian,
Kaka’i, Shabak and Shia Turkmen communities.
We hope that UNITAD maintains that momentum,
but not at the expense of the quality of its work,
particularly as the advanced technological tools used
by the unit make that possible. The Team successfully
collects and analyses evidence, drawing on new
technologies, including artificial intelligence, machine
learning and others. The Russian Federation recognizes
and encourages the use of modern technological
innovations in investigations to the extent that it
does not compromise the criterion of relevant and
admissible evidence.
We hope that the Iraqi authorities will soon be
able to access the collected evidence, as prescribed by
resolution 2379 (2017). That text specifies the relevant
Iraqi authorities as the main recipient of the evidence
collected by the Team. The absence of specialized
national legislation should not adversely affect the
implementation of the mandate of the Investigative
Team established by the Security Council.
We are convinced that granting Iraq access to
evidence will expedite the process of holding the
perpetrators of international crimes accountable.

We welcome Mr. Christian Ritscher, Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD). We hope that, under the new leadership, the
Investigative Team will redouble its efforts to ensure
the objective and impartial collection and analysis of
evidence of crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq.

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to start by
thanking the Mexican presidency, Ambassador De
La Fuente Ramírez and his team for their excellent
work in the month of November. I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I assure you of our full support. I
thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his
report. I welcome the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Iraq to our meeting today.

We have carefully reviewed the Investigative
Team’s seventh report, and we appreciate the
informative briefing. We welcome the completion of the
case brief on the investigation into the mass execution
of Shia Muslim prisoners at Badush prison in western
Mosul, which was seized by ISIL militants. The crimes
committed there are inexcusable. All those responsible
for them must be punished as they deserve.

We welcome the seventh report of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), which includes the progress
that the Team has made in the past six months. We
note with satisfaction the achievements in the work of
UNITAD despite the political and security challenges
in the Team’s operating environment, as well as the
restrictions due to the coronavirus disease pandemic.

We note the good pace of investigations into the
development and use by terrorists of chemical and
biological weapons. There is no doubt that they were
used by terrorists. ISIL fighters have acted in a similar

We look forward to the first prosecutions of members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) for
international crimes, as anticipated in resolution 2379

21-364547/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

(2017). We are encouraged by the Investigative Team’s
innovative approach and its results. The continued
integration of advanced technological tools in the
Team’s work has proved efficient in collecting and
analysing a rapidly increasing amount of evidence in
the digitization project.
We have been closely following the Team’s
investigations into the use of chemical and biological
weapons by ISIL in Iraq in 2014 and 2016. The
chemical-weapon-related atrocities, as confirmed in
the Team’s report, cannot be ignored.
We reiterate Viet Nam’s consistent and strong
support for the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Chemical weapons, which are
indiscriminate and inhumane, have long-term effects
on human life and the environment. My delegation
unequivocally condemns the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstance. We
thank the Special Adviser and his team for their efforts
and look forward to the completion of the case brief in
this line of investigation.
Against that backdrop, we commend UNITAD for
its strengthened cooperation with the Iraqi Government
and encourage the Team to continue to provide training
and other forms of capacity-building assistance to local
authorities for the future prosecution of ISIL members.
The strong commitment by Iraq’s relevant
authorities and local communities remains a key factor
in the investigations. The establishment of the Witness
Protection Department, with the support of UNITAD, is
a significant and commendable step by the Government
of Iraq. In the light of the recent elections in Iraq, we
hope that the Team will continue to provide support for
the establishment of a legal basis for the prosecution of
ISIL members in Iraq for international crimes.
Finally, we highly value the support of Member
States and international organizations for UNITAD
through the provision of experts and funding. It
represents the strong commitment of the international
community in fighting against terrorism and preventing
the resurgence of ISIL.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I thank Mexico for shepherding us
through the previous month with such positive effect. I
congratulate Mr. Christian Ritscher on his appointment
as Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
8/17

02/12/2021

Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD), and I thank him for his briefing.
Kenya welcomes the progress the Investigative
Team has made, as reflected in its seventh report, and
recognizes the contributions made by UNITAD in the
landmark conviction of a fighter of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Germany earlier this
week. Holding those operatives accountable is critical
to combating genocide. We reiterate our unequivocal
support for the prosecution of members of this group,
not only for their terrorist acts but also for related
crimes, including war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.
We recall ISIL’s horrific crimes against individuals,
motivated by its extremist ideology, a core part of which
is the instrumentalization of a clash of identities and
intolerance of diversity, which leads it, by definition,
in addition to its violence, to encourage exclusion,
marginalization and victimization based on ethnicity
and religion. This ideology has, unfortunately, inspired
movements around the world, including in Africa,
where it continues to destabilize our countries. We
would like members and the international community
to always remember that the ideology of ISIL and
that of Al-Qaida affiliates, such as Al-Shabaab, when
operationalized and allowed to take root, becomes
genocide. That is its logical end.
In line with UNITAD’s mandate to support domestic
efforts to hold ISIL accountable, Kenya welcomes
the Special Adviser’s prioritization of engagements
with Iraqi high-level Government officials early in
his tenure. The achievement of full accountability
depends on cooperation with the Iraqi Government,
strengthening the capacity of Iraqi authorities and
working in partnership with all elements of Iraqi
society, including survivor groups, religious authorities
and community leaders.
I applaud the transfer of skills through training and
technology and the provision of international standard
equipment. Kenya believes that the effectiveness
of national judicial and prosecutorial institutions is
critical to the exercise of sovereignty, and that national
ownership strengthens the accountability process. We
are also encouraged by the acceleration of field-based
activities in the second half of this year, as UNITAD
transitions back to a full staffing footprint, as well as
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

UNITAD’s continued support of Government efforts to
excavate mass grave sites associated with ISIL crimes.
I commend the bravery of the survivors and
witnesses, whose testimonies make UNITAD’s work
possible, and I support the extra measures being taken
to ensure their physical safety and mental well-being,
which must be prioritized.
I conclude by encouraging the Security Council
to have the same standard of seriousness and demand
for accountability for other crimes committed by other
terrorist groups, including in Africa and the Horn
of Africa. We must have a single standard and must
not deviate or create double standards or a two-lane
counter-terrorism architecture in the Security Council.
Mrs. Dime-Labille (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to wish you, Mr. President,
every success during your presidency, which comes on
the heels of the excellent presidency held by Mexico. I
would like to also congratulate Mr. Christian Ritscher
on his appointment as new Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). I
thank him for the presentation of the seventh report
of the mechanism responsible for collecting evidence
on acts that may constitute war crimes, crimes against
humanity or crimes of genocide. I especially commend
the Team for the work it completed in recent months.
France welcomes the dialogue initiated by
UNITAD with all components of Iraqi society. It is
essential that the families of those who were victims of
the atrocities committed by Da’esh be involved in the
work of the investigators.
I welcome the presence of the Ambassador of Iraq,
who once again expresses Iraq’s commitment to work
closely with the international community and UNITAD
to ensure that justice be provided to all victims of the
crimes committed by Da’esh on Iraqi territory.
With regard to the report, we note the significant
progress made since the introduction of the previous
report (see S/2021/419). I would like to note in particular
the completion of a third case related to the investigation
of the massacre of predominantly Shia inmates at
Badush prison on 10 June 2014 and the progress made
in the investigation with regard to the development
and use of chemical and biological weapons by Da’esh
against civilians in Iraq between 2014 and 2016, as

S/PV. 8914

well as the implementation of the joint strategy on the
excavation of the mass graves. That work has made it
possible to begin excavations near Badush prison and to
hold the upcoming ceremony to return the remains of
the victims of the massacres in Kojo village, which are
important milestones.
Despite the challenges associated with the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the mechanism was
able to achieve results by implementing creative and
innovative solutions. The pandemic has served to renew
the relevance of the Team’s strategy of integrating
technological tools, such as artificial intelligence,
to formulate charges in order to optimize future
prosecutions of members of Da’esh.
The progress and success of the mechanism are the
result of very good cooperation with Iraq, as evidenced
by the sharing of information on the financing of
the crimes committed by Da’esh, which has allowed
UNITAD to uncover evidence detailing the internal
administrative workings of Da’esh’s central treasury
and how it directly supported Da’esh’s ability to commit
its crimes.
Furthermore, we believe it is important that
UNITAD continue to raise awareness among Iraqi
judicial authorities about the mandate set out in
resolution 2379 (2017), of 21 September 2017, including
through the training of Iraqi investigative judges in
international criminal law and the preparation of case
files for the indictment and prosecution of members
of Da’esh for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.
It is important to recall the consistent position
of the United Nations not to hand over evidence in
judicial proceedings if there is any risk of the death
penalty being imposed, wherever that might take place.
The legislative framework that allows members of
Da’esh to be brought to justice in accordance with the
highest human rights standards and principles must be
finalized. We encourage the Iraqi authorities to pursue
their efforts in this regard, especially as the context is
favourable, with the election of a new Parliament.
The situation of victims is a fundamental element.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Adviser and
the Team to provide psychological support to both
surviving victims and witnesses.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore France’s
commitment to stand by Iraqis in the fight against

21-364549/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

terrorism, including within the Global Coalition
against Da’esh. Iraq is one of our key partners in the
region and can continue to count on our support.
More broadly, our commitment to the country
and its sovereignty was illustrated by the Baghdad
Conference for Cooperation and Partnership, held on
28 August by Iraq, in close cooperation with France.
The holding of that event created positive momentum
that was maintained at the follow-up ministerial
meeting held on 21 September on the margins of the
General Assembly.
The fight against impunity for all perpetrators of
crimes is critical for the stabilization, reconstruction
and reconciliation of the Iraqi people as a whole.
The Council must remain mobilized in order to
prevent the resurgence of Da’esh in all its forms. That
includes both a renewed commitment by UNITAD
to investigate the group’s chain of command and
continued support for the Iraqi authorities’ counterterrorism efforts.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I extend our warm
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. You can
count on our full support. I also wish to congratulate
our colleague, Mr. Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez,
and his delegation on an excellent presidency. I thank
Mr. Ritscher for his report and briefing this morning.
We assure him of Ireland’s support as he fulfils his
important mandate. I also wish to welcome our colleague
Mr. Bahr Aluloom, Permanent Representative of Iraq,
to today’s meeting.
It is clear that the important work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) in ensuring accountability
and support for the survivors of crimes perpetrated
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
accelerated over the reporting period. The completion
of a third case brief connected to the mass killing of
predominantly Shia prisoners at Badush Central Prison,
as well as advanced investigations into ISIL financial
crimes, are examples of such progress.
Ireland wishes to recognize the cooperation
afforded by the Iraqi authorities to the Team, without
which such headway would not have been possible.
We also commend UNITAD for rising to the challenge
posed by huge amounts of digital evidence through the
10/17

02/12/2021

use of creative technological solutions, particularly
during the pandemic.
Building trust and providing gender- and
age-responsive support are crucial in encouraging
victims of ISIL crimes who are members of vulnerable
and marginalized communities to actually share
their stories. We therefore acknowledge the efforts of
UNITAD and the Iraqi Government to meaningfully
engage survivors and victims in accountability efforts.
We were pleased to see the detail in the report on the
range of supports that UNITAD is offering to victims
and survivors, including the provision of psychosocial
support measures to encourage members of the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and queer community to
come forward.
While it is crucial that supports and reparations are
provided for victims and survivors, it is also essential
to hold perpetrators to account for their crimes. In
the context of UNITAD, that means moving from
evidence-gathering to evidence-based trials.
We welcome UNITAD’s intention to prioritize
support to the Iraqi authorities in order to ensure the
adoption of national legislation enabling the domestic
prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide over the coming six months. Such
legislation would mark another important step by Iraq
in the journey towards accountability for ISIL atrocity
crimes. Ireland encourages concrete action towards that
end. Ensuring that criminal proceedings comply with
international human rights law is, of course, essential.
In that connection, I also wish to reiterate Ireland’s
unequivocal opposition to the death penalty in all cases
and circumstances.
Separately, the capacity-building assistance
provided by UNITAD to the Iraqi authorities is
crucial to achieving comprehensive accountability. We
strongly urge the continuation of that important work
as it relates to evidence digitization, excavations of
mass grave sites and the provision of judicial training
in international criminal law.
Given the scale and nature of crimes committed
by ISIL against Iraqi citizens, we have a collective
objective to deliver accountability. The deepening
support provided by UNITAD to domestic proceedings
in different jurisdictions is therefore welcome.
In particular, we note the judgment in the case
referenced by Special Adviser Ritscher in his briefing.
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

As the first prosecution of an ISIL member for
international crimes drawing on UNITAD evidence
and the first-ever conviction of an ISIL member for
genocide against the Yazidi community, this is an
important reminder of the Team’s value in delivering
justice for the victims and survivors of ISIL crimes. In
that connection, Ireland commends Germany and all
States that have initiated proceedings in their domestic
courts to prosecute atrocity crimes committed by
ISIL members.
ISIL’s development and use of chemical and
biological weapons is abhorrent and unacceptable.
We welcome the Special Adviser’s update on the
investigation into the use of chemical and biological
weapons by ISIL, including progress on inquiries into
the impact of the Taza Khurmatu attacks, including
gender-related harms. We look forward to the
completion of that particular case brief in 2022.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Ireland’s
steadfast support for the important work of UNITAD
in ensuring accountability and justice for victims and
survivors of ISIL crimes.
Ms. Mark (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We
begin by congratulating Mr. Christian Ritscher on his
appointment to Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and welcoming his
comprehensive briefing this morning. We are confident
that his expertise makes him well suited to lead the
Investigative Team in the discharge of its mandate.
The adoption of the landmark resolution 2379
(2017) establishing UNITAD was predicated on the
need to ensure accountability for the reprehensible
crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). Over the past few years, the Team
has reached a number of milestones in its lines of
investigation into these crimes, which include the
completion of two case briefs during the previous
reporting period, addressing crimes committed against
the Yazidi community in Sinjar and the mass killing of
unarmed cadets near Tikrit.
In that context, we welcome the efforts undertaken
to build on those achievements through the finalization
of an additional case brief concerning crimes committed
by ISIL in and around Badush Central Prison in
June 2014. We further welcome the progress made in
UNITAD’s investigations into the development and use

S/PV. 8914

of chemical and biological weapons by ISIL. In that
vein, we recall our unyielding position that the use of
chemical weapons under any circumstances constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law and must not be
allowed with impunity.
UNITAD continues to adopt an innovative
approach to the collection, documentation and
analysis of evidence of crimes committed by ISIL,
the preservation of which is critical to facilitating the
prosecution of ISIL members. We note the expansion of
the Team’s collection of documentary evidence within
the context of the ongoing digitization project and
the progress made in the implementation of the Zeteo
application, which has been described as a paradigmshifting innovation in the field of evidence analysis.
In that regard, we acknowledge the financial
contributions made by Member States in support of this
cross-cutting work. We recognize the Special Adviser’s
proactive approach to strengthening engagement with
senior members of the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi
judiciary and other authorities. In addition to ensuring
that UNITAD’s work reflects a common partnership
with the Iraqi authorities, we welcome the efforts
made by the Team to strengthen the capacity of the
Iraqi authorities, including through the provision of
support to Iraqi investigative judges in the development
of case files for the prosecution of ISIL members
and towards enhancing the technical infrastructure
of relevant national authorities responsible for massgrave excavation activities. While we welcome the
Government’s constructive approach to cooperation
and collaboration with UNITAD, we recall that
UNITAD must discharge its mandate without
infringing upon Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence.
Following the milestone elections of 10 October,
there is great momentum within the Security Council
and the international community around the creation of
a peaceful, secure and prosperous Iraq. Nevertheless,
that goal cannot be attained without guaranteeing
justice for victims of ISIL crimes, as justice and peace
are mutually reinforcing. We urge the Government of
Iraq to remain steadfast in its commitment to ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed by ISIL,
including by continuing its consideration of national
legislation that will allow for the prosecution of ISIL
members for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.

21-3645411/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will continue to
stand in solidarity with the Government and the people
of Iraq, particularly in their pursuit of accountability,
which is not a matter of choice, but a matter of duty.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): We congratulate
the Niger on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and we offer our sincere
thanks to Mexico for its excellent steering of our work
in November. I welcome the representative of Iraq to
today’s meeting.
Let me congratulate Mr. Ritscher on his recent
appointment as Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). We welcome comprehensive
report and thank him for his briefing today.
Norway remains a steadfast supporter of UNITAD’s
mandate. The Team’s work to promote accountability
for international crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq is crucial
to restoring the rule of law and ensuring justice for
victims and survivors — both prerequisite conditions
for sustainable peace.
Even though ISIL is territorially defeated, the
overall situation concerning the terrorist group in Iraq
is worrying. It continues to show both the capacity
and the willingness to commit heinous attacks. We
must therefore, as an international community, remain
vigilant. In that regard, Norway is encouraged to note
several positive developments concerning UNITAD’s
work since the former Special Adviser’s last briefing to
the Council (see S/2021/460, annex I). We commend the
Team for completing its case brief on the investigation
into the mass killing of predominantly Shia prisoners
at Badush prison in June 2014. This is an important
milestone, that builds on the progress demonstrated
in the last reporting period, with the completion of the
Team’s first two case briefs.
We are also pleased to note that the work of the
Team’s Financial Crimes Unit is advancing, particularly
with regard to investigations into ISIL’s treasury, Bayt
Al-Mal. Just last month, the joint open meeting of
the Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities once
again reminded us of the importance of preventing
12/17

02/12/2021

and suppressing financing flows to degrade terrorist
capability. We also appreciate continued progress on
numerous other investigations, including ISIL’s use of
chemical and biological weapons, as well as its crimes
against the Sunni community. The latter case file is
significant in illustrating that ISIL targeted all segments
of Iraqi society. Acknowledging this is important for
national reconciliation.
I would now like to highlight three cross-cutting
priorities that Norway considers crucial in UNITAD’s
ongoing work:
The first is accountability. The quantity and quality
of evidence gathered by UNITAD are truly impressive.
However, the mechanism was never intended to remain
simply a depository; it is important that the evidence
ultimately feed into judicial processes to hold ISIL
members to account. Therefore, we would have liked
to receive more information in the Special Adviser’s
report on the current status of discussions between
UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities on an arrangement
for evidence-sharing. We hope that the agreement
reached regarding financial crimes may serve as a
model in this regard.
The second priority is the protection of civilians,
including children, which is a priority for Norway. We
are pleased to note that the dedicated Gender Crimes
and Children Unit has significantly advanced in its
investigations on crimes against children. It is also
very positive that the Unit has gathered additional
evidence on the extent of ISIL’s gender-based crimes,
including sexual slavery, rape and persecution. We are
pleased to learn about the achievement of an advanced
child forensic interview training programme. This is
absolutely vital to prevent children who have been used
in conflict from being revictimized by the judiciary.
The work of UNITAD is key to the long-term
stabilization and development of Iraq after the
territorial defeat of ISIL. Norway is encouraged by
the progress made by UNITAD in cooperating with
the Iraqi judiciary and authorities towards delivering
justice for the victims and survivors of ISIL’s crimes.
UNITAD can count on Norway’s continued support
in its efforts to ensure accountability for international
crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq and justice for
victims and survivors.
Ms. Elmansouri (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
I congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month of
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

December. I wish to thank Mexico for presiding over
the Security Council last month.
I welcome the participation of the Ambassador of
Iraq in today’s meeting.
I wish to thank Mr. Ritscher for his briefing and
to reiterate our congratulations on his appointment
as Special Advisor and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD).
I also wish to commend the progress that has been
achieved by the Investigative Team since the beginning
of its mandate, in particular its prompt adaptation to the
challenges that have been imposed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, and its achievements at various
levels during the period under review, including the
collection and storage of data and evidence, capacitybuilding for the Iraqi authorities and partnerships with
the various stakeholders in Iraq, including civil society
and victims.

S/PV. 8914

that the Investigative Team can deliver on its mandate.
The Security Council should not lose sight of the main
rationale for the establishment of the Investigative
Team under resolution 2379 (2017), namely, to collect
and analyse evidence and to transmit it to the Iraqi
authorities, in full respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and its
jurisdiction over the crimes perpetrated on its soil.
To conclude, we wish to see tangible and effective
results from the Investigative Team on the basis of a clear
timeline and without preconditions. That will enable us
to ensure accountability and promote reconstruction, in
line with the letter addressed by Iraq to the President of
the Security Council on 16 September.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Allow me to convey my
felicitations, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. You have our support
for your presidency. I would also like to thank Mexico
for its very productive and successful presidency. I
welcome Special Adviser Christian Ritscher and thank
him for his comprehensive briefing. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to this meeting.

Tunisia welcomes the opening of the third case
on the crime of genocide in Badush prison and the
investigative work on the use of chemical and biological
weapons by Da’esh, as well as the transmission of
evidence on financing for terrorism. This brings us
closer to creating a database for well-established
evidence with a view to ensuring accountability.
Furthermore, we welcome the use of advanced
technology by the Investigative Team in the collection
and analysis of evidence, especially through the
Zeteo automatic facial recognition technology and the
digitization of documents. We welcome the partnerships
with technology in ensuring accountability.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
carried out inhuman atrocities against the people of
Iraq. The victims of ISIL’s horrific crimes in Iraq also
include 39 Indian nationals. ISIL has deliberately and
indiscriminately targeted innocent civilians, including
women and children. They have systematically
committed genocide, torture, rape, slavery and
kidnapping throughout the territory under its control in
Iraq and Syria. The seventh report of the Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
again brings out the horrific crimes committed by ISIL.

We also welcome the approach of the Investigative
Team, based and rooted in the gender-dimension, the
rights of minorities, human rights and the rights of
witnesses and escapees. Information should be made
available with respect to those categories of individuals
and there should be an emphasis on matters related to
sexual and gender-based violence.

UNITAD is contributing to fighting that impunity
for terror and ensuring accountability for the crimes
committed by ISIL in Iraq. Accountability for such
crimes, including those against minority communities
in Iraq, is critical to achieving smooth reconciliation
and sustained peace in Iraq. The ongoing investigations
on attacks against the Christian, Sunni, Kaka’i, Shabak
and Shia Turkmen communities and the strengthening
of the initial case briefs in the attacks against the Yazidi
community will support the Iraqi Government’s efforts
aimed at national reconciliation.

This progress could not have been achieved without
the support of the Iraq authorities, whom we commend.
Furthermore, cooperation with the Iraqi authorities is
ongoing in capacity-building and exchange of expertise.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to continue to provide political support and
financial and human resources to Iraq in order to ensure

The close partnership and cooperation between the
Iraqi authorities and UNITAD are commendable. That is
central to the effective delivery of UNITAD’s mandate.

21-3645413/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

The joint work of the experts of the Iraq Government
and UNITAD in investigations, mass excavations and
the development of case files will ensure that capacities
are strengthened within the national investigative and
prosecutorial system to ensure accountability in the
long term for the heinous crimes perpetrated by the
ISIL. That holds true for the extensive support provided
by UNITAD to the digitization of evidence in the
possession of the Iraqi authorities and the ISIL-related
case files of the Iraqi judiciary.
The Secretary-General’s recent biannual report
(S/2021/682) on the threat posed by ISIL to international
peace and security highlighted the continuous expansion
of the terrorist group and its affiliates in many parts
of Africa and Asia, including in our neighbourhood.
Therefore, we believe that UNITAD’s investigations
will bolster our efforts in the fight against ISIL and
terrorism. In particular, UNITAD’s investigations into
the internal administration of the ISIL treasury can
provide valuable insights into ISIL’s revenue streams
and in preventing flows to ISIL and its affiliates in
other parts of the world. UNITAD’s widening of the
scope of financial investigations must also include the
external sources of funding for ISIL.
We take note of UNITAD’s proactive efforts to
share its findings with the Iraqi authorities on ISIL’s
financial crimes. That must also extend to other
evidence and information collected by the Investigative
Team. It is unfortunate that, despite a lapse of more than
three years, UNITAD has been unable to fully service
the evidentiary requirements of the Government of Iraq
due to a different interpretation of UNITAD’s mandate.
We hope that that will be rectified soon and that the gap
will be bridged.
We welcome UNITAD’s continued investigation
into the development and use of chemical and biological
weapons by ISIL in Iraq. India firmly condemns the use
of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anybody,
under any circumstance. ISIL’s use of the University
of Mosul for a systematic programme for producing
and weaponizing chemical and biological substances
is of particular concern. India has been highlighting
the serious threat to international peace and security
emanating from the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by ISIL and other terrorist groups. The
international community needs to pay closer attention
to that issue, since such a template could be replicated
by terrorist groups in other places.
14/17

02/12/2021

Last week, the victims of the dastardly 26/11
Mumbai terrorist attacks were remembered in India and
several other countries. Be it Mumbai or Mosul, India
strongly believes that the credibility of our collective
fight against terrorism can be strengthened only once
we can ensure accountability for the grave and inhuman
acts of terror committed by terrorists. We need to take
strong measures against those who encourage, support
and finance terrorism.
The people of Iraq have made immense sacrifices
in Iraq’s fight against ISIL. Justice should be delivered
to the victims of ISIL’s crimes and to their families.
That cannot happen unless those responsible for
the atrocities are held accountable. The full and
timely implementation of UNITAD’s mandate would
contribute to securing justice for those affected. I once
again reiterate that India stands ready to provide its
support to UNITAD in that regard.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I also join other speakers
in congratulating Mexico on its very successful
presidency of the Security Council, and I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming that task for this
month. I welcome Mr. Ritscher to this meeting and
thank him for a detailed overview on the ongoing
investigations of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Iraq. It is positive to
hear that, during the recent reporting period, the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) has re-established full fieldbased operational capacity.
Earlier this week, during an Arria Formula meeting
on accountability in Syria, we heard about challenges
to collecting evidence on the war crimes committed
in Syria. I believe that the excellent work of UNITAD
can serve as an example for showing how we can
end impunity and help to bring justice to the victims
through a holistic approach.
I stress the importance of the continued work of
UNITAD through the respective special units on the
issues of sexual and gender-based crimes and crimes
against children and a focus of witness protection,
as well as psychological support for witnesses
and survivors.
Estonia fully supports UNITAD in its efforts
to strengthen the capacity of the Iraqi authorities,
and commends the significant progress made
in terms of using new resources and technical
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

innovations. In particular, I would like to highlight
the evidence-digitization project, which witnessed
more than 2 million pages of documents archived and
digitized within the reporting period.
Close coordination with the Iraqi authorities must
remain a priority for UNITAD. That cooperation helps
to facilitate the arrest of individuals believed to be
active ISIL members, thereby leading to a safer Iraq.
It is a notable step, which I believe paves way for even
stronger joint activities in the future.
I look forward to the launch of the Interfaith
Dialogue Series in January 2022. Such initiatives
by UNITAD, undertaken together with the Office of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, will provide more in-depth
engagement with local faith communities.
Estonia continues to value UNITAD’s work, as it
meaningfully contributes to achieving accountability
in Iraq with full respect for the principles and best
practices of the United Nations.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I welcome
Special Adviser Ritscher to the Security Council.
We are glad to have him here today in his new role
as Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). His previous experience
in his home country prosecuting alleged members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) for
genocide committed against the Yazidi community in
Iraq is a very meaningful asset in our shared pursuit of
justice for the thousands of victims of ISIS’s horrific
campaign. I thank him for his briefing today.
The United States determined in 2016 that ISIS was
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.
The United States stands with victims in working
to ensure that those responsible are held accountable.
UNITAD is critical to that effort. We will continue
to work with UNITAD to ensure that the evidence
of the atrocities of ISIS is collected, processed and
shared in order to investigate and prosecute those who
are responsible for those atrocities, including foreign
terrorist fighters, by national courts.
To that end, we were encouraged to hear today from
the Special Adviser of UNITAD’s success in supporting
Iraqi authorities to convert documentary evidence into

S/PV. 8914

searchable digital files. With over 2 million documents
already digitized, UNITAD is providing essential
services to the people of Iraq and the international
community in the pursuit of justice. In addition, as we
heard this morning, the investigation by UNITAD has
produced evidence that, on the morning of 10 June 2014,
ISIS forces attacked the Badush Central Prison near
Mosul, which housed approximately 3,000 prisoners,
and executed several hundred predominantly Shia
prisoners. UNITAD’s investigation into that heinous
crime is a critical step in the pursuit of justice for the
families of the victims.
UNITAD, we believe, is most effective when it
works in lockstep with the Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government. We encourage
UNITAD to continue coordinating closely with
the new Iraqi Government to build upon the good
cooperation we saw in the past, as well to continue its
engagement with Iraqi law enforcement and judicial
entities, as well as civil society, including survivor
groups, non-governmental organizations and religious
authorities. The United States urges Iraq to adopt
legislation that would provide a basis for the Iraqi
Government to prosecute atrocity crimes, including
those committed by ISIS. Such authority is essential
to finalizing an arrangement for UNITAD to share
evidence with competent Iraqi authorities in accordance
with its terms of reference.
The United States urges Member States — including
Iraq — to repatriate and prosecute, as appropriate, their
citizens who joined ISIS. In addition, it is important
that all Member States rehabilitate and reintegrate, as
appropriate, the associated family members of those who
travelled to Iraq and Syria to join ISIS. As the Special
Adviser can attest, UNITAD has provided valuable
support to Member States, including the United States,
to investigate and prosecute foreign terrorist fighters.
In conclusion, through our strategic dialogue with
Iraq, the United States has confirmed its commitment
to supporting Iraq’s territorial integrity, stability
and prosperity. Holding ISIS accountable for its
atrocities and promoting justice for the victims of
ISIS in Iraq is an important step in service of Iraq’s
national reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.

21-3645415/17

S/PV.8914

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to thank Mr. Christian Ritscher for his
briefing. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his appointment and wish him every success
in his new role at the helm of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD). The work he does is crucial
to ensuring accountability for crimes committed by
terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), also known as Da’esh, and hence reconciliation
among the people of Iraq.
We are already delighted with the first convictions
of representatives of Da’esh on 30 November in
Germany, and we invite all States to strengthen their
cooperation with UNITAD to identify, apprehend
and bring to justice all those who are suspected of
committing crimes of terrorism. In that regard, in May
2019 in Niamey, the Government of the Niger signed
a cooperation agreement with UNITAD in order to
benefit from its expertise in this area.
Turning back to Iraq, allow me first of all to
commend the strong cooperation between UNITAD and
the Iraqi authorities in the implementation of resolution
2379 (2017), in particular in assistance related to
digitization project concerning the data collected in the
investigations, the provision of technical equipment to
support the excavation of mass graves and, above all,
the advanced training in international criminal law for
Iraqi investigating judges.
We encourage Mr. Ritscher and his Investigative
Team to persevere along the same lines in order to
finalize the case briefs relating to the other crimes
committed by Da’esh fighters as well. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the fact that a new milestone was
achieved in the basic investigative work of the Team
with the completion of a third case brief relating to its
investigation into the massacre of predominantly Shia
prisoners, which occurred on 10 June 2014, in Badush
Central Prison. The ceremony of the return of victims’
remains to be held in Kojo village in early December
will enable many families to finally proceed with
burials in accordance with the wishes and the traditions
of their community.
The progress made in the investigations carried
out by UNITAD into the ISIL chemical weapons
programme, including the reconversion of Mosul
University into a centre for research and development
for such weapons, is also commendable.
16/17

02/12/2021

Also within the context of progress achieved, I
would like to highlight the progress made in the work
of the UNITAD Financial Crimes Unit in the collection
of evidence regarding the internal operations of ISIL’s
treasury, as well as the identity of ISIL members who
have acted as trusted financiers. On that point, my
delegation notes that it is essential that those who have
financially supported or profited from ISIL’s crimes be
held accountable.
We reiterate our support for the establishment
of the agreement between UNITAD and the Iraqi
judiciary to facilitate the exchange of information
concerning financial crimes committed by Da’esh in
Iraq, in accordance with the Team’s mandate. That will
undoubtedly make it possible to strengthen cooperation
in the investigation and prosecution of those who
facilitated and financially benefited from the crimes
committed by that terrorist organization in Iraq and
who are also guilty of those crimes by association.
My delegation supports the continued integration of
advanced technological tools into the work of UNITAD,
in particular the partnership with Microsoft in the use
of artificial intelligence to collect data. The progress
made in the implementation of the Zeteo platform,
which was developed by the Team with Microsoft, is
good news.
Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate its
support for the provisions of resolution 2379 (2017),
as well as its support for the work of the UNITAD
Investigative Team aimed at establishing responsibility
and accountability for acts that may constitute war
crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide
committed by Da’esh fighters.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
On behalf of Iraq, I would like to thank the United
Nations for the various resolutions, recommendations
and decisions concerning my country, and I welcome
the international efforts under way to help us to
pursue terrorists. I would like also to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and I wish you, the
Permanent Representative of the Niger, every success.
And I would like to thank the country of Mexico for
the skill it demonstrated in its presidency last month.
21-36454

02/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8914

I would also like to congratulate Mr. Ritscher on his
appointment as Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), and I thank him for
his work and his briefing and the introduction of the
seventh report.

the Supreme Iraqi Criminal Tribunal. That law will
make it possible for us to use the evidence related to
crimes committed by Da’esh against the Iraqi people,
and this evidence will be important for the families of
the victims and the Iraqi Government, which each year
renews its trust in the Investigative Team to provide
justice to the victims.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2597 (2021)
approving the Iraqi Government’s request to extend
UNITAD’s mandate for one more year to 17 September
2022. We are ready to make greater efforts to pursue
those responsible for these crimes, those who have
provided financial, logistical or technological support
to these criminals and those who have supported
Da’esh through the sale of antiquities. We also welcome
the judgment of the German Federal Court against a
member of Da’esh, and we hope that augurs well for
the future.

In that sense, the Investigative Team must act in full
respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its competence
with regard to crimes committed on its territory against
its own citizens and must be in accordance with the
mandate given to it and now extended at the request of
the Iraqi Government. We must re-establish justice and
fight impunity, and we hope that, as time passes, the
evidence will remain fresh, because providing justice
will enable the victims to get on with their lives.

We heard Mr. Ritscher’s briefing and welcome the
seventh UNITAD report, which describes the progress
made by the Team in Iraq thanks to its cooperation
with the Government of Iraq and the relevant local
authorities. The broader aim is to ensure accountability
at the international level. We must therefore move from
the collection of evidence to trials and the extradition
of people to face Iraqi justice.
The seventh report follows up on the sixth report,
but does not propose concrete measures. The sixth
report clearly stressed that the progress made and
evidence gathered would make it possible to prosecute
those responsible in Iraq. We hope that specific
concrete measures will be taken to transfer that
evidence to the Iraqi Government so that we can begin
our national trials.
Our position on terrorism has not changed. We
continue to do what needs to be done to put an end to
this dangerous scourge. My Government is seeking
to strengthen the capacity of the relevant authorities
fighting terrorism, as well as the judicial system,
in accordance with human rights, our international
commitments and the Iraqi Constitution. We have also
begun the necessary legal preparations to assess the
evidence within our national court system once it has
been provided to us by UNITAD.
In that connection, the Iraqi Parliament has
completed its first reading of the draft bill relating
to an amendment to Law No. 10 of 2005 establishing

My Government is following and assessing
UNITAD’s work this year, and it is critical to establish
a strategic plan together with the Iraqi National
Coordinating Committee in order to achieve the
Team’s goals. At the same time, Iraq will continue to
cooperate with the Investigative Team and will provide
the necessary assistance thanks to the Committee.
All of this must be conducted in full respect for Iraqi
sovereignty and the competence of Iraq with regard
to crimes committed against the Iraqi people on
Iraqi soil. The use of criminal evidence beyond Iraqi
jurisdiction must be subject to the agreement of the
Iraqi Government.
We are awaiting the evidence and the results of the
tests carried out by the Team pursuant to paragraph 39
of UNITAD’s mandate, according to which UNITAD
must provide the necessary legal assistance to the
Government of Iraq in order to help it strengthen its
judicial capacities. The principle of equity and justice
must prevail. The fact that the Iraqi people are the
primary victims of the crimes of Da’esh should motivate
further efforts to elucidate the group’s crimes against
the Iraqi people. We also call for the preservation of
evidence, pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017).
In conclusion, we would like to thank the members
of the Council and the friendly States that have helped
us to fight terrorism. We must work together to ensure
that we bring the guilty to Iraqi justice. I would like to
thank Mr. Ritscher and his team once again, and I wish
them every success.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21-3645417/17
