30

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

3. Declares that progress would be promoted towards general and complete disarmament if universities
and academic institutes in all countries were to establish continuing courses and seminars to study problems
of the arms race;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States and
to the attention of the United N ations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization with a view to its
wide publication and dissemination.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
2826 (XXVI). Convention on the Prohihition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin W eapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Convinced of the importance and urgency of eliminating from the arsenals of States, through effective
measures, such dangerous weapons of mass destruction
as those using chemical or bacteriological (biological)
agents,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament dated 6 October 1971,11 and being appreciative of its work on the
draft Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, annexed to the report,
Recognizing the important significance of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925,12 and conscious also of the contribution which the
said Protocol has already made, and continues to make,
to mitigating the horrors of war,
Nating that the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction provides far the parties to reaffirm their
adherence to the principies and objectives of that
Protocol and to call upan al1 States to comply strictly
with them,
Fw-ther noting that nothing in the Convention shall
be interpreted as in any way limiting or detracting
from the obligations assumed by any State under the
Geneva Protocol,
Determined, for the sake of all mankind, to exclude
completely the possibility of bacteriological (biological)
agents and toxins being used as weapons,
Recognizing that an agreement on the prohibition
of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons represents a first possible step towards the achievement
of agreement on effective measures also far the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling
of chemical weapons,
N ating that the Convention contains an affirmation
of the recognized objective of effective prohibition of
chemical weapons and, to this end, an undertaking
11 Of!icial Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1971, document DC/234.
12 Leaguc of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, 1929, No.

'.!138.

to continue negotiations in good faith with a view to
reaching early agreement on e:ffective measures for
the prohibition of their development, production and
stockpiling and for their destruction, and on appropriate
measures concerning equipment and means of delivery
specifically designed for the production or use of
chemical agents for weapons purposes,
Canvinced that the implementation of measures in
the field of disarmament should release substantial
additional resources, which should promote economic
and social development, particularly in the developing
countries,
Canvinced that the Convention will contribute to
the realization of the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United Nations,
1. Cammends the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction, the text of which is annexed
to the present resolution;
2. Requests the depositary Governments to open
the Convention for signature and ratification at the
earliest possible date;
3. Expresses the hope for the widest possible adherence to the Convention.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
ANNEX
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriolqgical (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction

The States Parties to this Convention,
Determined to act with a view to achieving effective progress
towards general and complete disarmament, including the
prohibition and elimination of ali types of weapons of mass
destruction, and convinced that the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons and theiT elimination, through
effective measures, will facilitate the achievement of general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective intemational control,
Recognizing the important significance of the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous
or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, and conscious also of the
contribution which the said Protocol has already made, and
continues to malee, to mitigating the horrors of war,
Reaf!irming their adherence to the principies and objectives
of that Protocol and calling upon ali States to comply strictly
with them,
Recalling that the General Assembly of the United Nations
has repeatedly condemned all actions contrary to the principies
and objectives of the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925,
Desiring to contribute to the strengthening of confidence
between peoples and the general improvement of the international atmosphere,
Desiring also to contribute to the realization of the purposes
and principies of the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced of the importance and urgency of eliminating
from the arsenals of States, through effective measures, such
dangerous weapons of mass destruction as those using chemical
or bacteriological (biological) agents,
Recognizing that an agreement on the prohibition of
bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons represents a
first possible step towards the achievement of agreement on
effective measures also for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons, and
determined to continue negotiations to that end,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe First Committee

Determined, for the salce of ali mankind, to exclude completely the possibility of bacteriological (biological) agents and
toxins being used as weapons,
Convinced that such use would be repugnant to the conscience of mankind and that no effort should be spared to
minimize this risk,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1

Each State Party to this Convention undertakes never in any
circumstances to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise
acquire or retain:
( 1) Microbial or other biological agents, or toxins whatever
their origin or method of production, of types and in quantities
that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other
peaceful purposes;
(2) Weapons, equipment or means of delivery designed to
use such agents or toxins for hostile purposes or in armed
conflict.
ARTICLE Il

Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to destroy,
or to divert to peaceful purposes, as soon as possible but
not later than nine months after the entry into force of the
Convention, ali agents, toxins, weapons, equipment and means
of delivery specified in article I of the Convention, which are
in its possession or under its jurisdiction or control. In implementing the provisions of this article all necessary safety
precautions shall be observed to protect populations and the
environment.
ARTICLE Ill

Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to
transfer to any recipient whatsoever, directly or indirectly,
and not in any way to assist, encourage or induce any State,
group of States or intemational organizations to manufacture
or otherwise acquire any of the agents, toxins, weapons, equipment or means of delivery specified in article I of the Convention.
ARTICLE IV

Each State Party to this Convention shall, in accordance
with its constitutional processes, take any necessary measures
to prohibit and prevent the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of the agents, toxins, weapons,
equipment and means of delivery specified in article I of the
Convention, within the territory of such State, under its jurisdiction or under its control anywhere.
ARTICLE V

The States Parties to this Convention undertake to consult
one another and to co-operate in solving any problems which
may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the application of the provisions of, the Convention. Consultation and
co-operation pursuant to this article may also be undertaken
through appropriate international procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in accordance with its
Charter.
ARTICLE VI

1. Any State Party to this Convention which finds that
any other State Party is acting in breach of obligations deriving
from the provisions of the Convention may lodge a complaint
with the Security Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint should include ali possible evidence confirming its
validity, as well as a request for its consideration by the
Security Council.
2. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which the Security
Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint received by the Council. The Security Council shall
inform the States Parties to the Convention of the results of
the investigation.

31

ARTICLB VII

Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to provide
or support assistance, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, to any Party to the Convention which so requests,
if the Security Council decides that such Party has been
exposed to danger as a result of violation of the Convention.
ARTICLE VIll

Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as in any
way lirniting or detracting from the obligations assumed by
any State under the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on
17 June 1925.
ARTICLB IX

Each State Party to this Convention affirms the recognized
objective of effective prohibition of chemical weapons and,
to this end, undertakes to continue negotiations in good faith
with a view to reaching early agreement on effective measures
for the prohibition of their development, production and stockpiling and for their destruction, and on appropriate measures
concerning equipment and means of delivery specifically designed for the production or use of chemical agents for
weapons purposes.
ARTICLE X

1. The States Parties to this Convention undertake to
facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest
possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and
technological information for the use of bacteriological
(biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes. Parties
to the Convention in a position to do so shall also co-operate
in contributing individually or together with other States or
international organizations to the further development and
application of scientific discoveries in the field of bacteriology
(biology) for the prevention of disease, or for other peaceful purposes.
2. This Convention shall be implemented in a manner
designed to avoid hampering the econornic or technological
development of States Parties to the Convention or international co-operation in the field of peaceful bacteriological
(biological) activities, including the international exchange of
bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins and equipment
for the processing, use or production of bacteriological
(biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention.
ARTICLE XI

Any State Party may propose amendments to this Convention. Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party
accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Convention and thercaftcr for
each remaining State Party on thc date of acceptancc by it.
ARTICLE XII

Five years after the entry into force of this Convention, or
earlier if it is requested by a majority of Parties to the Convention by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary Governments, a conference of States Parties to the Convention shall be held at Geneva, Switzerland, to review the
operation of the Convention, with a view to assuring that the
purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the Convention, including the provisions concerning negotiations on
chemical weapons, are being realized. Such review shall take
into account any new scientific and technological developments
relevant to the Convention.
ARTICLE XIIl

l. This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
2. Each State Party to this Convention shall in exercising
its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the

32

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Convention ü it decides that extraordinary events, related
to the subject-matter of the Convention, have jeopardized the
supreme interests of its country. It shall give notice of such
withdrawal to ali other States Parties to the Convention and
to the United Nations Security Council three months in advance. Such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme
interests.
ARTICLE XIV
l. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign the Convention before its
entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article
may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of
accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern lreland and the United States of
America, which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Convention shall enter into force after the deposit
of instruments of ratification by twenty-two Governments
including the Goverrunents designated as Depositaries of th~
Convention.
4. Por States whose instruments of ratification or accession
,'re deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform ali
signatory and _acceding States of the date of each signature, the
date of depos1t of each instrument of ratification or of accession and the date of the entry into force of this Convention,
and of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary
Governments pw-suant to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
ARTICLE XV
This Convention, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall be deposited
in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly certified
copies of the Convention shall be transmitted by the Depositary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized,
have signed this Convention.
...... , this ......
DONE in triplicate, at
day of ................ ,

2827 (XXVI). Question of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, its resolution 2603 B (XXIV) of 16
December 1969, and in particular its resolution 2662
(XXV) of 7 December 1970 in which it stressed that
the prospects for international peace and security, as
well as the achievement of the goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
would be enhanced ü the development, production and
stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biological)
agents for purposes of war were to end and ü those
agents were eliminated from all military arsenals, and
commended the following basic approach for reaching
an effective solution to the problem of chemical and
bacteriological (biological) methods of warfare:
(a) It is urgent and important to reach agreement
on the problem of chemical and bacteriological (biological) methods of warfare,

( b) Both chemical and bacteriological (biologi.cal)
weapons should continue to be dealt with together in
taking steps towards the prohibition of their development, production and stockpiling and their effective
elimination from the arsenals of all States,
(e) The issue of verification is important in the
field of chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons, and verification should be based on a combination of appropriate national and intemational
measures, which would complement and supplement
each other, thereby providing an acceptable system that
would ensure the effective implementation of the prohibition,
Convinced of the importance and urgency of eliminating from the arsenals of States, through effective
measures, such dangerous weapons of mass destruction
as those using chemical or bacteriological (biological)
agents,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament, 13 in particular its
work on the draft Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction and its efforts towards reaching early agreement also on the elimination of chemical weapons,
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction is a first possible step towards
the achievement of early agreement on the effective
P~<?hibition of the development, production and stockp1hng of chemical weapons and on the elimination of
such weapons from military arsenals of all States, and
determined to continue negotiations to this end,

Recalling that the General Assembly has repeatedly
condemned all actions contrary to the principies and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use
in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and
of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925,14
N oting that the Convention provides for the parties
to reaffirm their adherence to the principies and objectives of that Protocol and to call upon all States to
comply strictly with them,
l. Notes with satisfaction that the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction contains an
affirmation of the recognized objective of effective prohibition of chemical weapons and, to this end, an undertaking to continue negotiations in good faith with a
view to reaching early agreement on effective measures
for the prohibition of their development, production
and stockpiling and for their destruction, and on appropriate measures conceming equipment and means of
delivery specifically designed for the production or use
of chemical agents for weapons purposes;

2. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue, as a matter of high priority,
its negotiations with a view to reaching early agreement
on effective measures for the prohibition of the develop13 Ofjicial Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1971, document DC/234.
14 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, 1929,
No. 2138.
