lH

General A11sembly-Thirtieth Se1111ion

3. Requests the Govemment of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to take all the necessary
steps to assist the people of the Seychelles in their
efforts to achieve self-determination and independence
not later than June 1976 and to continue to keep the
United Nations fully apprised of developments relating
to the Seychelles;
4. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Seychelles in their efforts to consolidate their national
independence and, to that end, invites the specialized
agencies and the institutions associated with the United
Nations to work out concrete programmes of assistance
to the Seychelles;
5. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3431 (XXX). Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 53
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 54
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Noting with satisfaction that, as a result of the constitutional talks on the future of the Solomon Islands,
held in London in May 1975 between the Govemments
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem
Ireland and the Solomon Islands, it was agreed that:
(a) The Territory should achieve interna! selfgovemment not later than 31 December 1975,
( b) lndependence should fol.low from twelve to
eighteen months after the achievement of interna! selfgovemment, subject to the requisite legislative approval
of the Govemment of the United Kingdom,
(e) A constitutional committee would be appointed
to work out an independence constitution and to submit recommendations thereon to the authorities of the
Solomon Islands not later than April 1976,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Solomon Islands ;55
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;

3. Requests the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to assist the people
of the Solomon Islands towards the achievement of
independence, as agreed, within the prescribed period
following the Territory's attainment of intemal selfgovernment in December 1975;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question, including the dispatch, as
appropriate and in consultation with the administering
Power, of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Solomon Islands in connexion with the processes leading to the Territory's accession to independence, and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3432 (XXX). Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,116
Having heard· the statements of the representatives
of Belize,57
Reaffi,rming the principies established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples set out in its resolution 1S14
(?(V) of 14 December 1960, Í!1 particular the princ_1ple that ~ll peoples ~ave ~e ri~t to self-determinat101;1, by. ~rrtue of which nght ihey freely determine
the1! pohtical status and freely pursue the1r economic,
social and cultural development,
Firmly convinced that the principles referred to
above apply to the people of Belize with no less force
than to the people of other colonial Territories,
Noting the firm desire of the Government and people
of Belize, which has been ftequently expressed for
many years past, to exercise their right to self-determin_ation_ and to proceed to independence as soon as pos~1ble 10 peace and security and with their territory
mtact,
Bearing in mind the repeated assurances by the
Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
~nd Northem Isl~nd, as the administering Power, that
1t stands ready, m accordance with resolution 1514
(XV), to take the formal steps necessary for Belize
to exercise its right to self-determination and independence,
Regretting that certain differences of opinion between the administering Power and the Government
o~ Guatemala concerning the future of Belize have
hJt~erto ~rev~nted the people of Belize from exerc1smg _theu nght to self-determination and independence m peace and security, in accordance with their
freely expressed wishes,
Considering that these differences of opinion can
and should now be speedily resolved by negotiations
carried out in close consultation with the Government
of Belize and in full acceptance of the principies referred to above,

53 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXI.

HJbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.l), chap. XXI.
55 Jbid.,

56 Ibid., chap. XXX.
57 /bid., Thirtieth Session,

2173rd meetings.

Fourth Committee, 2162nd and

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

1. Reaffirms tbe inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Declares tbat tbe inviolability and territorial integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upon all States to respect tbe rish,t of tbe
people of Belize to self-determination, independence
and territorial integrity and to facilitate tbe attainment
by them of their goal of a secure independence;
4. Calls also upon the Govemment of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Nortbem Irela¡nd, as tbe
administering Power, acting in close consultation witb
tbe Govemment of Belize, and upon the GQvemment
of Guatemala to pursue urgently their negodations for
tbe earliest possible resolution of their differences of
opinion conceming tbe future of Belize, in order to
remove such obstacles as have hitherto prevented the
people of Belize from exercising freely and without
fear their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
S. Declares that any proposals for tbe resolution of
these differences of opimon that may emerge from the
negotiations between the administenng Power and the
Govemment of Guatemala must be in accordance with
the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
6. Requests the two Govemments concerned to report to the Gener~l Assembly at its thirty-first session
on the progress made in implementing the present
resolution;
1. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975

3433 (XXX). Question of the New Hehrides,
Pitcairn and Tuvalu

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Pitcairn and Tuvalu, 58
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the
Grantin. of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories listed above, in particular
General Assembly resolutions 3288 (XXIX) and 3290
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Nortbern Ireland, as the administering
Power, relating to developments in those Territories, 60
5 8 As a result of the referendum held in the Gilbert and
Ellice lslands in August and September 197 4, which was observed by the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Gilbert
and Ellice lslands, 1974, the Ellice Islands separated from the
Territory of the Gilbert and Ellice lslands on 1 October 1975
and became known as Tuvalu (see A/C.4/786).
59 Of!icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chaps. IV, XVIII

and XXI.

ao lbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.

115

Noting the continued readiness of the Government
of the United Kingdom to grant independence to the
peoples of the Territories under its administration on
the basis of their express ·wishes and aspirations in that
regard, and its declared policy of fostering the growth
of free and democratic political institutions in those
Territories,
Recalling the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission dispatched to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands
in 197461 and noting with satisfaction the steps taken
in the implementation of the relevant recommendations
of the Visiting Mission,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the fu1l implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories listed above,
Bearing in mind tbe constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and retterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to tbe conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the views,
wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein with
respect to their future status,
Strongly deploring the continued refusal of the Govemment of France, in contravention of the provisions
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
to co-operate with the Special Committee in its examination of the Territory of the New Hebrides,
Deeply concerned at the continued testing of nuclear
weapons in the South Pacific in disregard of the strong
opposition expressed by the peoples of the South
Pacific, includmg those of the Non-Self-Goveming Territories in the region, and the concern expressed in
resolution 3290 (XXIX),
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories
concemed and stressing the necessity of diversifying
their economies as a matter of priority in order to
reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pe~les relating to
the New Hebrides, Pitcairn and Tuvalu;
2. Reatfirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to take measures to expedite the process of decolonization in those Territories in accordance with the relevant
recommendations of the Special Committee, including
in particular the related observations of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Gilbert and
Ellice lslands in 1974;
5. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economies of the
New Hebrides, Pitcairn and Tuvalu and to work out
61 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/96Z3/
Rev .1 ) , chap. XXI, annex l.
62 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.1), chaps. XVIII and XXI.
