S/PV.8362

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8362nd meeting

Wednesday, 26 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Trump/Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Morales Ayma
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Kablan Duncan
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo
Mr. Negewo
Mr. Macron
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Al Sabah
Mr. Rutte
Mr. Vizcarra Cornejo
Mr. Duda
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Wallström
Mrs. May

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-29859 (E)
*1829859*

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President: I am honoured to be here today
to preside over this meeting of the Security Council.
It is also my privilege to welcome the Heads of State
and Government, Ministers and other leaders and
representatives here with us in the Chamber. I also
wish to warmly welcome Secretary-General António
Guterres and thank him for joining us.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of the United States of America.
It is a great honour to be here today at this
Security Council meeting to discuss a matter of urgent
importance concerning countering the proliferation of
deadly chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and
the means to deliver them. The nations of the world have
long recognized that certain weapons are so dangerous
and can inflict so much suffering that all of us have a
vital interest in preventing their further development,
spread and use.

26/09/2018

The regime is the world’s leading sponsor of terror
and fuels conflict across the region and far beyond. A
regime with that track record must never be allowed to
possess a nuclear weapon.
For that reason, I announced earlier this year
that the United States would withdraw from the Iran
nuclear deal. That horrible, one-sided deal allowed
Iran to continue its path towards a bomb and gave the
regime a cash lifeline when they needed it the most.
They were in big trouble. They needed cash, and we
gave it to them. In the years since the deal was signed,
Iran’s aggression only increased. The regime used new
funds from the deal to support terrorism, build nuclearcapable missiles and foment chaos.
Following America’s withdrawal, the United States
began reimposing nuclear-related sanctions on Iran. All
United States nuclear-related sanctions will be in full
force by early November. They will be in full force.
After that, the United States will pursue additional
sanctions — tougher than ever before — to counter the
entire range of Iran’s malign conduct. Any individual
or entity who fails to comply with those sanctions will
face severe consequences. I ask all members of the
Security Council to work with the United States to
ensure that the Iranian regime changes its behaviour
and never acquires a nuclear bomb.

Since my inauguration, the United States has taken
bold action to confront such sinister threats. Many of us
are rightly focused on the dangers of nuclear weapons,
but we must never forget the risk posed by biological
and chemical weapons. The United States was one of
the first nations to unilaterally renounce the use of
biological weapons and, since the First World War, we
have led international efforts against the scourge of
chemical warfare.

With all of that said, I want to thank Iran, Russia and
Syria, for — at my very strong urging and request — they
have substantially slowed down their attack on the
governorate of Idlib and the 3 million people who live
there, in order to get 35,000 targeted terrorists. Get the
terrorists; but I hope the restraint continues after they
get the terrorists. The world is watching. I would also
like to thank Turkey for helping to negotiate restraint.
Anything the United States of America can do to help
resolve this problem in order to save, perhaps, hundreds
of thousands of lives — maybe more — we are willing
and able. We are available to help.

Most recently, in Syria we have twice imposed
severe consequences on the Al-Assad regime for using
chemical weapons against innocent civilians. I want
to thank Prime Minister May and President Macron
for their countries’ close partnership in those efforts
in April. The Syrian regime’s butchery is enabled by
Russia and Iran. The Iranian regime exports violence,
terror and turmoil. It illicitly procured sensitive
items to advance its ballistic missile programme and
proliferates those missiles all across the Middle East.

In my remarks yesterday to the General Assembly,
I laid out my Administration’s commitment to building
a more just and peaceful future (see A/73/PV.6).
Regrettably, we found that China has been attempting
to interfere in our upcoming 2018 elections, to be held
in November, against my Administration. They do not
want me, or us, to win because I am the first President
ever to challenge China on trade, and we are winning
on trade. We are winning at every level. We do not want
them to meddle or interfere in our upcoming elections.

2/22

18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

As I also mentioned yesterday, we have seen the
results of historic efforts to open new pathways to peace
on the Korean peninsula, of which we are extremely
proud. I am pleased to say that North Korea has not
conducted a missile test since last November. It has not
conducted a nuclear test since last September. And the
hostages have been returned to us. Very importantly, the
remains of American heroes are now returning home.
In June, I held a historic summit with Chairman
Kim Jong Un in Singapore, where he reaffirmed his
commitment to complete denuclearization. Last week,
Chairman Kim reiterated that commitment to President
Moon Jae-in at their third summit, and to me in the
form of a very strong letter. I think we will make a deal.
But, unfortunately, to ensure this progress continues,
we must enforce existing Security Council resolutions
until denuclearization occurs.
However, we have detected that some nations are
already violating those United Nations sanctions. That
includes illegal ship-to-ship transfers, which must end
immediately. The safety of the Korean peninsula, the
region and the world depends on full compliance with
Security Council resolutions. That is very important.
Most importantly, however, I believe that Chairman
Kim Jong Un, a man I have gotten to know and like,
wants peace and prosperity for North Korea. Many
things are happening behind the scenes, away from the
media, that nobody knows about, but they are happening
nevertheless and they are happening in a very positive
way. So I think the international community will have
some very good news coming from North Korea in the
coming months and years.
I also very much appreciate what President Moon
of South Korea had to say about me last night in
television interviews. Working with President Moon
has been my great honour. Likewise, working with
President Xi of China and Prime Minister Abe of Japan
has been a pleasure and an honour. Each of us follows
in the footsteps of countless world leaders, diplomats
and public servants who came to the United Nations
with the same noble goal: to build a future worthy of the
patriots — true patriots — who sacrificed their lives
for our nations and for our future. To be successful, we
need a commitment of every nation represented in this
Chamber. Acting together, we can replace the horrors
of war with the blessings of safety and the beautiful
promise of peace.

S/PV. 8362

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
President of France, to take the floor.
President Macron (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the United States presidency of the
Security Council for convening us today to address the
serious threat to international peace and security posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being present with us today.
The first question that comes to mind with regard to
this issue as I contemplate our differences — speaking
frankly — over the past year on such important issues as
Iranian nuclear power and the use of chemical weapons
by the Syrian regime, is simply: “What is it that we, the
States members of the Security Council, still want to
do together?”
The non-proliferation regime, which organizes
nuclear weapons control to limit the risk of nuclear war
and imposes an absolute ban on certain weapons so that
our people will forever be protected from the horror
of gas or bacteriological warfare, is a relatively recent
construction that reached maturity in the 1990s. It is the
result of the tragedies of the twentieth century and the
firm determination of our predecessors, their vision of
the good of humankind and their spirit of responsibility.
That edifice is based on the mutual concessions,
interdependencies and mutual trust that we built at that
time. In a word, it is based on a multilateral approach
to security.
Our responsibility, which I strongly believe in
today, is that we owe it to those who came before us
and to those for whom we are responsible is to preserve
and strengthen that regime at a time when it is being
seriously tested. The States members of the Council
must set an example in that respect, and, in my view,
stand united on this issue even more than on others, .
We have been remarkably united on the issue of
North Korea, most recently in December 2017 with
resolution 2397 (2017). The management of that crisis,
as just recalled by the United States President, is now
in a new phase thanks to his initiative to engage in
a direct dialogue with the Chairman of the Workers’
Party of Korea. France welcomes and supports his
efforts, as well as those made by South Korea, which
he highlighted.

18-298593/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

At no point should the Security Council lose
sight of the fact that North Korea continues to pose
a nuclear and ballistic threat to the region and the
world. France expects the Pyongyang regime to take
concrete actions to demonstrate its genuine willingness
to engage in a process of dismantling its nuclear and
ballistic programme in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner. Until those actions have been
taken, the dialogue must be accompanied by rigorous
implementation of the sanctions decided by the Council.
On that issue, we were united.
We were also united on the issue of Iran with
resolution 2231 (2015), but that was in 2015. Since
then, the trajectories of the signatory States of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) have diverged.
And yet, I reiterate, I am convinced that everyone at
this table still has the same goal of preventing Iran from
acquiring nuclear weapons and of guaranteeing, through
strict international control, the peaceful purpose of its
nuclear programme. The JCPOA is imperfect, but it is a
decisive step in that direction.
While a serious crisis of confidence was triggered
by the reimposition of extraterritorial sanctions by the
United States, Tehran continues to honour its nuclear
obligations. That situation must be reinforced by
compliance with all the provisions of the JCPOA and
the resolution that endorses it, and that applies to all
Members of the United Nations — not just France,
Germany and the United Kingdom.
We must also go beyond the current framework, as
I said that here at the United Nations a year ago (see
A/72/PV.4). That is why I share the goals that were
recalled by the President of the United States, even
if we may disagree on the methods with regard to the
JCPOA. I believe that, together, we must build a longterm strategy for managing the crisis, which cannot be
reduced to a policy of sanctions and containment. The
foundations of new negotiations must be based on, first,
the framework for Iran’s nuclear power beyond 20252030, which is an essential complement to what was
attained in 2015; secondly, the issue of Iran’s increase
in the range and accuracy of its missile arsenal and
thus the framework of its ballistic activity; and thirdly,
on regional stability. All of those issues can be part
of useful international action to reduce the regional
dangers and achieving the goal we all seek, namely,
that Iran never acquires a nuclear weapon.
4/22

26/09/2018

We were united on the elimination of Syrian
chemical weapons with resolution 2118 (2013), but
that was in 2013. Since then, threats to the credibility
of the prohibition norm have accumulated. The
reappearance of chemical weapons during the Syrian
regime’s offensives, after Damascus had acceded to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and declared its programme,
was not met by the necessary resolve by the Council.
For its part, Da’esh has used those weapons in Syria
and Iraq.
In February 2017, a member of the North Korean
ruling family was murdered in Malaysia with the help of
a powerful nerve agent, VX. This year, on the territory
of the United Kingdom — and thus in the European
Union — another nerve agent was used, killing one
person and wounding four. France recalls here that it
shares the British analysis that there is no plausible
explanation other than that Russia is responsible, and it
calls on Russia to take all necessary measures to put an
end to that threat.
On 23 January 2018, France launched an
international partnership against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons, which all States are invited to
join. It also had to take action against Syrian chemical
capabilities, together with the United States and the
United Kingdom, and I would like to thank President
Trump and Prime Minister May in that regard. France
is working to strengthen the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons by setting up a
new investigative and attribution mechanism, which
is essential.
France will work tirelessly to unite the Council on
non-proliferation issues. We must remain united because
in recent years, whenever we have been divided, it has
been at the expense of our principles and our collective
effectiveness. It is a condition of our legitimacy as
permanent and non-permanent members. We must be
united also because the spread of technology carries the
seeds of new threats to peace that directly concern us.
The development of intercontinental missiles by
North Korea is a matter of concern. Until now, only a
few States had those powerful weapons, which placed
a particular responsibility on them. In the future, if
sufficient control is not ensured by all and if North
Korea proliferates, how many countries will have them?
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the Middle East, ballistic assistance to Hizbullah
and the Houthis is a new and worrying development.
It must stop before those entities destabilize a tense
region even further.
The fight against Da’esh has confirmed the interest
of terrorist groups in weapons of mass destruction.
The threat of nuclear or radiological terrorism has not
disappeared despite the leadership shown by the United
States in this area with the Nuclear Security Summits.
France calls for continued international cooperation,
which is more necessary than ever.
France will continue to strictly respect its
commitments under the international non-proliferation
regime and to strengthen the various institutions that
form its framework. In particular, it will continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations and its
experts, and will address the challenges of combating
nuclear, chemical, biological and ballistic proliferation
during its presidency of the Group of Seven in 2019. To
that end, I call for unity and a spirit of responsibility
because the non-proliferation regime is the backbone
of our collective security system. We have built it
decade upon decade. It is still young and requires our
mobilization, our spirit of responsibility and our unity.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic of Poland,
to take the floor.
President Duda: The current security situation is not
encouraging. Tensions at the global and regional levels
threaten the existing international order, including the
non-proliferation and arms control regimes. In fact, we
have been witnessing their progressive decomposition.
They have been regularly challenged by non-State
actors, but what is of even greater concern is that they
are also being undermined by individual States.
Before I address the problem of nuclear weapons,
I would like to first draw attention to another type of
weapon of mass destruction that has made its way back
to the top of the global agenda. I am referring to chemical
weapons. Let me be clear — every use of a chemical
weapon is a crime. It does not matter whether it is used
on a mass scale by undemocratic regimes against their
own people to secure their power or whether it is used
in a State-terrorist manner against individuals abroad
on whom a certain State wants to take revenge. And if
it is a crime, it means that the principal obligation of the
international community is defined by the rules-based
order. Criminals must be brought to justice.

S/PV. 8362

No single use of chemical weapons can be left
unanswered since it not only undermines the basic
sense of justice, but also leads to the erosion of the
non-proliferation and disarmament regimes and, in
consequence, threatens the security of us all. Brutal
attacks, directed mostly against civilians, all have the
same aim — to intimidate the international community.
The community of the United Nations cannot accept
such methods. Our inaction will only encourage
perpetrators. I hope that the finalization of the new
European Union sanctions mechanism, completed in
the framework of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, will allow us to bring appropriate
pressure to bear on current and future perpetrators, as
well as deter them from those unacceptable actions.
We had all hoped to have chemical weapons
effectively banned by the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We must stand firmly behind our own rules
and norms, which are the pillars of the international
order. In that context, let me mention that, as in previous
years, Poland will introduce to the General Assembly a
draft resolution on the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. It is of great importance to
preserve the integrity of this regime. Therefore, we
call on all Member States to ensure a strong, clear and
united message of support of the whole international
community for the integrity of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the efforts of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
The second issue I would like to highlight is the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Permit me to make
three points regarding this matter.
First, we all know that nuclear weapons cannot
be bought on the free market. Therefore, every act of
proliferation of these weapons is a failure of both the
international community and the rules-based world
order. And we must remember that it always involves
not only the State that develops a nuclear capacity, but
also those who provide it with the means to achieve it,
namely, technology, materials and resources.
It is of the utmost importance for every agreement
that aims to control nuclear programmes to guarantee
that such programmes are used solely for peaceful
purposes. We have an obligation to evaluate such
agreements against their stated purposes and to act
accordingly. We should not turn a blind eye to those
who contravene the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by providing the

18-298595/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

means or assisting in other ways to develop nuclear
weapon capacities.
Good and effective export control mechanisms
should be upheld by all countries involved in nuclear,
chemical and biological trade for peaceful purposes
in order to maintain the appropriate control level
of dual-use goods and to make non-proliferation
efforts more effective. In that regard, we welcome
the International Atomic Energy Agency’s efforts to
strictly monitor and verify Iran’s commitments. Let me
also take this opportunity to commend the vital role
the Agency plays in non-proliferation. The Agency’s
system of safeguards is a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays an
indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT.
Secondly, I would like to welcome the prospect
of the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
have seen some encouraging developments, such as
the inter-Korean summits and the meeting of Kim
Jong Un with President Donald Trump. This led to
the stopping of the missile and nuclear tests. I would
like to stress, Mr. President, that this is, in great
measure, your and President Moon’s great achievement
and merit, for which I thank you. However, decisive
steps have yet to be taken. Lasting peace will not be
achieved without the denuclearization of North Korea
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. Until
then, the international community must remain united
in maintaining real and consistent pressure on North
Korea, including by upholding the United Nations
sanctions regime.
Thirdly, for the sake of the credibility of the
international community, it is vital to stand firmly
behind the duties and obligations we have taken upon
our shoulders. In that context, I am saddened by the
concerning developments in the security situation in
our region of Central and Eastern Europe.
In just the past few years, we have witnessed a clear
breach of the Budapest Memorandum that guaranteed
the territorial integrity of Ukraine in exchange for
its peaceful and voluntary denuclearization. We
have also heard about the use of nuclear weapons
to end conventional conflicts. Equally alarming
was the deployment of a dual-capable means of
delivery close to our borders. All these actions have
significantly contributed to the deterioration of the
security environment.
6/22

26/09/2018

What should our response to the challenges I
have just listed be? It requires, first, the full and
firm implementation of the well-established and
widely recognized treaties and norms of international
law; secondly, support for and full confidence in the
work of the international mechanisms responsible for
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction;
finally, proactive and constructive engagement in
initiatives that aim at fighting proliferation efforts and
promoting transparency and verification.
In 2018, my country assumed the chairmanship
of the second session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and chaired the seventeenth annual Regular Meeting of
the Subscribing States to The Hague Code of Conduct
against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. Our efforts
have been focused on strengthening these regimes,
their universalization, securing their widespread and
credible verification mechanisms, implementing good
practices, and tightening international cooperation.
These actions constitute long-term objectives of the
Polish security policy.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that
non-proliferation is a collective effort. To uphold the
security architecture that we have built for decades
and to prevent the nightmares of the recurring use
of weapons of mass destruction, we need the full
commitment of everyone, without any exception, to
observing all norms and obligations in this field.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to take the floor.
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo (spoke in
Spanish): It is my pleasure and honour to address the
Council for the first time on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea. We thank the United States of
America for convening this debate and congratulate it
on its excellent work as President of the Council.
Disarmament is one of the longest-standing
objectives of the United Nations. It was the subject of the
first Security Council resolution (resolution 1 (1946)),
adopted on 25 January 1946, under Article 47 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council adopted
that resolution 72 years ago, and to this day the world
is still in the midst of an arms race that leads many
States to feel obliged to equip themselves with all types
of weapons for their defence, including weapons of
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

mass destruction. Moreover, such nuclear arsenals not
only aggravate tensions between States and undermine
efforts for peace, but also threaten the very existence
of humankind. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
neither possesses nor intends to possess weapons of
mass destruction; it has adopted measures to guarantee
the strict implementation of the commitments
and obligations undertaken with the international
community in the area of non-proliferation by acceding
to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
The promotion of nuclear disarmament must be a
priority on the agenda of the international community.
Two years from now, we will celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which entered
into force in 1970. That international instrument made it
possible to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
to countries that did not then possess them, but it was
not as successful in eliminating those weapons from the
nuclear arsenals of nuclear-armed States, which have
always strongly resisted implementing their nuclear
disarmament commitments. The expenses incurred
by the nuclear Powers to maintain and, in some cases,
modernize their arsenals exceed the combined budget
of all the countries of the African Union and some
other regions.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and commits the Council to its role of working to
prevent the production and spread of such weapons.
To counter the proliferation and use of weapons of
mass destruction, it is essential to implement and
comply with international non-proliferation treaties
and resolution 1540 (2004); to support the Proliferation
Security Initiative and the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism; to prohibit all nuclear weapons
testing; to share information among States and
international organizations; and to implement joint
control systems for the verification, inspection and
monitoring of nuclear arsenals and research plants by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, which should also include their security and
destruction. In addition, negotiations with nuclearweapon States should be encouraged to effectively
reject the nuclear weapons option. At the same time,
their security should be guaranteed and the right of all
parties to the peaceful use of nuclear energy recognized.

S/PV. 8362

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is highly
alarmed because of the paradox that what the United
Nations says and what each country actually does
within its sovereign prerogative takes place in a context
of lies, deceptions, hypocrisy and a lack of solidarity.
Just two days ago we devoted a special summit to the
honour the thinking of the South African leader Nelson
Mandela, in which we all agreed to reject any kind of
confrontation and resentment and that, thanks to his
legacy, a world of peace, security, development and
well-being for all could be achieved. Nevertheless,
many States appear to choose to wage an arms race that
runs counter to the noble ideals of the Mandela summit,
which all of us accepted and applauded.
Weapons of mass destruction can be banned and
their use made unthinkable. All that is required is the
necessary will on all sides. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea expresses its firm support for pursuing efforts
towards the negotiation and adoption of binding
legal instruments leading to effective, irreversible
and verifiable nuclear disarmament with a view to
achieving the goal of the complete elimination of all
nuclear weapons. The international community of
nations should also be deeply concerned about the
humanitarian consequences and global effects of any
nuclear detonation, be it accidental or intentional, and
must cooperate at the international security level to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring the means to
engage in nuclear terrorism.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is committed
to the use of nuclear energy only for peaceful purposes
and under the supervision of the IAEA.
I shall conclude by pointing out that in our region
of Africa there are no weapons of mass destruction,
nor have they ever been used, which, for us, indicates
that weapons of mass destruction are the result of
the illegal trafficking of weapons, terrorism and the
conflicts on our continent. That is why there is a need
to support the African Union in its desire and initiative
to obtain funding for peace missions led by Africa on
a case-by-case basis. I strongly appeal to the members
of the Security Council to ensure that this support
materializes, since it will ultimately contribute to
international peace and security, which is the main
objective of the Security Council.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Evo Morales Ayma, Constitutional President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, to take the floor

18-298597/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

President Morales Ayma (spoke in Spanish): The
presidency of the Security Council has called on its
members to discuss the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
Bolivia is located in a region that has been declared
nuclear-weapon-free for more than half a century.
For that reason, I recall article I of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:
“Each ... State Party undertakes not to transfer
to any recipient whatsoever ... and not in any way
to assist, encourage, or induce any non-nuclearweapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices”.
I call on all States represented around this table to sign,
ratify and give immediate effect to these provisions.
That is the best way to avoid the catastrophic possibility
of the use of such weapons. It is an ethical imperative
and a debt to future generations.
The States Members of the United Nations system
are obliged to comply with the essential tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations, adopted in 1945, and
above all to resolve their international disputes through
the use of mechanisms of peaceful settlement. In no
dispute may they use weapons of any kind. Rather, it is
negotiation, diplomacy, dialogue and judicial settlement
that must guide the actions of the countries. Bolivia
is convinced that only through these means will we
achieve more just societies with shared responsibilities.
We must be capable of leaving the primitive use of
weapons among peoples in the past. I must highlight as
an example the contribution of the International Court
of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations system, in the effective resolution of disputes
between States in different latitudes and different
situations. We are convinced that it is essential to
discuss not only the effects, but above all the structural
causes of armed conflicts and the real motivations for
breaches of international peace, security and justice.
One example of that is Iran, a country that has
already been referred to this morning. In 1953, the
United States financed, organized and executed a coup
d’état against a democratically elected Government
that, in exercise of its sovereignty, nationalized its
oil from the hands of an Anglo-American company.
Then, for several decades, it supported an authoritarian
Government that allowed oil profits to benefit
transnational corporations.
8/22

26/09/2018

That was the situation until the 1979 revolution.
Now that Iran has regained control of its resources, it
is once again a victim of a United States siege. Bolivia
categorically rejects the unilateral actions undertaken
by the United States Government against Iran. It also
condemns the fact that the United States has withdrawn
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, using
excuses to pursue its policy of interference and
intervention in the internal affairs of that sister country.
I would also point to the region of the Middle
East, rich in natural resources but disproportionately
affected by invasions, wars and situations of unjustified
aggression that continue to produce pain and mourning
among its peoples. That region has been the scene of
the three greatest aggressions committed in the twentyfirst century. The first was the illegal invasion of Iraq,
based on the lie that the country possessed weapons
of mass destruction. That invasion resulted in more
than 1 million deaths. The second aggression was
the overthrow of the Libyan Government, with tens
of thousands of dead, on the pretext of humanitarian
motivations. The serious political instability and
humanitarian crisis it unleashed in North Africa are
ongoing. The third aggression is the civil war in Syria,
which over the past eight years has caused more than
half a million deaths. That war is the direct product
of interference and the financing of the armed groups
and terrorist organizations that are confronting the
Syrian Government.
In recent months, the United States has once
again demonstrated its contempt for international law,
multilateralism and the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. Every time the United
States invades a country, launches missiles or finances
regime-change, it does so together with a propaganda
campaign that reiterates that such action is in the name
of justice, freedom, democracy, human rights or for
humanitarian reasons. I would like to inform the Council
that the United States is not interested in democracy,
for if that were so it would not have financed coups
d’état and supported dictators. It would not threaten
democratically elected Governments with military
interventions, as it has done with Venezuela. It is not
interested in human rights or justice. If so, it would
sign and ratify international human rights treaties. It
would not threaten the investigative mechanisms of the
International Criminal Court. It would not encourage
the use of torture or withdraw from the Human Rights
Council. It would not separate migrant children from
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

their families or put them in cages. The United States
is not interested in multilateralism. If so, it would not
have withdrawn from the Paris Agreement or renounced
the global compact on migration. It would not launch
unilateral attacks or make unilateral decisions, such
as illegally declaring Jerusalem to be the capital of
Israel. Such contempt for multilateralism is motivated
by its desire for geopolitical control and to appropriate
natural resources.
Nonetheless, we commend the countries — France,
Germany, the United Kingdom, China and Russia — that
stand firm in defence of the nuclear agreement signed
with Iran; did not abandon the Paris Agreement;
defend the principles of the sovereign equality of
States and non-interference in internal affairs; respect
international law and commitments made and uphold
multilateralism. The responsibility of our generation is
to bequeath a fairer and safer world to future generations.
That will be achieved only if we work together to build
a multipolar world, with common rules for respecting
and defending the United Nations from all threats.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Martín Vizcarra Cornejo, President of the Republic
of Peru, to take the floor.
President Vizcarra Cornejo (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to greet Mr. Donald Trump, as well as all
other dignitaries and senior officials present.
Peru welcomes today’s high-level meeting to draw
the attention of the world and the Security Council to
the need to halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, as we mark the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons. Throughout its history, the Council has
remained united in the fight against the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well
as their means of delivery, in keeping with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, as entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations.
The work of the Council is based on the gradual
development of international instruments, which,
in turn, are based on a series of binding instruments
adopted by the Organization and its Member States.
The most recent of those instruments is the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted in 2017,
which we hope all countries, in particular those with
nuclear arsenals, will one day be able to join. Indeed,
this is not a utopia. Thanks to the Treaty of Tlatelolco,

S/PV. 8362

Latin America and the Caribbean is a nuclearweapon-free region, which has enabled it to make
progress in consolidating a region of peace.
As a country committed to non-proliferation
regimes, Peru fully complies with the obligations
established by the respective instruments, as well as with
the provisions of the Council, as stipulated in relevant
resolutions. As members of this principal organ, we
strongly encourage that they be strictly observed. We
believe that ensuring international peace and security
means eliminating the risk posed by weapons of mass
destruction. There is no better way to do that than to
make sure that they do not exist. In that regard, we
stress that non-proliferation must go hand in hand with
disarmament and strict conventional arms control.
It is our view that that implies, first of all, addressing
the challenge posed by the nuclear and ballistic
programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. In that regard, we again commend the highlevel diplomacy that you personally, Mr. President,
and your Administration have demonstrated in
an effort to achieve the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We believe that the continued validity of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime should also be observed
through the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme,
endorsed by the Council in resolution 2231 (2015).
Furthermore, we must deplore and condemn the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict, as well as in
the British city of Salisbury.
In conclusion, given the complex context, we wish
to stress the importance of diplomacy, multilateralism,
international law, confidence-building measures and
universality in strengthening non-proliferation and
disarmament regimes. We note that, in many cases, it
is the perception of insecurity that leads to weapons
build-up, and even to the development of new means
of warfare. We believe that it is necessary to work
on that perception in order to halt proliferation and
promote disarmament by investing in international
cooperation and development. Technology must serve
to promote peace and progress, not dehumanization
and destruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-President of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Kablan Duncan (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to thank the

18-298599/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s high-level debate on the issue of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I would also like to welcome you, Mr. President, as
well as the other Heads of State and Government and
eminent persons present at today’s meeting, to discuss
an issue of such great importance for our planet.
The rapid development of nuclear and ballistic
programmes has led to the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Such weapons fuel violence and
conflict, threaten the stability of entire regions and
make the issue of non-proliferation an objective that
will ensure the survival of humankind. Despite all
efforts made by the international community to achieve
a world free of nuclear weapons, regrettably, our world
remains under the constant threat of such weapons and
of biological and chemical weapons. At the moment,
there are more than 14,500 nuclear weapons in the world.
They pose the risk of a nuclear conflict with irreversible
humanitarian and environmental consequences and
represent a real challenge for the Organization.
It is also regrettable that States are inclined to invest
more in the modernization of their nuclear arsenals but
very little in the elimination of such weapons and their
means of delivery. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, considered to be the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime, has been sorely tested and
is the source of major discord at its Review Conferences,
held every five years. Non-compliance by certain States
in upholding their commitments regarding disarmament
and non-proliferation constitutes a serious blow to
security and could lead to the acquisition of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors.
The Iranian nuclear problem, the situation in the
Middle East — including Syria and allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in that country and the
use of ballistic missiles in Yemen — and the issue of
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula constitute
truly complex situations and real sources of concern for
the international community. Those situations urgently
compel us to place the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction at the top of our list of
priorities. In facing that situation, the Security Council,
as the guarantor of the maintenance of international
peace and security, must continue to shoulder its
responsibilities in the area of non-proliferation.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire calls for the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
10/22

26/09/2018

resolutions, as well as the implementation of the
various international legal instruments on disarmament
and non-proliferation. To that end, my country calls on
Member States, supported by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to meet
their international obligations in accordance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire,
which is party to all major non-proliferation treaties
and conventions, has incorporated all obligations under
those international legal instruments into its national
laws. With regard to ​​disarmament, as the step-by-step
approach has not produced the desired results, the
delegation of Côte d’Ivoire calls on the nuclear-weapon
States to consider a new and more effective approach.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the adoption of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons on 7 July 2017
and stresses the importance of its swift implementation.
Outer space, rightly considered as a common good
for humankind, deserves our sustained attention and
requires the urgent adoption of an international and
legally binding instrument to protect it from any arms
race and thereby avoid its militarization. Moreover,
Côte d’Ivoire stresses the need for the international
community to adopt a more binding instrument in
the area of biological and toxin weapons. Similarly,
my country would like to see the adoption a universal
and non-discriminatory instrument so as to ensure
security for non-nuclear-weapon States. With regard
to chemical weapons, Côte d’Ivoire calls for the
universalization of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
2325 (2016). In that regard, the mandate accorded to the
OPCW at the special session held at The Hague on 26 and
27 June to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators
of chemical-weapon attacks could greatly contribute to
resolving the issue relating to allegations of the use of
chemical weapons. Côte d’Ivoire calls on the Security
Council to stand united on that important issue.
Concerning the Iranian nuclear issue, the Ivoiran
delegation supports the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is satisfactory
in general. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire calls on
stakeholders to settle their differences concerning the
agreement, which was the result of unprecedented
international compromise and remains to this day a
genuine assurance for the implementation of the Treaty
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and a
pledge to ensure peace and regional stability.
Regarding the situation on the Korean peninsula,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes recent positive developments.
The historic 12 June meeting in Singapore between you,
Mr. President, and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un
remains one of the major milestones of the new regional
dynamic. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
commitment to the principles of the peaceful settlement
of disputes through dialogue and consultations. We
urge all stakeholders to rule out definitively all military
options, which could lead only to damaging and
irreversible consequences for the entire planet.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to multilateralism and international law,
and stresses the need for according high priority to
the maintenance of the non-proliferation regime on
chemical weapons, including their means of delivery,
as well as promoting disarmament and arms control.
The President: I now invite The Right Honourable
Mrs. Theresa May, Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to take
the floor.
Mrs. May (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
There is no greater threat to international peace and
security than the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. These issues matter to every man, woman
and child around the globe, and United Kingdom, like
the other permanent members of the Security Council,
has a special responsibility to protect the significant
gains that we have made in the past 70 years — because
the international community has invested a huge
amount of energy into containing the horrific forces
that emerged in the twentieth century. The multilateral
framework of treaties to counter the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is one of the greatest
achievements of the international community, thereby
demonstrating the value of global cooperation. It has
improved all of our security. It has brought about a
measure of predictability and stability. And it has paved
the way to arms control agreements and disarmament.
When many of us around this table were born, it
was feared that dozens of nuclear-weapon States might
emerge. Instead, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons has seen a remarkable near30 States abandon their pursuit of nuclear weapons.
Global stockpiles have been reduced by almost 80 per

S/PV. 8362

cent since their Cold war peak. That is true success on
a truly global scale. Similar if not greater success has
been achieved with regard to chemical and biological
weapons. More than 96 per cent of declared stockpiles
of chemical weapons have been destroyed under
international verification, and no country professes
publicly to possess biological weapons. But the past 18
months have seen those hard-won gains challenged. We
have seen chemical weapons used in Syria, Malaysia
and the United Kingdom. The conventions governing
our nuclear compact are being picked at. Predictability
and stability are declining. If we do not increase our
collective efforts to preserve and build on what we have,
there is a very real risk that those gains will subside or
fall away.
The 1970 Non-Proliferation Treaty is rightly
perceived as the flagship of the international community’s
determination against nuclear proliferation. Supporting
it requires leadership, which your Administration
and you personally, Mr. President, are demonstrating
with regard to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea — the world’s most pressing nuclear threat.
In meeting Kim Jong Un, you have created a historic
opportunity for complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. Consensus from the Council to
impose sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea played no small part, but we will not continue
meaningful progress towards peace on the Korean
peninsula without sustained pressure. Sanctions must
be strictly enforced by all, including the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s neighbours. We must
remain vigilant.
Ensuring non-proliferation also requires collective
leadership of the type that led to the 2015 agreement of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) — the
Iran nuclear deal. For many years, the scale and nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme raised serious international
concerns. The JCPOA was an important step forward
in addressing them. It remains the best means of
preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, and
we are committed to preserving the JCPOA, as long as
Iran continues to abide by its obligations in full. Iran
must ensure that it implements its obligations fully,
and, in order to monitor Iran’s compliance, we strongly
support the International Atomic Energy Agency using
inspections and other monitoring provisions of the
JCPOA to their full extent.
Other aspects of Iran’s policies, in particular its
destabilizing regional behaviour and sustained efforts

18-2985911/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

to enhance its ballistic-missile capability, continue to
cause serious concerns. The international community
and, where appropriate, the Security Council need to be
ready to address that. Iran’s proliferation and transfer of
missile and sophisticated military technology to groups
like Hizbullah in Lebanon or — as the United Nations
Panel of Experts concluded — to the Houthis Yemen
are also not in compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It risks a dangerous escalation.
We therefore need to see further decisive action in
the Council to tackle both the transit and proliferation
of those technologies and increase the costs for
those responsible. It is regrettable that Russia continues
to prevent the Council from upholding its responsibility
to stop that destabilizing activity.
Nowhere are the grim consequences of the erosion
of global norms on weapons of mass destruction more
apparent than in Syria, where the United Nations has
concluded that Al-Assad’s regime has repeatedly use
chemical weapons, a direct assault on a near centuryold ban vital to our collective peace and security. Yet
Russia has repeatedly wielded its veto to prevent the
Security Council from holding the Al-Assad regime
to account even shutting down the international body
established to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
I therefore welcome the decision of 150 countries in
June, the largest gathering in its history, to empower the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to attribute responsibility for chemical-weapon attacks
in Syria and to put in place arrangements for attribution
for any country that requests it. I would like to thank
President Trump and President Macron for their shared
determination, with the United Kingdom, to deter the
use of chemical weapons in Syria through the joint
military action in April by the United States, United
Kingdom and France. Those actions sent a clear message
to the Al-Assad regime, that is, that perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons cannot escape identification
or act with impunity. The regime’s backers must use
their influence to ensure chemical weapons are not
used again — for there must be no doubt that we will
respond swiftly and appropriately if they are.
The United Kingdom saw the consequences of
those norms being eroded in Salisbury this year when
Russia recklessly deployed a nerve agent on the streets.
The United Kingdom has presented detailed evidence,
clearly laid out in charges of attempted murder and the
use and possession of a chemical weapon against two
12/22

26/09/2018

agents of the Russian State. We have taken appropriate
action with our allies, and we will continue to take
the necessary steps to ensure our collective security.
Russia has sought only to obfuscate through desperate
fabrication. Permanent Members of the Security
Council must not attack and undermine the international
non-proliferation regimes and the institutions that
underpin them. All members of the council must fulfil
their responsibilities to safeguard them in support of
international peace and security. It is my sincere hope
that Russia will rejoin the international consensus
against the use of chemical weapons and the collective
efforts to uphold it. If so, the Council will again be able
to work together to rid the world of chemical weapons,
but if not, we should leave no one in any doubt of the
international community’s determination to uphold
international non-proliferation regimes.
Not all the challenges faced by the counterproliferation framework come before the Council, but
they are no less urgent. We need to strengthen the rules
to keep pace with new technologies and more complex
global supply chains. We must hold every United Nations
Member to develop its capabilities and regulations and
ensure they are able to make their contribution to that
global effort. The quiet, but essential, role the United
Nations plays must be at the heart of those efforts. As
United Nations Members, therefore, we should invest
the expertise and necessary diplomatic resources in
the conventions.
It was collective engagement by States across
the globe that produced the counter-proliferation
framework. Even the most powerful recognized that
investing in collective rules-based restraint was the
only effective way of addressing national security
interests and avoiding unilateral recourse to force. We
cannot let that framework be undermined today by
those who reject the values and disregard the rules that
have kept us safe. It will take collective engagement to
reinforce it in the face of today’s challenges. And in
that, as always been the case, the United Kingdom will
play a leading role.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands.
Mr. Rutte (Netherlands): There have been several
occasions this year when weapons of mass destruction
have endangered our security, undermined international
stability and caused terrible suffering. The year
2018 has made the importance of non-proliferation
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8362

abundantly clear. I agree with you, Mr. President, that,
as politicians, we are first and foremost responsible
for keeping our own citizens safe, and I believe that
multilateral institutions play a major role where the
issue is concerned.

human rights record. In particular, Iran’s support for
Hizbullah, the role Iran plays in Syria and Iraq and in
the development of missiles by the Houthis in Yemen
remain serious concerns for the Netherlands that need
to be addressed.

As I will say in my address to the General Assembly
later today, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has always
championed and will continue to champion the rulesbased international order and multilateral cooperation,
especially homeland security matters and other issues
of shared concern. Multilateral cooperation requires
active support from all of us, including and even
especially on the issue of weapons of mass destruction.
We should acknowledge the significant achievements
that have been made in controlling those weapons.

The repeated use of chemical weapons is deeply
alarming. It causes terrible human suffering and erodes
the established international norm. There should be no
impunity for any use of chemical weapons — not for
the large-scale attacks in Syria or for the individual
attacks in Malaysia and the United Kingdom. The same
goes for the possible use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian regime in Idlib.

For 50 years, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons has kept the number of nuclear
weapon possessors under 10. We can only imagine
how much conflict, instability and violence that has
prevented. I am encouraged that United States, Russian
and British Foreign Ministers have underlined their
continuing support for, and commitment to, the NPT
on the occasion of its fiftieth anniversary.
We have seen some positive steps on non-proliferation
this year in relation to North Korea. The ultimate
goal of our joint efforts is to ensure that North Korea
abandons its nuclear ballistic missile capabilities and its
programmes on weapons of mass destruction. It should
do that in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We welcome the efforts you, Mr. President, are
personally making to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula. For we know that the problem can
only be resolved peacefully. As Chair of the sanctions
committee, the Netherlands is doing everything it can
to ensure that all nations fully implement the sanctions
so as to keep up the pressure on North Korea to comply
with its international obligations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, endorsed by
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), remains a
good example of how the Council and the international
community can work hand in hand for non-proliferation.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has
concluded, in 12 consecutive reports, that Iran is abiding
by its commitments under the deal. As long as that
continues, we will also uphold our commitment to the
deal. At the same time, we are concerned about Iran’s
role in the region — its ballistic missile programme and

All of us, both within and outside the Council, bear
a responsibility, because of the stalemate in this organ,
we have tasked the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to investigate and identify
those responsible for the use of those weapons. We
cannot sit back, we have to speak up, take action and
firmly support the OPCW so that the perpetrators can
be brought to justice, and we need to do it together.
Indecisiveness by countries that claim to support
the principles of disarmament and non-proliferation
could ultimately have disastrous consequences. And
with regard to the Salisbury attack, we reaffirm our
confidence in the United Kingdom’s investigations. We
welcome it bringing criminal charges as an important
step towards justice, which bolsters our earlier
conclusion that it is essential to hold those responsible
to account.
In conclusion, the devastating consequences of the
use of weapons of mass destruction serve to underline
the urgent need to take action. The use of those weapons
must never become the new normal. We must prevent
impunity at all costs. A legal norm can be effective
only if we collectively uphold it together as part of a
multilateral effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our satisfaction and
pleasure at seeing His Excellency President Trump
preside over this meeting of the Security Council.
We appreciate your initiative in convening this
open meeting, which confirms that you attach the
utmost priority to one of the most serious threats to

18-2985913/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security, namely, weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs).
The discussion we are having in this Chamber
comes at a delicate stage amidst complex circumstances
facing our world today. That is especially so in the
Middle East region. In addition to the spread of conflicts
and terrorism, we are facing more threats embodied in
the use of WMDs. Those are not virtual threats any
longer, because we have recently witnessed the launch
of ballistic missiles, the testing of nuclear weapons and
the use of chemical weapons in many places around
the world.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate the constant
and principled position of the State of Kuwait on
non-proliferation. We condemn the use of all WMDs
anywhere, at any time and by any party. The use
of WMDs is a grave violation of international law.
Achieving peace, security and stability in the world
cannot be reached while such weapons exist.
We have recently witnessed the horrors of
chemical-weapon attacks undertaken by State and
non-State actors in Syria. Such attacks confirm that the
threat of proliferation of WMDs has not declined, despite
numerous treaties and resolutions criminalizing their
use. We are following with great concern the possibility
once again of such attacks in future, whether in Syria or
elsewhere in the world. We emphasize the importance
of addressing chemical attacks through the unity of the
Security Council in responding to the imminent danger
posed by WMDs, thereby ensuring the implementation
of the relevant international resolutions, particularly
resolution 1540 (2004).
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is facing
unprecedented attacks from ballistic missiles launched
by the Houthi militias towards its territories and
targeting civilian and religious sites. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its strong condemnation and denunciation
of the rocket attacks targeting the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in particular, and the region in general. We also
emphasize the need for the Security Council to take
action and shoulder its responsibilities in confronting
the threat facing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in
order to preserve international peace and security. My
country’s delegation is fully prepared to take further
measures in order to put an end to such attacks, which
are undoubtedly linked to the proliferation of WMDs.
In the midst of the events the Middle East region is
witnessing, the State of Kuwait remains committed to
14/22

26/09/2018

supporting all United Nations resolutions, and we have
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015). While
the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to implement
the provisions of that resolution and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) publishes reports
confirming Iran’s compliance with its nuclear-related
obligations, we note with concern the independent
international reports that indicate that Iran continues
to support and finance militias and armed groups in
Arab countries.
We are particularly concerned about Iran’s
interference in Yemen and, as the resolution adopted
by the League of Arab States on 11 September
confirms, Yemeni territories have been transformed
into a launching pad for Iranian-made ballistic missiles
targeting Yemen’s neighbors and threatening maritime
navigation in the Bab Al-Mandab Strait and the Red
Sea, which not only negatively impacts the security and
stability of Yemen and the region but also constitutes a
violation of resolution 2216 (2015). The League of Arab
States resolution also calls on Iran to cease those acts
and all such acts that adversely affect the security and
best interests of the States in the region, and to undertake
confidence-building measures with its neighbors in
order to establish ties based on a good neighbour policy,
cooperation, mutual respect and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries.
As I give my speech from this forum, I consider it
a great honor to speak as a representative of the Arab
States in the Security Council, conveying the concerns
and preoccupations of our peace-loving peoples and
their aspirations to security and stability. In that
context, the State of Kuwait and all other Arab States
reaffirm their absolute faith in multilateral action under
the umbrella of the United Nations, according to the
objectives, principles and commitments agreed upon in
the Charter of the United Nations. We also emphasize
the Arab position on the importance of achieving the
universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which was extended indefinitely
after the decision of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference, and establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other WMDs in the Middle East.
We reiterate the Arab position calling upon the
three sponsor States of the 1995 Middle East resolution
to shoulder their responsibilities by implementing the
resolution, as it was an integral part of the indefinite
extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We
also emphasize the need for Israel to accede to the
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Non-Proliferation Treaty and to place all its nuclear
facilities under the supervision and monitoring
of the IAEA, especially as it is the only country
in the Middle East that has not yet acceded to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty.
In conclusion, the commitment you have shown,
Mr. President, to confront the challenges posed by
WMDs is not limited to our meeting here today;
it is also to be seen in the current diplomatic efforts
to ease tension and achieve denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Those efforts came within the
context of cohesion and unity on the part of Security
Council members to counter the illegal programmes
and activities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We know that the road ahead is still long
and hard to achieve denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula, yet we believe that the absolute and sincere
commitment of all the parties concerned, as well as the
full implementation of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, will lead to a lasting and comprehensive
peace agreement in a Korean peninsula free of
nuclear weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Maintaining global peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council, as entrusted to
it by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as a
shared responsibility of all Security Council members.
Given the complex challenges to international peace
and security, how should the Security Council fulfil
that mission and play its role? That is a question
that deserves serious consideration. China believes
the following.
The Security Council should perform its functions
in a fair and just manner, as mandated by the Charter.
The Council must uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter, universally recognized international
law and the norms governing international relations.
It should safeguard the authority and the role of the
United Nations in international affairs, as well as the
sovereignty, independence and legitimate rights and
interests of all countries. The Security Council should
adhere to political settlement as the basic direction.
The Security Council should also be the strongest
advocate for political solutions, resolving differences
and disputes through dialogue and consultation. It
should make effective use of all the tools at its disposal,

S/PV. 8362

including good offices, mediation and peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, and step up its preventive
diplomacy efforts with the aim of serving the greater
goal of achieving political settlements.
The Security Council should enhance its unity in
order to promote consensus. All of its members must
keep firmly in mind their responsibility for maintaining
world peace and security. They should improve their
unity and coordination, set aside individual geopolitical
considerations, ensure that the Council can function
effectively and uphold the common interests of all the
States Members of the United Nations. The Council
should strengthen its overall planning and coordination
with a view to forging synergies, coordinating and
cooperating with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations development system so that the political
and development pillars can support each other and
so that efforts aimed at achieving lasting peace and
sustainable development can be mutually reinforcing.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery poses a real
threat to global peace and security and is a challenge
that we all face. China proposes that we intensify our
efforts in three areas. First, we must champion the
rule of law in order to consolidate and improve the
international non-proliferation regime. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) and other relevant Council resolutions together
constitute the legal foundation of the international
non-proliferation regime. We must all work diligently
to safeguard its universality, effectiveness and
authority, particularly by preventing terrorists and
other non-State actors from acquiring WMD materials
and technologies.
Secondly, we must take multi-pronged measures to
implement the NPT in a balanced way. Every country
should keep its word, fulfil its responsibilities and
abide by its international obligations. The NPT and
related agreements must be fully and comprehensively
implemented in their entirety. Double standards,
discriminatory arrangements and selective enforcement
are impermissible.
Thirdly, we should improve international
cooperation
and
enhance
every
country’s
non-proliferation capabilities. It is Governments that

18-2985915/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

26/09/2018

bear the primary responsibility for non-proliferation,
and countries should be supported in their efforts to
develop their non-proliferation policies based on their
national circumstances and encouraged to improve
their non-proliferation and law-enforcement capacitybuilding, and conduct more exchanges and practical
cooperation efforts so that together we can strengthen
the weakest links and achieve general security.

been commended by the international community. We
have never interfered, and never will interfere, in any
country’s domestic affairs. We reject any unwarranted
accusations to that effect and call on others to abide
by the purposes of the Charter and to refrain from
interfering in other countries’ internal affairs.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on the Iranian nuclear issue represents a hard-won
achievement for multilateralism that reinforces the
international nuclear-non-proliferation regime and
peace and stability in the Middle East generally. While
no international agreement is perfect, the JCPOA
has had the unanimous endorsement of the Security
Council. The events of the past three years have shown
that it is a viable agreement, and China encourages Iran
to continue to fulfil all of its commitments. At the same
time, the legitimate right of all countries to conduct
normal economic relations and trade with Iran should
be respected. China calls on the relevant parties to keep
the big picture in mind, think long-term and uphold the
sanctity, integrity and efficacy of the JCPOA.

Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the modern world, the ability to effectively
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is particularly crucial to the maintenance of global and
regional stability and to reliably ensuring the security
of every State, without exception. Constructive
cooperation in this area is an important element of our
efforts to establish a positive international agenda.

Since the beginning of the year, there has been major
progress with the situation on the Korean peninsula.
China has been working relentlessly to that end, and we
support the important understandings reached between
the leaders of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the United States at the Singapore summit.
We also support the efforts of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea to
improve their relations. We call on all the parties to take
advantage of the current opportunities to translate this
political consensus into concrete action, and to work
on establishing a peace mechanism and, ultimately,
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula, with a view
to achieving a lasting peace there as soon as possible.
China lives by its commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
upholding the current international system centred on
the United Nations. We have worked diligently to fulfil
our international responsibilities and obligations. We
must continue to work together to realize peace and
security for all.
In conclusion, I want to point out that China has never
wavered in respecting the principle of non-interference
in other countries’ domestic affairs. It is a tradition of
Chinese foreign policy, and our observance of it has
16/22

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

I think we all agree that the Security Council
resolutions that set out concrete measures for dealing
with those who violate non-proliferation regimes
should be strictly observed. The cornerstone remains
the founding resolution 1540 (2004), which requires
Member States to commit to taking concrete measures
to prevent weapons of mass destruction and their
components from falling into the hands of non-State
actors. The Council’s resolutions, providing for
sanctions for the transfer of any type of arms to
terrorists, are especially important. Such transfers do
happen and must be thoroughly investigated.
Just as it was 50 years ago, when the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) opened
for signature, my country remains committed to the
goal of ridding the world of the nuclear threat. At the
same time, there can be no question that we have to
consider every factor influencing strategic stability,
and that every country with military and nuclear
potential should take part in the negotiation process.
The desire of a number of countries to ban nuclear
weapons in isolation from the fundamental principles
of the NPT has no hope of success and serves only to
create ambiguity with regard to future approaches to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Speaking of the NPT, I should not omit to mention
resolution 2231 (2015), in which the Council endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
to settle the issue of the Iranian nuclear programme.
The unilateral withdrawal of the United States from
this agreement represents a serious threat to the
non-proliferation regime, particularly since, as many
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

speakers before me have emphasized, Tehran has
been meticulously abiding by its obligations under the
JCPOA, as the International Atomic Energy Agency
has regularly confirmed. Russia is a firm believer in
the importance of preserving the JCPOA, and we are
actively working on that at the moment with Iran,
China and the European Union. Without it, we could
be facing increasing tensions throughout the Middle
East, fraught with risks to regional stability and the
non-proliferation regime. The collapse of the JCPOA
would also be extremely counterproductive for the
ongoing efforts to denuclearize the Korean peninsula,
which we welcome and support.
There continue to be other serious obstacles to
nuclear non-proliferation — essentially, the decision of
the United States to put off for an unspecified period,
perhaps forever, its ratification of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and the lack of progress in
implementing the decision of the States parties to the
NPT on the establishment of a zone in the Middle East
free of weapons of mass destruction.
The situation regarding chemical-weapon disarmament
is also worrying, primarily in connection with the actions
of a number of Western States, which have continued
again and again to accuse the Syrian authorities of the
use of banned chemical agents. We should warn them
against carrying out any new attacks on the territory
of the Syrian Arab Republic under any more staged
pretexts, which would constitute a gross violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and undermine the efforts
to promote a political settlement in that long-suffering
country. The Government of Syria has destroyed its
arsenal of chemical weapons in accordance with the
Russian-American agreement of 2013, enshrined in
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) and in the
resolutions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. But there are terrorist groups that
do possess chemical warfare materials. They have
learned how to synthesize them and have built their own
laboratories for that. Intelligence services, including
those of the United States, have been issuing warnings
about this for a long time. Russia has repeatedly
proposed developing a comprehensive strategy for
combating chemical terrorism. In 2017 Russian and
China introduced a draft resolution on the subject to
the Security Council that was not considered, through
no fault of ours. From a broader perspective, as long
ago as March 2016, at the Conference on Disarmament
in Geneva, we submitted a draft convention at the

S/PV. 8362

Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on combating
acts of chemical and biological terrorism. Sadly, work
on it has been artificially blocked, and no doubt we all
know by which countries. Nevertheless, our proposals
still stand.
Meanwhile, the situation is deteriorating in the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
where our Western colleagues are trying to impose socalled attributive functions on its Technical Secretariat,
in a gross violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention that infringes on the prerogatives of the
Security Council.
At the same time, entirely unsubstantiated rhetoric,
in the “highly likely” vein, is increasing in connection
with the Salisbury affair. However, Britain has been
stubbornly rejecting our repeated proposals for a joint
investigation, despite the fact that this is a requirement
according to its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, the 1965 bilateral Consular Convention
and the 1959 European Convention on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters. This raises the
possibility that if they do not want to cooperate, they
have something to hide. We once again call on London
to launch a constructive dialogue in order to establish
the truth.
The way events have been developing gives reason
to believe that today no possibility can be excluded,
including that of provocations involving the use of
biological weapons. Given the attempts I have mentioned
to manipulate the status of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, I want to caution against the temptation to
do the same with the Biological Weapons Convention. I
would like to point out that the Convention stipulates that
the right to initiate and conduct investigations belongs
to the Security Council alone. There is no provision for
surrogates, nor can there be. Incidentally, I would like to
remind the Council that we more than once proposed to
agree on a mechanism for verifying the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention. However, that
was firmly blocked and ultimately completely buried
by the United States. Washington’s desire to preserve a
free hand has also been apparent when the Convention’s
regime has encountered additional issues with regard to
the spread of military medical and biological activity,
including in the post-Soviet space. We urge everyone
to reject the militarization of health care. Russia has
consistently advocated for strengthening the Biological
Weapons Convention, and we are implementing several

18-2985917/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

initiatives to that end, including the establishment
of mobile anti-epidemic teams for rapid responses to
biological emergencies.
A dialogue between Russia and the United States,
as the two largest nuclear Powers, is especially
important for strengthening the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction. Our two
States were present at the creation of the common
frameworks for multilateral cooperation in preventing
such weapons from falling into the hands of non-State
actors and combating acts of nuclear terrorism. Russia
still considers such cooperation to be fundamentally
important, not just for Moscow and Washington but
for the entire international community. Let us not
sacrifice it for the sake of instant decisions and shortterm calculations. Based on the solid foundation of the
Charter of the United Nations, Russia is always open
to honest cooperation with the five major nuclearweapon States and all other countries in the interests
of strengthening global strategic stability. We hope
that today’s meeting of the Security Council — the key
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security — will enable us to take a step in that direction.
In that regard, we believe that President Trump’s
initiative to convene this meeting is very timely.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.
Mr. Negewo (Ethiopia): We thank the United States
presidency for convening today’s high-level briefing
on non-proliferation. We are very pleased to see you
presiding over this important meeting, Mr. President.
Non-proliferation has indeed been high on the Council’s
agenda and it is therefore timely and relevant that we
are discussing the issue at the highest level.
A few days ago, the world paid tribute to the late
Kofi Annan. In a speech he gave in 2006 he said,
“Can there be any threat more alarming, in
today’s world, than that of a nuclear or biological
weapon falling into the hands of terrorists, or
being used by a State as a result of some terrible
misunderstanding or miscalculation? The more
States have such weapons, the greater the risk.
And the more those States that already have them
increase their arsenals, or insist that such weapons
are essential to their national security, the more
other States feel that they too must have them, for
their security.”
18/22

26/09/2018

This is indeed the reality that we are facing today. Indeed,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
posing grave threats to global peace and security. From
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Iranian
nuclear issues to chemical attacks in Syria and the
Salisbury incident in the United Kingdom, proliferation
risks have become one of the most serious challenges of
our time. The international non-proliferation regime is
under serious strain and global anxieties about nuclear
weapons are at the highest level since the end of the
Cold War, as Secretary-General António Guterres said.
We believe it is absolutely vital that we
comprehensively address the risks of proliferation.
We have no option but to strive to find negotiated
solutions through political and diplomatic means to
some of the most difficult issues that we are currently
facing. We have all been observing the developments
following the recent summit meeting between you,
Mr. President, and Mr. Kim Jong Un, the outcome of
which has given us some sense of hope for progress
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the advancement of peace in North-East Asia.
We encourage such endeavours, as we have first-hand
experience in resolving and bringing peace through
diplomatic means to the no-war, no-peace situation that
existed for 20 years between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We earnestly hope that you will maintain the
momentum generated recently with a view to finding
a comprehensive, peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution to the issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Council should continue to
support such endeavours. In that regard, the talk of
a follow-up summit is indeed encouraging. We also
welcome the outcome of the third inter-Korean summit
in Pyongyang and hope it will lay a foundation for
concrete action towards sustainable peace, security and
complete and verifiable denuclearization on the Korean
peninsula, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Council should support the
relevant parties in making progress in that direction.
In the meantime, we believe that the continued
implementation of the sanctions regime will be critical.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, we remain
convinced that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) represents a significant achievement for
multilateralism. However, we understand the challenges
and difficulties inherent in the broader implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). While we recognize that
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA
represents a serious challenge, the commitment of the
remaining participating countries will be critical to
its full implementation. We hope they will continue
to make every possible effort to address the major
challenges and to contribute to the full implementation
of the agreement, which remains vital to the global
non-proliferation architecture.
In addressing the proliferation risk posed by
non-State actors, we believe that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
continues to play a significant role. Strengthening the
Committee’s assistance framework for Member States
aimed at addressing gaps in implementation continues
to be important in comprehensively addressing
the proliferation risk posed by non-State actors,
including terrorists. The Council should also pay
particular attention to strengthening the collaboration
between the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee
and members of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
Finally, multilateral agreements such as the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons continue to make an immense
contribution to the prevention and elimination of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. At a time of
great risks of proliferation, it is in all of our best interests
to preserve those important multilateral agreements in
order to guarantee our collective safety and security
and ensure their full and effective implementation.
I would therefore like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia’s unwavering commitment to continuing
to fulfil its international obligations by taking all
the necessary measures to prevent weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery from falling
into the hands of State and non-State actors, including
terrorists, as well as by fully implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful
to the United States presidency for organizing today’s
summit meeting of world leaders focused on countering
the spread and use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). Given that previous speakers have mentioned

S/PV. 8362

the devastating consequences of the use and testing
of weapons of mass destruction, I want the Council
and the world to understand that Kazakhstan, along
with some other nations and vast territories, has been
suffering those consequences since the early days of
the Cold War.
The goal of today’s meeting is very close to
Kazakhstan’s heart and is one of the key priorities
of my country’s foreign policy. Kazakhstan’s firm
and unwavering commitment to international peace
and security began at our independence in 1991. Our
Head of State, President Nursultan Nazarbayev, took
the daring and bold decision to renounce our nuclear
arsenal and close the Semipalatinsk nuclear-weapon test
site, the world’s fourth and second largest, respectively.
The international community acknowledged the
unprecedented and laudable nature of those actions by
establishing 29 August, the date of the closure of the
Semipalatinsk test site, as the International Day against
Nuclear Tests. In September, the United Nations
community commemorated that Day in a new, official
high-level format, in which the international community
reiterated its plea for more effective steps to rebuild
trust between nuclear and non-nuclear countries.
Earlier this year, in January, the signature event
of Kazakhstan’s presidency of the Security Council
was devoted to the importance of confidence-building
measures in achieving the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (see S/PV.8160).
Confidence-building measures succeeded in stopping
the arms race and preventing a nuclear catastrophe in
the past century. Today, the world is hoping for a repeat
of the same visionary actions from the nuclear Powers,
something that is unfortunately not being fully realized
or acknowledged at today’s meeting.
At the Security Council meeting in January, as
well as in his manifesto “The World. The Twenty-First
Century”, President Nazarbayev noted that the largest
nuclear Powers should be in the vanguard in advocating
for a nuclear-weapon-free world and should lead by
example in reducing their weapons of mass destruction.
Past conflicts have shown that we cannot ensure our
own security by undermining the security of others.
President Nazarbayev has therefore urged all of us to
understand that only complete elimination of all nuclear
weapons and full disarmament can be an absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons. He has therefore called on all States Members
of the United Nations to build a nuclear-weapon-free

18-2985919/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

world by 2045, the centenary of the founding of the
United Nations.
We have seen some good examples of
confidence-building measures in the case of the
inter-Korean rapprochement and the Singapore
summit, due in part to the successful personal
efforts of President Trump, which have the potential
to inspire other positive outcomes of goodwill and
sincere collaboration. Kazakhstan fully supports
such promising beginnings and is ready to share its
practical experience and expertise, if necessary, based
on our sad legacy, as I have mentioned. However, trust
alone cannot guarantee sustained success unless it is
supported by the strict implementation of all existing
regulatory legal instruments and the Security Council’s
sanctions resolutions. Without diminishing the role
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), it is clear that the world needs a
stronger international legal framework against WMDs.
The current asymmetric implementation of the Treaty
is an obstacle to trust between nuclear and non-nuclear
countries. Nevertheless, the NPT should not lose its
effectiveness and relevance amid such scepticism.
The early entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty should also become one of
the most important and essential building blocks for
the global non-proliferation architecture. When fully
operational, it will definitely help to foster mutual trust
and confidence. Kazakhstan cooperates actively with the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
and annually conducts high-level international events
aimed at implementing effective practical steps to
achieve a world without nuclear threats, as a natural
outcome of our commitments. To realize that goal, we
must first and foremost establish a final ban on nuclear
testing. Secondly, Atoms for Peace should remain our
important moral compass. However, in the meantime,
we should not cease our struggle to achieve a legal ban
on nuclear weapons, keeping in mind our paramount
goal of attaining a nuclear-weapon-free world.
By opening the International Atomic Energy Agency
Low-Enriched Uranium Bank last year, Kazakhstan
made another contribution towards strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and ensuring the safe and
reliable use of uranium for peaceful purposes. We are
grateful to all donors — the United States, the European
Union, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Norway
and the Nuclear Threat Initiative — whose generous
financial contributions made the project possible. We
20/22

26/09/2018

also thank China and Russia for their cooperation
regarding the transit through their territories of lowenriched uranium and equipment for the Bank.
How can we enforce non-proliferation and
disarmament through the measures of the Security
Council? First, the Council must maintain its unity
and common understanding in order to send the world
a clear and unambiguous message about our strong
stance on those issues. It is vital to ensure that everyone
realizes that sanctions are interim measures and not
an end in themselves. Their effectiveness should be
measured by the degree of progress towards reaching
political solutions peacefully.My President has also
suggested that withdrawing from the NPT should
be made extremely difficult, possibly by crafting
a special Security Council resolution with serious
implications for countries in breach of the Treaty. He
has also proposed developing a legally binding system
of guarantees to be given by nuclear Powers to States
willing to voluntarily renounce their nuclear weapons,
as well as those with non-nuclear status, as an incentive
for the latter not to acquire such weapons. That is a fair
step that can be undertaken without significant costs.
Nuclear-weapon-free zones continue to be an
effective way of combating the spread of nuclear
weapons. My President has therefore proposed
strengthening the cooperation between nuclearweapon-free zones by organizing a high-level
inter-zone meeting in Astana next year. The permanent
five members should encourage the expansion of those
zones by providing them with security guarantees. We
therefore hope that Central Asia’s nuclear-weapon-free
zone will be endorsed by the last hold-out among the
permanent five.
Given the criticism of the considerably weakened
non-proliferation regime in Syria, Kazakhstan is firmly
convinced that the Council has to be united in working
tirelessly to find a comprehensive solution to the issues
of arbitration and prosecution, without transferring
such prerogatives to other structures and subjecting
them to further polarization and politicization. A
political settlement of the Syrian conflict will also help
eliminate the vacuum that allows chemical weapons to
be used with impunity. For its part, Kazakhstan will
continue to provide the Astana platform of ceasefire
and confidence-building measures as a complement and
support to the Geneva process, under the leadership of
the United Nations.
18-29859

26/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Regarding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), that multilateral document has fulfilled its
primary mission by putting Iran on a nuclear-free path,
with the IAEA confirming that Iran has fulfilled all
its nuclear obligations. Kazakhstan, with its reputation
as an honest broker, hosted two sets of talks during
the negotiations that led up to the agreement. As the
world’s top uranium exporter, Kazakhstan contributed
significantly by supplying 60 tons of raw uranium
to Iran in exchange for Tehran sending over 300
kilograms of highly enriched uranium to Russia. All
the parties to the agreement have acknowledged this
measure as a significant milestone, with this action
constituting the first start of JCPOA implementation.
Notwithstanding certain complications related to the
obligations of some parties to the agreement, we hope
for its further implementation. We propose that new
concerns and challenges be considered through all
possible means of diplomacy, without destroying our
hard-won achievements.
Finally, it is necessary for all in the Council to
demonstrate responsibility, political will and wisdom
in order to make a quantum leap forward of great
historical significance. We need the moral compass to
go from narrow national interests to a greater vision of
a safe and secure world.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): Listening to the
representatives of all countries around this table, I
have heard support for the idea that multilateral and
diplomatic efforts are urgently needed to address the
challenges of today. International peace and security,
and preventing conflict and terrorism, are rightly
high on our agenda. I therefore thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting on
non-proliferation.
We have been asked to comment on four themes
in this briefing: sanctions efficiency, capacity to
implement, non-State actors, and weapons of mass
destruction. I think that the answer to all of issues
is close multilateral cooperation. The world would
certainly be a much more dangerous place without
the existing treaties and agreements of the global
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. Yet, that
multilateral framework depends on our continuous
commitment to collective solutions.

S/PV. 8362

In many parts of the world, we are seeing the
modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals, increased
missile capacities, the threat of chemical weapons
use and a normalization of the rhetoric surrounding
all weapons of mass destruction. History has shown
us too many times that such steps form a pathway
to catastrophe. The nuclear-weapon States bear a
particular responsibility in upholding and making
good on the commitment inherent in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) of a
nuclear weapons-free world. To that end, the Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT in 2020 must pave
the way for enhanced disarmament and non-proliferation
commitments. Equally, Sweden reiterates the call on all
States to sign and ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.
The non-proliferation Treaty is the common tool
towards disarmament and non-proliferation, but let me
today also focus on three specific issues on which many
speakers have already touched. These are the challenges
to the Iran nuclear agreement, the development of
nuclear weapons by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and the recurring use of chemical weapons.
First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — the Iran deal — is a historic achievement.
It is a concrete example of effective diplomatic
non-proliferation efforts. The agreement prevents
nuclear proliferation in Iran, but also aims to avoid
ripple effects in the region. As the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirms, Iran continues to
fulfil its nuclear obligations under the agreement. As
long as that is the case, the JCPOA effectively curtails
Iran’s ability to develop nuclear weapons.
This is why Sweden, together with the rest of the
European Union (EU), deeply regrets the United States
unilateral withdrawal from the agreement — a decision
with far-reaching consequences that makes our world
more unsafe. And frankly, what are the alternatives to
the agreement? Undercutting a concrete multilateral
non-proliferation tool it dangerously undermines our
joint non-proliferation efforts elsewhere.
Together with our EU partners, we will try to
mitigate the adverse effects of the United States
policies. Sweden and the rest of the EU will continue to
foster broad relations and dialogue with Iran, including
on issues such as human rights. Iran’s role in the region
and missile activities are clearly a matter of concern.
These concerns can and should, however, be addressed

18-2985921/22

S/PV.8362

Maintenance of international peace and security

separately and not at the expense of the JCPOA. Security
in the Middle East region can be achieved only through
diplomatic solutions and enhanced cooperation, not
through further polarization and isolation. It should be
remembered that we tried that before for decades, with
isolation and sanctions, and all it did was to support the
most conservative forces in Iran. That is a problem
Secondly, the nuclear weapons programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a major
threat to the global non-proliferation regime. Recent
diplomatic efforts deserve our full and active support.
The continued progress in the inter-Korean dialogue
is very encouraging, and the summit between the
United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was indeed significant.
All parties must now work to maintain momentum
and take positive steps. For the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, that means that commitments must
be translated into legally binding undertakings. The
IAEA should be given a role early in the verification
of the denuclearization and disarmament process. The
Security Council and the international community
must continue to stand united.
Thirdly, the use of chemical weapons is a serious
violation of international law. Every violation
undermines established norms and risks eroding
the international taboo on these weapons. This is a
very serious and worrisome development. The use of
chemical weapons is morally abhorrent and can never
be accepted.
In Syria, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism has confirmed that chemical weapons

22/22

26/09/2018

were used repeatedly by the Syrian Arab Republic
and by Da’esh. We supported the decision to task the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. While a mechanism established by
the Council would have been preferable, the issue was
too important to be allowed to be blocked. This does
not, however, free the Council from its responsibility to
ensure that those responsible are held to account.
In Salisbury, in the United Kingdom, a targeted
murder was attempted using a nerve agent. Such
assaults are absolutely unacceptable, and we call on
Russia to fully cooperate with the investigations.
We must never lose sight of why we are making the
efforts to eliminate these horrific weapons. Until now,
we have not talked about the victims. I myself have met
with survivors of nuclear weapons attacks, and I will
never forget their stories. Victims of chemical weapons
have shared similarly accounts. It is important to listen
to such personal experiences in order to understand what
it is we are fighting for. It has definitely strengthened
my resolve to step up efforts for non-proliferation
and disarmament.
Weapons of mass destruction are clearly a global
threat that we must address together. Only through
multilateral solutions, including on the part of the
Council, can we effectively prevent the use of these
repugnant weapons. The multilateral non-proliferation
and disarmament framework is also a key pillar of the
international rules-based order. We owe this to the
survivors and victims of past attacks, and we owe it to
future generations.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

18-29859
