TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 19 DECEMBER 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 525) . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge d’affaires ad interim of Guinea
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.1525

c

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN
t

NUNDRED

Neld in New York
-

AND TWENTY-FIFTH

on Friday,

19 December

1969, at 3 p.m.

.
President: Mr. V. .I. MWAANGA (Zambia).

2

ETING

permanent representatives of Mauritius and Bulgaria requesting to be invited to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion on the question now before the
Council [S/9572, S/9.573]. In accordance with the Council’s usual practice I propose, accordingly, if I hear no
objection from any member of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Mauritius and Bulgaria to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they will be invited to sit at
the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 525)

1, A’doption of the agenda.
-.
2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge
d’affaires ad interim of Guinea addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/9528).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. K. Ramphui
(Mauritius)
and Mr. M. Tarabanov (Bulgaria) took the
places reserved for them.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Before we turn to the item on the
agenda, I should like to inform the members, with deep
sorrow, that I have just learned of the shooting of the
President of the Republic of Uganda, Milton Obote, this
evening. The fate of the President is unknown, and I shall
undertake, on behalf of the Security Council, to send a
message to the Government and people of Uganda expressing our sympathies.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Guinea
.Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Chary6 d’affaires
ad interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9528)

I

4. The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the complaint submitted to it by Guinea on
4 December 1969 in document S/9528. I call now on the
representative of Nepal who wishes to introduce a draft
resolution.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous decisions,, I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of Guinea and Portugal to take
places at the Council table, and the representatives of Mali,
Syria, Congo (Brazzaville), Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra
Leone, Tunisia, Lesotho, Saudi Arabia, Libya, Yemen and
India to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, on the usual understanding that
those with places at the side of the chamber will be invited
to take a seat at the Council table when it is their turn to
addressthe Council.

5. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, I associate myself
with the sentiments that you have just expressed with
respect to the reports of the tragic happening that has
befallen the President of Uganda.
6. For the third time since July of this year the Security
Council has been called upon to consider a situation
brought about by the vialations of territorial integrity of
African States by Portugal in pursuance of its colonial
policy. The Government of Guinea has sought redress for
the wrongs it has suffered at the hands of the Portuguese
authorities. The complaint by Guinea has the full support
of all African States represented in the Organization of
African Unity, as we can see from the letter dated
5 December [S/9549]
from the representatives of 40
African States addressed to the President of the Security
Council. My delegation fully shares the concern felt by
those States at the threat posed by the colonial policy of
the Government of Portugal to peace and security in Africa,
a concern which has been reflected time and again in a
number of resolutions adopted by competent organs of the

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Tour6 (Guinea)
and Mr. F. B. de Miranda (Portugal] took places at the
Council table, and Mr. S. Traore (Mali), Mr. G. J. Tomeh
(Syria), Mr. J. Mombouli (Congo (Brazzaville)), Mr. L. H
D&s (Liberia), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. F. B.
Savage (Sierra Leone), Mr. A. M’Sadek (Tunisia), Mr. hf. T.
Mashologu (Lesotho), Mr, J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. IV. El Bouri (Libya), Mr. M. S. Alattar (Yemen) and
Mr. S. Sen (India) took the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have just received letters from the
1

“Grieved
at the extensive damage caused by the
Portuguese shelling of Guinean villages from positions in
the Territory of Guinea (Bissau),

United Nations. May I say that, by those resolutions, the
United Nations has rejected the claim of the Government of
Portugal concerning the legitimacy of its colonial presence
in various parts of Africa.

“1. Deeply deplores the loss of life and heavy damage
to several Guinean villages inflicted by the Portuguese
military authorities operating from bases in Guinea
(Bissau);

7. It has become evident to all of us that the Government
of Portugal, in a bid to perpetuate its domination over its
colonial possessions in Africa, a bid which is foredoomed to
failure, is bent on carrying out a sustained policy of active
hostility against each of the African States whose territories
adjoin those of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique.
Those colonial Territories have been recognized as ones to
which Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration*
on decolonization
apply. The several
violations of the territorial integrity of Guinea, the subjectmatter of the present complaint, faI1 into the general
pattern of the colonial policy of Portugal. My delegation
has no doubt whatever that so long as Portugal persists in
its present policy it is bound to give rise to further such
justifiable complaints in the future, because Portugal’s
colonial policy is a source of constant friction in the
political life of the African continent.

“2. Calls upon Portugal to desist forthwith from
violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of he
Republic of Guinea;
“3. Culls upon the Portuguese authorities in Guinea
(Bissau) to release immediately the Guinean civilian plane
which was captured on 26 March 1969 together with the
pilots thereon;
“4. Further calls upon the Portuguese authorities ia
Guinea (Bissau) to release immediately the Guinean
motor barge, Patrice Lumumba, which was captured on
27 August 1969 together with the passengersthereon;
“5. Solemnly warns Portugal that if such acts wereto
be repeated in future, the Council would have to consider
seriously further steps to give effect to this decision.”

8. As a progressive institution
in the United Nations
system, the Security Council, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of world peace and security, cannot lose
sight of that basic factor in the over-all situation in Africa.
Each individual complaint, such as the one which the
Security Council is considering, should be viewed in that
context. Furthermore, the Council should take account of
the commitment of the African States to the ideal and goal
of a peaceful change in Africa, as evidenced by the Lusaka
Manifesto.2 The Security Council should pronounce itself
unequivocally in.favour of freedom, independence and the
self-determination
of peoples under colonial domination
everywhere.

10. I shall refrain from explaining the provisions of the
draft resolution, because they are self-explanatory. Let me
point out, however, that the draft resolution has been
conceived in a spirit of moderation and formulated with a
great degree of restraint, and that it seeks, in a limited way,
to redress the wrongs suffered by Guinea and to discourage
Portugal from taking upon itself the task of chastising the
African States one after the other, in pursuance of its
colonial policy and in contravention of its solemn obligations under the Charter.

9. With those considerations uppermost in our minds, the
delegation of Nepal has joined with those of Algeria,
Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia in sponsoring a draft resolution, which it is now my honour to submit to the Security
Council in the name of the five delegations. The draft
resolution reads as follows:

11, This disturbing situation in Africa, for which the
colonial policy of Portugal is responsible, is the fund*
mental factor that should be taken into account by the
Security Council in the discussion of this question. It is this
situation that the sponsors of the draft resolution are
concerned about most.

“The Security Council,

12. Members of the Council will recall that on 28 July
1969, and on as recent a date as 9 December, the Security
Council, quite rightly, adopted two resolutions-268 (1969)
and 273 (1969)-with regard to similar matters brought
before the Council by Zambia and Senegal.

“Having noted the contents of the letters of the
representative of Guinea in documents S/9525,3 S/95283
and S/9554,3
“Observing that incidents of this nature jeopardize
international peace and security.

13. In a spirit of consistency, the Security Council will no
doubt view the present text with that measure of positive
consideration which characterized its attitude to the two
aforementioned resolutions. It is the firm belief of the
sponsors that this draft resolution will receive the widest
possible support in the Council.

“‘Mindful that no State should act in any manner
inconsistent with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations,
“Gravely concerned with any and all such attacks by
Portugal directed against independent African States,

14. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that
arrangements will be made to have the text of the draft
resolution which has been read out distributed as an Official
document of the Council.4

-1 General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) dated 14 December
1960.
2 See Ojjicial Records of tlte General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.
3 Official Records of the Secun’ty Council, Twenty-fourth
Year,
Supplement for October, Novem her and December I969.

4 Subsequently submitted as document S/9574.

2

15. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): On behalf of the
Hunga:rian delegation I wish to join you, Mr. President, in
expreslsing deep sympathy to the delegation and Government of Uganda on the tragic event which has befallen His
Excellency President Milton Obote.

provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and in
view of the determination of the international
community ro put an end to colonialism and racial discrimination in Africa.”
21. Portugal’s answer to that resolution, as well as to a
number of earlier ones, was nothing but the shelling of
villages and the killing and wounding of the civilian
population-not
only a violation of human rights, but also a
danger to international peace and security. In such circumstances can anyone question the right-and not only the
right but also the most important duty-of the Security
Council to examine Portugal’s policy of colonialism and
aggression?

16. It. is most regrettable that the Security Council for the
second. time in three weeks has to deal with the oppressive
colonialist policy of Portugal, which has resulted recently in
armed acts of aggression against sovereign African States,
this time the Republic of Guinea.
17. Prom the letter submitted to the Council by the
representative of Guinea [S/9528/; it has become quite
clear, even to those who might have had some doubts
before, that the incidents enumerated, which are various
types and intensity but always destructive to foreign land,
life and property-acts of hijacking of airplanes, boats and
so on--are by no means isolated incidents. In less than six
month.s, these violent actions have been perpetrated by
Portug;al against Zambia, Senegal and now Guinea; but
there were many more at earlier times against other African
countries.

22. The representative of Portugal ventured to state the
other day that the comments of his delegation do not
receive due attention in the Security Council. As a matter
of fact, those comments, including such distorted ideas as
“Portuguese overseas provinces” and “pluri-continental
State”, and such other hypocritical assertions as that
Portugal was “acting in self-defence” or was “the victim of
constant attacks”, have always been given due attention;
the result of that consideration by the Security Council, as
well as by the General Assembly, has been a long row of
resolutions condemning Portugal for its colonialist policy,

18. During the lS22nd meeting of the Council on 15
December, the representative of Portugal took the liberty
of saying, among other things, that it was not the policy of
Portugal that was under discussion here. But what do these
facts prove, if not a policy? The sequence of such acts of
aggression constitutes an inherent part of the deliberate
colonialist policy of Portugal, a policy, and practice, of
terror and piracy, which occur repeatedly wherever Portuguese ldomination exists in Africa.

23. Thus, contrary to the accusations of the representative
of Portugal, the fact is that Portugal does not pay the
slightest attention to international public opinion; it is
Portugal which disregards and completely defies the United
Nations and the Security Council.
24. Needless to say, it is not the United Nations or the
Security Council which need to be governed by the
colonialist ideas and oppressive policy of Portugal; rather, it
is the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of this body that must be honoured and
implemented by Portugal. Any formal hope the aggressor
may entertain of possibly rejecting and dismissing those
instruments could never justify its causeand its actions.

19. The representative of Portugal may be right in saying
that it is not the internal affairs of that country on the
Iberian Peninsula with which we should deal here. But he is
definitely and deeply wrong in suggesting that the policy of
colonial domination-the
policy of aggression against the
territa’rial integrity of African nations, the policy of terror
against Africans fighting for their freedom, independence
and self-determination-is not before the Council. He has
been reminded many times-the demand has been made
repeatedly in United Nations resolutions, including those of
the Security Council-that
Portugal must abandon its
colonialist policy, that it must adopt immediate measures in
order to grant independence to Territories under its
domination and to ensure observance of the right to
self-determination of the peoples living in those Territories.

25. Representatives of African States and peoples, ineluding those at present under Portuguese colonial oppression, have stated in strong terms on several occasions that
Portugal has got nothing to do with Africa. Portugal, as a
country situated on the Iberian Peninsula in Europe, is
nothing but an intruder on the African continent and as
such it has no right at all to characterize its aggression
against African peoples as “self-defence”, In fact, the
opposite is the case. The peoples of Angola, Mozambique,
Guinea (Bissau) and other African countries have every
reason to exercise their right to self-defence against the
intruder State of Portugal.

20. Moreover, the General Assembly, in its resolution
2507 I[XXIV), adopted at the 1816th plenary meeting on
21 November 1969-that is, at a time when armed acts of
aggression were being committed by Portugal against
African countries-stated, among other things:

26. In this context, my delegation does not and cannot
accept any approach such as that made by the representative of Portugal, earlier in this debate, when he said that
the Security Council should arrive at an equitable decision
concerning Portugal’s acts of aggression and continued
violations of the United Nations Charter. It is the firm
opinion of my delegation that there can never be an
equitable decision that would suit the aggressor or confer
any right or justification on the colonialists in the mainte-

“The General Assembly,
“. ..
“‘Recommends that the Security Council, with a view to
the immediate implementation of resolution 15 14 (XV)
in the Territories under Portuguese domination, should
take effective steps in conformity with the relevant

3

.~

33. The new Government of Portugal, that of Mr. Caetano, we are told, is giving the economic development
problems of Portugal and its overseas territories greater
attention than they received hitherto. This means purely
and simply still greater and more merciless exploitation of
the peoples of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique,
for the very heavy military expenditures, which absorb half
the revenues, have to be made good. Officially-and we
know what is meant by that-the figures for the various
items of a budget come under specific headings, but there
are other figures besides which should be added to those
official figures. We all know the solid support given by
international capitalism to colonialist Portugal. Annexes
II A and II B of appendix II of the report of Sub-Committee I on the activities of foreign economic interests in
Portuguese colonies show up clearly the close ties between
traditional colonialism and modem neocolonialism, I need
not stress here the economic, social and political consequences of such foreign capital reinforcements in the
Portuguese colonies; but we must not lose sight of this
aspect of the problem, which will enable us to understand
how desperately anxious the Portuguese authorities are to
preserve their colonial privileges at all costs.

nance of their oppressive policy. To paraphrase the words
of the representative of Portugal: The world at large knows
very well who launches violence against whom, who takes
the offensive and who is obliged to defend himself, The
present case, as well as many previous ones, shows clearly
that Portuguese armed forces violate African territories,
Portuguese soldiers kill African peoples and Portuguese
artillery shells and destroys African villages.
27. The Security Council has once again the task of
stopping these cruel and inhuman acts and of condemning
the every-day practice, as well as the general idea and the
reality, of this remnant of the colonial age in Africa. Owing
to the seriousness of the continued armed aggression by
Portugal against African States, the Council is obliged to
consider these acts with adequate seriousness, in view of the
provisions contained in Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
28. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
29. Mr. ALATTAR (Yemen) (translated from I+ench):
Mr. President, I wish to associate myself and my delegation
with your expressions of regret at the tragic event which
has just taken place in Uganda.

34. Neither modem history, which has seen peoples free
themselves from colonial domination by heroic struggle,
nor the lessons drawn from this experience by other great
colonial Powers, nor the principles of the United Nations
Charter have modified the policies of the Portuguese
authorities, which still believe that they are living in the
days of colonial epics and conquered territories.

30. I should like to thank you for being kind enough to let
me speak on the subject of the complaint lodged by a
brother country, Guinea. Once again I wish to express to
the members of the Council our indignation at the acts of
aggression committed by the Portuguese colonial authorities against countries and peoples of Africa.

35. The murderous warfare being waged by Portugal on
the peoples of Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola,
and its provocations against sovereign African countries
constitute a challenge to the international community and
an affront to our Organization. However, the liberation
movements are sure of their victory. Let us listen to one of
the leaders who symbolizes the decisive liberation struggle
in Guinea (Bissau); he said:

31. Hardly ten days ago, on 8 December, my delegation
was one of those that expressed their concern at the
resumption of attacks by the Portuguese authorities. Now
Mr. Tour& the representative of Guinea, has brought before
the Security Council a complaint justified by grave events,
by warlike acts committed by the Portuguese authorities
against the sovereignty of the Republic of Guinea.

“Today, we no longer fear the forests; we have
conquered the forests; we have mobilized and organized
men’s minds for the struggle and transformed their
weaknessinto strength. Such is the struggle.
“*I.

32. Those who know the conscientiousness with which the
leaders of Guinea, in particular President Sekou Tour&, deal
with political problems and international relations can have
no doubt that the crimes made known here were indeed
committed by Portugal. There are, on the one hand, the
facts reported by the representative of Guinea and, on the
other, the subterfuges of the Portuguese representative
intended to distract our attention from the real problem,
the problem of colonial domination, I shall not repeat what
I tried to demonstrate in my last statement regarding the
economic aspects of Portuguese colonialism and the crucial
importance
of those aspects for the political life of
Portugal, a traditional colonial Power. The facts and figures
are there. I should merely like to draw attention to the
remarkable report of 28 November 1969 of Sub-Committee I of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.5

36. The representative of Portugal may say this is bravado
or exaggeration, but he is free to think what he wishes.
Those who believe in the liberation movements, whether in
Africa, Asia or the Middle East, are convinced that the aims
the liberation movements have set themselves will be
achieved.

5 See Official Records of the General Assembly,
Session, Supplement No. 23A, annex.

37. Guinea, for its part, has never concealed its view on
the liberation movements, views which are in perfect

‘&We do not like war, but this armed struggle has its
advantages: by means of this struggle we are forging a
strong nation, aware of itself. We have freed more than
two thirds of our territory, No matter what the present
political circumstances may be in Portugal, the situation
will only progress towards the total liberation of our
people with”-and I would emphasize this-“with or
without the prior assent of the Portuguese Government.”

Twenty-fourth
4

agreement with the principles of the Charter and the many
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,, Hence the shellings and provocations, and the
threats made by the Portuguese authorities against Guinea.
Neverthmeless,Guinea is not alone. It has secured not only
the support of all the 39 members of the Organization of
African Unity, but also that of many countries on other
continents.

resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council, namely, General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960
and 1807 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, and Security
Council resolutions 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963,
218 (1965) of 23 November 1965 and 253 (1968), paragraph 13, of 29 May 1968. I do not wish to repeat the
statement of the case that I submitted to the Council on
that occasion.

38. AS far as the delegation of Yemen is concerned, we
should like to assure the delegation of Guinea of our total
solidarity, and we should like to assure the liberation
movements in Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola,
and also the other liberation movements struggling for
self-determination, liberation and independence, that we
admire them and have absolute confidence in their ultimate
victory. Furthermore, my delegation hopes that the Secu.
rity Council will take adequate steps to put an end to the
aggression and to apply to recalcitrant countries like
Portugal the sanctions provided for in the Charter, so as to
make possible the achievement of one of the fundamental
principles of our Organization, that of self-determination,

43. I also dealt at that meeting with the defence of
Portugal as put forward by the representative of Portugal. I
do not wish to repeat either what I then said in this
connexion. However, at the 1524th meeting of the Council,
held yesterday, the following contention was advanced by
the representative of Portugal:
“Throughout that period”-that is, nearly 500 years“Portugal’s sovereignty in Africa has been internationally
recognized. It was on that basis that Portugal was
admitted to the United Nations. It is beyond the
competence of the United Nations to question the
territorial composition of the Portuguese State or its
sovereignty in any part of its territory.” [1524th meeting,

39, Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): My delegation joins the other
delegations in expressing deep concern and sorrow on
hearing the sad news of the tragedy that has befallen the
President of the Republic of Uganda. We extend our deep
sympath[y to the Government and people of Uganda.

para. 76.1

44. The representative of Portugal seems to maintain that
the United Nations is not competent to question Portuguese sovereignty in Africa. May we not in our turn ask
whether Portugal is competent to question the provisions of
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, which sets
forth the declaration regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories. Is not Portugal bound to comply with the obligations set forth in that declaration? As recently as the
just-concluded twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the Assembly, in its resolution 2507 (XXIV) of 21
November 1969, condemned the continued refusal of the
Government of Portugal to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter with regard to the colonial
Territories under its domination, The resolution went on to
state that this refusal stemmed from Portugal despite
numerous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
concerning those Territories. What has Portugal to say
about this violation of a Charter obligation? Is it tenable to
invoke the Charter against the international community and
at the same time to flout a provision which obligates
Portugal to develop self-government and to transmit information, including that of a constitutional and political
nature, as to how it is developing political institutions and
taking into account the political aspirations of the peoples
of its colonies? :

40. Folr the third time this year, the Security Council is
seized of a complaint brought against Portugal by an
independent African State. This time the complainant is the
Republic of Guinea. A little more than a week ago the
Security Council adopted a resolution strongly condemning
the Portuguese authorities for the shelling of a Senegalese
village, causing loss of life and damage to property
/resolution 2731196911. Earlier, on 28 July, the Security
Council strongly censured the Portuguese attack on a village
in the territory of Zambia-your country, Mr. Presidentresulting in similar loss of life and property [resolution
268 (19r59)].
41. It i.s therefore clear that what we have before us is a
much wider question than that of specific complaints. This
wider question is that of confrontation between the
independent African States and Portuguese colonialism in
the west and south of Africa. The fact that 40 African
States have again, in their letter of 5 December 1969
addressed to the President of the Security Council
/S/9549], ranged themselves on the side of the Republic of
Guinea, as they did on the side of Senegal and Zambia on
the earlier occasions to which I have referred, and also the
fact that so many African States not members of the
Security Council always participate in the debates on
complaints against Portugal, confirms that what the Council
has to consider is not so much the particular instances of
provocations and aggressive acts by Portugal, but the
potential threat to peace and security in Africa by the
refusal of Portugal to end its colonial rule over Guinea
(Bissau), Angola and Mozambique.

45. My delegation would like to submit that it is the
bounden duty of all the members of the Security Council
to keep in mind Portugal’s breach of the law of the United
Nations in weighing the contention of Portugal in regard to
the right of self-defence and so-called reprisal. The right of
self-defence does not belong under the generally accepted
rules of international law when the party claiming it is
acting in contravention of the law. That basic rule must
govern our entire approach to the defence put forward on
behalf of Portugal on the present complaint, as well as on
any others that may be brought against Portugal in the
Security Council from time to time.

42. My delegation, at the 1519th meeting of the Security
Council, stated the case of the international community
against Portugal, basing it on the provisions of the
5

over discussions in the Security Council on questions
concerning Africa.

46. I should like in this context to repeat what I said at
the 1519th meeting of the Security Council on the plea by
Portugal of the right of self-defence:

52. I wish to express to you the thanks of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, and, through you, may I thank the
members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to explain, during the deliberations in the
Council on the complaint by the Republic of Guinea
against the acts of aggression by Portugal-and this in fact is
a complaint by Africa as a whole-the views of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria.

“The right of the colonial peoples to self-determination
cannot be legislated away by domestic legislation which
violates the rules of international law and the obligations
of Member States under the Charter of the United
Nations.” [ISlPth meeting, para. 17.1
47. Finally, the African States are accused by Portugal of
giving aid and comfort to persons involved in what Portugal
calls “terrorist activities”. The Republic of Guinea has been
so charged in the present debate. In this connexion the
Security Council will no doubt bear in mind that Guinea,
like the other African States concerned, has been doing no
more than acting in accordance with the resolutions of the
United Nations. As the Lusaka Manifesto puts it:

53. We have decided to participate in this debate because
it concerns not only Guinea, a friendly country with which
we are linked by long-standing ties that were established at
the time of its declaration of independen’ce, but also
because it concerns all of Africa. Indeed, the aggressive acts
perpetrated against Guinea by Portugal are the expression
of a policy of continuous war not only against that country
but against the whole African continent.

“If peaceful progress to emancipation were possible, or
if changed circumstances were to make it possible in the
future, we would urge our brothers in the resistance
movements to use peaceful methods of struggle even ?t
the cost of some compromise on the timing of change.
l3ut while peaceful progress is blocked by actions of those
at present in power in the States of southern Africa, we
have no choice but to give the peoples of those territories
all the support of which we are capable in their struggle
against their oppressors.“6

54. In a letter addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of all the African countries
[S/9549]-with
the exception of the Republic of South
Africa, which cannot in its present form be considered as
anything but alien to Africa-it is stated:
“The African States’ request for the convening of the
Security Council is based on the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, which requires all member States
to ‘promote the unity and solidarity of the African
States’ and ‘eradicate all forms of colonialism from
Africa’.”

48. Those then are the considerations which, in our
opinion, constitute the perspective for the Council’s action.
It is clear that the succession of provocative attacks and
incidents, including the latest shelling of Guinean territory,
is creating a highly-charged atmosphere. The resultant
tension is fraught with serious consequences to peace in
Africa. The Council must therefore focus attention on the
preventive aspects of its decision. In our view, it is the duty
of this Council to endeavour to take such steps, as it did in
the case of the complaint by Senegal, as would reassurethe
Government of Guinea and other African States that the
Council cannot remain indifferent to the series of incursions by the Portuguese colonial authorities against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent African
States which adjoin its colonial possessions.

55. These aggressive acts against Guinea, which are one
link in a long series of acts of aggression against African
countries, are very revealingly set forth in the letter from
the 40 African countries, so that I need not mention them
again. They constitute, when taken together, a threat to
international peace and security.
56. It is true that the representative of Portugal tried to
minimize the significance of those aggressive acts by
describing them as border incidents and by trying to
present the matter as if it was Portugal that had been
attacked by Guinea, and not the reverse. Although in many
cases he tried to extricate himself from the situation in
which he found himself by saying for example that the acts
of aggression reported by Guinea’ were non-existent,, he did
in effect recognize their existence in his statement of 18
December when he stated:

49. The choice before the Council is clear: it lies between
the retention of the confidence of African States in the
Council’s willingness to pronounce unequivocally against
Portugal, and the loss of that confidence should it fail to do
so. It is our hope that the Cauncil will make the right
choice.

“But we also emphasize our right of self-defence against
attacks launched on Portuguese Guinea; since the attacks
come from the Republic of Guinea, we hold the Republic
of Guinea wholly responsible for the consequences.”

50. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“The Republic of Guinea, which aids and encourages
violence against us, has no right to complain of cons@
quences, whatever they may be, arising from its 0~11
illegal offensive actions.” [1524th meeting, paras. 73

51. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate yet+ on being President of the Council. We are most
gratified that an African has been called upon to preside
I+ench):

and 74.1

These are open avowals of Portugal’s responsibility and
guilt in connexion with the acts of aggression committed
against the Republic of Guinea.

6 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agendaitem 106, docu-

ment A/7754, para. 12 of the Manifesto.

6

domination
and to embark
African continent.

57. The representative of Portugal made much of the fact
that the border incidents which he referred to were old
incidents and that the matter was brought belatedly before
the Security Council. That is but one additional admission
on the part of the representative of Portugal that the acts of
aggression were real and were indeed committed by his
country. At the same time, he would have us believe that
Portugal was the victim of attacks from the Republic of
Guinea, and he mentioned a number of facts that had been
alleged. However, the fact remains that it was the Republic
of Guinea that lodged the complaint against Portugal
concerning the attacks, whereas Portugal did not dare lodge
a complaint against Guinea in the Security Council. This
shows that Portugal cannot, will not ana dare not shed any
light on the situation which has arisen as a result of its own
acts of aggression. All it does is equivocate i!j. the Security
Council in the face of a situation which is all too clear in
Africa.

on the reconquest of the

61. It is with this in mind that Portugal, largely on the
basis of the assistance from its allies, tries to blackmail the
independent States of Africa in ordqr to make them give up
the struggle for the complete independence of Africa and to
prevent them from supplying the assistance which United
Nations resolutions require that they should provide to the
liberation movements of the still subjugated African
peoples.
62. In the light of these repeated acts of Portugal against
the independent States of Africa, the Security Council
should regard it as its duty to take vigorous action in order
to put an end to this constant threat which weighsheavily
over peace and security in Africa. Portugal should be
compelled to stop’ its armed attacks in Africa and to
comply with the resolution of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

58. The list of offences of Portuguese colonialists is so
long that the representative of Portugal was himself
compelled to say that he could not remember the facts
mentioned and would need some additional time to secure
information from his Government.

63. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(transkted porn Russian): Mr. President, the Soviet delegation fully associates itseIf with the sympathy expressed
by you in connexion with the monstrous terrorist act
committed by the assailant of the President of Uganda,
Mr. Milton Obote. I am personally horrified at the news and
wish to express my deepest regret because I knew President
Obote personnally very well. I accompanied him in the
Soviet Union when he came on an official visit and we
visited numerous towns and regions. I met him in the
capital of Uganda, Kampala, and he impressed me as a
fervent patriot of his own country and all of Africa, as a
passionate champion of the liberation of Africa, as an active
fighter against oppression, colonialism and imperialism, and
as a wise statesman distinguished by the breadth of his
political views and by his great experience of the revolutionary struggle for the freedom of his own country and of
Aftica.

59. In this situation, so threatening for peace and security
in Af’rica, a very relevant question has been put on a
number of occasions by many representatives in the United
Nations, namely, how it was possible for a small country
like Portugal to maintain in its African colonies an army of
150,000 men, the largest army in all Africa. How could the
Portuguese Government afford to spend every year $320
million, 43 per cent of its national budget, just to wage a
colonial war against the oppressed peoples of Angola,
Moza:mbique and Guinea (Bissau). It is a secret to no one,
least of all to the members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), that these members are the main
suppl:iers of weapons, and that they provide the military
and economic assistance thanks to which Portugal can
afford to wage that colonia1 war, can repress the struggle
for freedom of the African peoples, and can engage in
repeated attacks against the independent States of Africa.
That is an act which is a violation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peopl.es and of many United Nations resolutions. The
General Assembly, in paragraph 13 of its resolution
2507 (XXIV), which it adopted on 21 November 1969:

64. The assaiIant’s hand raised against so distinguished a
leader of Africa was undoubtedly not the only one, but had
behind it the forces of vicious reaction, colonialism and
imperialism. It is this aggression on the part of colonial
Powers, which we are discussing today in the Security
Council, that creates an atmosphere of hatred and malice in
the continent of Africa against those who are selflessly
waging a struggle for African freedom and for the strengthening of the sovereignty and independence of African
countries and peoples.

rCUrgesall States, and particularly the States members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to withold or
desist from giving further military and other assistance to
Portugal which enables it to pursue the colonial war in
the Territories under its domination.”

65. But, as members know, terror is the weapon of those
that are doomed, The fact that reaction, colonialism and
imperialism
are doomed is what impels these men to
commit such monstrous crimes. But we know that the
peoples of Africa will respond to such acts by closing their
ranks, strengthening their unity and intensifying the strug
gle to cleanse the African continent of the last vestiges of
colonialism and to eradicate racism from that continent. In
that connexion we can assure the African peoples and the
African States that the socialist countries and the Soviet
Union wilI extend to them support, understanding and al1
possible assistance.

60. What is really responsible for the l‘on-compliance with
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples is intemational imperialism.
The aggressive policy in’ southern Africa is being applied by
a new colonial and racist bloc made up of South Africa,
Portugal and Southern Rhodesia, acting with the complete
support and with the complicity ever, of certain NATO
powers. Their primary aim is to create in southern Africa a
strong military and economic bastion in order to defend at
any price the Territories which are still under colonial
7

72. Portuguese colonialists in Africa are comporting themselveslike doomed men, recklessly and provocatively. Their
reckless acts are a threat to the security of African
countries and to peace in Africa. But no political trickery,
no acts of aggression and violence against African peoples
can impede the liberation of those African peoples that are
still under the foreign yoke. The hour has struck for
colonial rule on African soil. Next year both the United
Nations and the world will commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. No efforts on the part of the Portuguese colonialists can save them from the legitimate and righteous wrath
of the African peoples that they have oppressed.

66. Turning now to the question under discussion in the
Security Council, the Soviet delegation would like to make
the following statement. Only recently the Council completed its consideration of the question of aggressive acts by
the Portuguese colonialists against Senegal. The Council
condemned the Portuguese authorities for those acts of
aggression and demanded that an end should be put to
violations of the sovereignty and integrity of Senegal.
67. Now the Security Council is once again obliged to
discuss the question of aggressive acts by Portugal against
another African country, Guinea. The representative of
Guinea adduced in his statement numerous irrefutable facts
demonstrating that the armed provocation and violations of
the territorial integrity of Guinea by the Portuguese
colonialists from the Territory of Guinea (Bissau), which is
illegally occupied by them, are of a permanent and
systematic nature. The mere enumeration of those acts of
aggression perpetrated by the Portuguese colonialists
against the Republic of Guinea sounds like a most serious
indictment:
the artillery and mortar bombardment
of
peaceful settlements in Guinea and the bombing of its
territory from the air, the piratical seizure by Portuguese
military patrol boats of a civilian vessel with passengers, in
Guinean territorial waters, the illegal detention by Portugal
of a Guinean civilian aircraft and the abduction of dozens
of peaceful Guinean citizens and their illegal detention. As
a result of all these acts, peaceful inhabitants of the
Republic of Guinea are dying and serious material damage
has been caused. The delegation of Portugal has been
unable to refute these facts.

73. Portugal has no future in Africa. The hour is near
when African soil will be cleaned of the Portuguese colonial
oppressors and they will be expelled from Africa. There can
be doubt about that.
74. It is now obvious to the Security Council that the
armed provocations of the Portuguese colonialists committed against independent African countries are not
isolated incidents and not the result of irresponsible actsby
the Portuguese military. This is in fact essentially a new
stage in the permanent colonial war of Portugal against the
African peoples that are oppressed by the colonialists and
racists and against the sovereign States of Africa.
75. We have here a perfectly definite political course on
the part of Portugal, which for many years has been waging
war against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Rissau), and is now expanding the scope and the sphere of
that war by perpetrating systematic armed attacks on
independent African States. That is the essence of the
matter. Portugal’s war against the fighting peoples of the
Portuguese colonies to maintain its rule over those peoples
is at the same time becoming a war against free Africa.
Using modem weapons and modem military technology,
fhe Portuguese colonialists, for many years now, have been
carrying on a large-scale and bloody war to maintain their
colonial oppression over 5 million Africans in Angola,
6 million Africans in Mozambique, and 500,000 Africans in
Guinea (Bissau). Now the Portuguese colonialists are also
laying hands on the freedom and sovereignty of the peoples
of independent African States: Guinea, Senegal, Zambia
and Tanzania.

68. The Soviet delegation, in considering Senegal’s appeal
to the Security Council arising out of Portugal’s acts of
aggression, has already had an opportunity to express its
views on the acts of aggression of the Portuguese colonialists against African countries and the colonial-imperialist
motives of those acts of aggression and of those forces in
whose interests they are perpetrated. That assessment by
the Soviet delegation is fully applicable to the aggressive
acts of Portugal against Guinea now under discussion.
69. The Security Council and the General Assembly have
in recent years repeatedly demanded a halt to armed
subversion by the Portuguese colonialists against independent African countries and the cessation of violations
by Portuguese troops of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of those countries,
70. The General Assembly, in paragraph 4 of its resolution
2507 (XXIV) recently adopted at its twenty-fourth session,
condemned Portugal’s policy of using the Territories under
its colonial rule “for violations of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of independent African States, as in the
recent case in the Republic of Guinea”.

76. Portugal is in effect waging war in various parts of the
African continent against the freedom of Africa and against
all African peoples. Portugal’s colonial war in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and its aggressive acts
against a number of independent African States are links in
a single chain of aggressive colonial actions by Portugal in
Africa.

71. However, as recent events have shown, Portugal is
going further and further in its policy of ignoring these
legitimate demands of the United Nations. It is defying the
stem determination and the unshakable will of the African
peoples to achieve the liberation of the remnants of
colonial slavery in Africa and to defend their independence
and sovereignty against all encroachments by the forces of
colonialism and imperialism.

77. Portugal’s war against the peoples of the Portuguese
colonies fighting for their freedom and against a number of
independent African States in various parts of Africa is a
flagrant flouting of the most important principles of the
United Nations Charter and a violation of the decisions of
the General Assembly. In resorting to the methods of
international brigandage to perpetuate its colonial rule on
African soil, Portugal is in fact committing aggression
8

against all Africa and its peoples. The reply to this
strengthens the unity and solidarity of the African States,
as demonstrated both in the discussion of Senegal’s appeal
to the Security Council and, now, in the discussion of the
appeal made by the Republic of Guinea. In the first stance,
36 African States, and in the second, 40, appealed to the
Security Council, expressing their solidarity with and
support for the victims of Portuguese aggression, That is a
Striking illustration of the solidarity of the African con.
tinent in the struggle against colonialism and imperialism;
and those ~110 are trying to preserve colonial rule in Africa
must draw the most serious political conclusions from it,

That bloc of colonialists and racists will not stop at any
crimes against Africans in order to keep southern, and some
parts of western, Africa under colonial racist rule as a
bastion and bridgehead of military imperialism on African
soil. Portuguese troops, shedding the blood of African
peoples, are actually doing the dirty work of their more
powerful, wealthy and influential allies, they are acting as
an advance punitive detachment of imperialism, whosetask
is to prevent the liberation of oppressed African peoples
and terrorize free Africa, to oppose the strengthening of
independence and to impede the economic development
and social progress of the independent countries of Africa,

78. The aggressiveactivity of Portugal must inevitably be a
matter of concern to all peace-loving States-States that
have the cause of the freedom of the peoples ad the
preservation of peace and strengthening of international
security at heart.

83. The Soviet delegation has already drawn attention to
the fact that attempts by the Lisbon delegation here to
justify Portugal’s aggressive acts against independent African countries by references to an alleged “right to
self-defence” cannot mislead anyone. Not a single African
country is threatening Portugal’s security. On the contrary,
the Portuguese colonialists, acting illegally and violating
United Nations decisions in maintaining their rule over
millions of Africans living thousands of miles from Portugal, are putting down the freedom of African peoples and
threatening the security of the sovereign States of that
continent.

79. The question naturally arises why such a small,
economically backward country as Portugal is behaving so
aggressively and provocatively in Africa. Why does it dare
to defy the United Nations, to ignore the historic decisions
of the United Nations on the granting of independence to
all colonial peoples, and to encroach upon the independence and sovereignty of many African countries, notwithstanding the demands and warnings of the Security Council? The reasons for that are to be found, in the first
instance, in the assistance, support and patronage which
Portugal receives from some of its more powerful military
and political allies in NATO.

84. The General Assembly has recognized that it is not
only a right, but a duty, of African States, and indeed of all
States, to afford moral and material assistance to the
peoples of the Territories under Portuguese rule in their
sacred and just struggle for their freedom and national
independence. That decision was adopted by an over80. We fully share the views and statements of those -., whelming majority of Member States. The General Assemrepresentatives of African States who have rightly pointed
bly called upon all States to render such assistance,and at
its twenty-fourth session once again affirmed that appeal,
out in the Council that the aggressive acts of Portugal
against those countries and the expansion of its war and
calling upon all States to increase their assistanceto the
peoples of the Portuguese colonies in their just struggle for
intensification of terror against the peoples of the Portuguese colonies have become and are possible only because freedom. Those appeals are not going unheeded: the
fighting peoples of the Portuguese colonies are receiving,
Portugal, as a member of the NATO military bloc, is able to
obtain military and financial support, as well as political
and will continue to receive-right up to the time of their
full liberation from colonial rule-material and moral
and moral support, from its allies, Everybody knows that,
and it is really the case.
assistance and support. Right and justice are on their side.

81. In the statements made by the representatives of a
number of African countries, convincing information has
been adduced showing that Portugal, with its economic and
military potential, and even utilizing the resources of the
African peoples it oppresses, could not, without such
assistance from outside, expand its military activities
against the fighting peoples of Angola, Mozambique
and
Guinea (Bissau) on such a large scale, could not strengthen
its army and increase the number of police and security
troops, could not extend the apparatus of terrorist oPPression in the colonies, and at the same time throw down a
military challenge to the countries bordering on its colonial
possessions and thereby expand its aggressive acts against
those countries in Africa.

85. In the light of this reality, the Lisbon representative’s
utterances about some so-called interference in the domestic affairs of Portugal are entirely unfounded. This is a
typical example of the attempts made to distort the true
concept of “internal affairs”. African States, in affording
assistance and support to the peoples.of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), have a lawful right to do so, a
lawful right confirmed and approved by the United
Nations. They are doing their fraternal and international
duty. The peoples of those colonies are carrying on an
armed struggle against the illegal interference in their
internal affairs, against Portuguese colonial brigandage,
against foreign enslavers that are trying to deprive them of
their inalienable right to self-determination and freedom.

82. The provocative acts and the incessant armed Provocations against independent African States carried out by
Portugal are possible also because the Portuguese colomalists can rely on their military-political alliance with the
racist-Fascist regimes of the Republic of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia, condemned by the United Nations.

86. The arguments of the representative of Lisbon about
the right of the Portuguese authorities to take “retaliatory
measures” are also completely devoid of foundation.
Everyone knows that modern international law and the
United Nations Charter forbid States to have recourse to
military reprisals. The aggressive acts of Portugal against
9

African States, carried out under the pretext of being
SO-Called retaliatory measures, are in flagrant contradiction
with the obligations Portugal assumed under the United
Nations Charter.

96. I should like also to thank YOU and the members of
the Security Council for allowing me to participate h t&
debate on the serious matter before the Council. As leader
of the delegation of Mauritius, which is a proud member of
the Organiz’ation of African Unity, I joined all our other
brother representatives of the Organization of African
Unity in signing the letter addressed to the President of the
Council [s/9549]
in support of the request for the
convening of a meeting of the Council folIowing the
violations by Portugal of the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Guinea.

8’7. It is well known that the Security Council has
repeatedly and officially emphasized in its resolutions, for
example, when dealing with the aggressive acts of Israel
against Arab States, that the practice of so-called military
reprisals is incompatible with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. Israel has been condemned by
the Council for such reprisals.

;
1
d
:
;
,/
i,
!
I

97. For quite some time now, acts of aggression by
Portugal have been constantly committed against our
brother States. The victims so far have been our brother
States of Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Senegal and the
Republic of Guinea. We are gravely concerned at the
persistent harassment of our brothers by Portugal. The
world should know by now that there can never be
continued peace and security in Africa as long as the last
vestiges of colonial rule have not been removed and
oppressive racist policies not eradicated.

88. The Security Council must take the severest measures
to halt the aggressive acts of Portugal against independent
African States and to prevent a recurrence of such acts in
the future _
89. The Soviet Union fully supports the just and legitimate demands of Guinea that the Security Council should
condemn Portugal for its aggressive acts against that
country and that armed attacks and other violatians of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Guinea should cease
immediately.

98. Portugal today is behaving like a naughty child,
throwing stones at its neighbours and hiding behind the
skirts of its strongest friends. This is a dangerous pastime,
We can only appeal to the more powerful friends and allies
of Portugal to exert their influence upon it and advise it to
put an end to the suppression of the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and withdraw itself
peacefully from Africa before it is too late. The patience of
the African States is running short. The arrogance of
Portugal cannot be tolerated for ever.

90. We fully support the demands for the immediate
release and return of nationals of the Republic of Guinea
that were forcibly seized and detained by Portugal, for the
urgent restitution of all property of the Republic of Guinea
and for compensation for m,aterial damage.
91. The Security Council must warn Portugal that in the
event of a recurrence of such acts of aggression it will take
further necessary effective steps in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.

99. Today Portugal is indeed in a pathetic situation. Yet it
has so much to gain by following the good example set by
the United Kingdom in giving up its colonial domination.
The continued presence of colonial Powers by force and
against the wishes of the people of a territory is in itself a
form of aggression. That such an aggressor should come
here and ta.llc of self-defence is ironical and farcical. Not
long ago a wise and noble man, for whom my delegation
and my country as a whole have the greatest admiration
and respect, told me, in the language of Shakespeare, that it
is a good thing to have the strength of a lion but not a good
thing to use it like a lion. Portugal and its allies should heed
this good and sound advice. It should not provoke the
African lion to wake up from its long and deep slumber amI
sharpen its claws.

92. The Soviet delegation also supports the demand put
forward by a number of representatives here that the
Security Council should condemn Portugal for its failure to
carry out the United Nations Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in the
case of the countries under its colonial lule, namely,
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (B&au).
93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Mauritius. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
94. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, my delegation is shocked and grieved at the sad news from Uganda
regarding the shooting of President Miltoil
Obote, a
Commonwealth and African brother. We extend our deep
sympathy to the delegation of Uganda. We pray that peace
will continue to prevail in Uganda.

100. Yesterday we heard Mr. Miranda of Portugal make
what he called “an important declaration”. I do not know
who was impressed by the antics of Mr. Miranda in
withdrawing from the Council chamber when the representative of India, Ambassador Sen, took the floor, but it did
provoke laughter. It would be a sad state of affairs if all the
member States of the Organization of African Unity were
to Ieave the hall every time Portugal took the floor. India
was not the aggressor in the case of Goa. She was the
liberator, and her intervention was the wish of the people
of Goa. The long-enslaved people of Goa celebrated the
liberation with the same jubilance and enthusiasm as the
people of France when they were liberated from nazism.

9.5. Mr. President, I should like to extend to you the
warmest congratulations of my delegation and to say how
pleased and proud we are to see a distinguished young son
of a young African sovereign State President of the Security
Council. Your devotion and your sense of understanding
and justice are obviously helping you to carry out Your
duties as successfully and with as much dignity as Your
three very distinguished predecessors, Mr. Yost of the
United States, Lord Caradon of the United Kingdom ami
Mr. Malik of the Soviet Union.
10

I
‘1

,

(

101. We hope that in the not too distant future the people
of Mozambique, Angola and other colonial Territories will
celebrate their independence with the same gusto. I
congratulate Ambassador Sen for hating t&en the opportunitY to commemorate this noble and historical event.
According to the Bhagavad-Gitu, when injustice is being
perpetrated, when all the avenues for peaceful negotiation
have been explored in vain, then--and only as a last
resort-,it is not Only the right of man but also his duty to
use force, if necessary, to remedy the wrong. Mahatma
Ghandj, of non-violence fame, believed in the Bhngavad-

109. In the above-mentioned document we note that in
the month of April no less than four instances of shellings
of Guinean villages took place. That of the 14th resulted in
the death of three persons: one woman and two children.
In May, two such occurrences were reported as well. In
August, the attack on the Patrice Lumumba, a motor barge
used for peaceful purposes, resulted in the loss of one life,
with three wounded, and twenty-one Guineans forcibly
taken into Portuguese custody. These attacks have become
a regular pattern of harassing civilians of a country not
even at war with Portugal.

Gita.

110. We were only yesterday reminded of the Indian
experience with that country over the enclave of Goa. After
ten years of futile attempts at negotiation with the
Portuguese Government with regard to the future of that
Territory, the Indians became disgusted with the matter
and handled the situation in a totally different manner.
They ousted Portuguese forces stationed in Goa and
literally pushed those forces out of their sub-continent. As
complaints against Portuguese aggression follow each other
from sovereign States in Africa, notwithstanding the repeated censures meted out by the Security Council, which
remain unheeded by that country, one might perhaps begin
to wonder whether the Indian method is not by far the
most effective-the more so as the combined forces of
Guinea and Senegal would appear to be militarily superior
to the armies of this arch colonial Power stationed in
Guinea (Bissau).

102. We hope that Africans will never have to resort to
force t.o liberate their brothers, but we are aware that the
States of the Organization of African Unity are not alone
and are thankful for the moral support of India and other
well-wishers. The delegation of Mauritius expresses here its
own very firm solidarity, in the present situation, with the
Government and people of Guinea.
103. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the kind words he addressed to me.
104. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
105. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegaltion would very much like to Join with you and other
delegations in expressing regret at the grave event which has
befallen the President of Uganda, Mr. Milton Obote.

111. If those two States have refrained from such a line of
action, it is largely out of respect for the world community
and their belief in peaceful settlement of disputes, It would
be impossible to conjecture how much longer they will
continue to restrain themselves, We can well understand it
if their patience is fast running out. Instead of listening to
reason, instead of harking to the universal conscience of
mankind, the Portuguese authorities are heading towards a
situation of crisis which undoubtedly constitutes a grave
threat to international peace and security and should, as in
the caseof Senegal, be condemned in no uncertain terms by
the Council.

106. Mr. President, my delegation once again wishes to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
allowing us to participate in the present debate on the
quest.ion of which the Council is seized. If we refrain from
complimenting you, it is not because we are unaware of the
great skill and dedication you have so ably demonstrated,
but rather because we have had the opportunity in an
earlier debate to do so, and in the interest of brevity would
prefer not to repeat ourselves.
107. My delegation participated without reservation last
July in the discussion of the question of Portuguese
aggression against Zambia’s territorial integrity. OR the fifth
of the current month my delegation again intervened to
protest against Portugal’s molestation and wanton shelling
of villages and townships in Senegal resulting in 1OSSof life
and property. In that instance the Council seriously
censured Portugal for its aggression and decided to remain
seized of the Senegalese complaint.

112. In spite of Security Council resolution 180 (1963), in
which the Council refuted Portugal’s contention that the
African Territories are an integral part of metropolitan
Portugal and declared that such a concept was contrary to
the Charter, we are still treated to discourses from the
representative of that State to the effect that Portugal is an
African State and has been so for more than 500 years. He
further stated that his country’s sovereignty in Africa is
unquestionable and that his Government is prepared to
defend it-1 presume at all costs. No matter what the
Government of that country may be inclined to think,
members of this body know only too well that that type of
view is at best decadent. Other colonial Powers in the past
had to some extent propounded such a concept. But
discretion finally prevailed and in time such policies were
reversed, and to a great extent those erstwhile COhtd
Powers are all the better for the steps they took. The
relationship which has now developed between them and
their former colonies is one of mutual respect. If Portugal
comes before the Council to hammer away on this
outmoded colonialist view, it is a sad commentary on its

108. Now the Council is faced with another complaint,
this time from the Republic of Guinea, whose representative has, in document S/9554 of 12 Dwmber 1969,
presented the Council with a catalogue of atrocities
perpetrated by Portugal against innocent Guinean nationals
during the past eight months. It would therefore seem to
my delegation that Portuguese attacks on the territories of
neighboufing States is a deliberate policy that transgresses
all acceptable norms of international conduct. More specifi(;ally, such attacks are seen as a conscious Pattern of
Portugal’s behaviour, in spite of Article 2 of the United
Nations Charter.
11

offered by the representative of Portugal. It may be said
that this is not the right moment to pursue that proposal,
But it should certainly be remembered. It would no doubt
be salutary to all concerned to realize that if stick
complaints are made in the future the Council may well call
for an investigation on the spot. Surely our main concern
must be to stop such incursions, such bloodshed, suck
damage in future,

backwardness and a reflection of the sterility of its colonial
policies.
113. The attack on the Guinean motor boat, the provocative bombardment of Guinean villages, the seizure of a
Guinean aircraft and the unwarranted detention of its two
airmen, as well as the unnecessary loss of Guinean life and
destruction of other property, should not go uncondemned.
These causes of continued friction should be eliminated and
sterner measures taken to bring an end to this kind of
situation.

119. Our debate here may yet serve a valuable purpose;
the purpose of putting a stop to these acts of violencek
the future. That should be our purpose, the outcome, the
result, the benefit of our debate and our decision whenwe
take it today or on a subsequent occasion.

114. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had asked to
speak shortly this evening ra’ther than later in order to add
my voice to that of others in the expression of our shock
and dismay at the news we have received while we have
been sitting in this Council, the news of the attack on the
President of Uganda. The subsequent news which we have
heard as we have been sitting here leads us to hope that the
President will recover and that his injuries are slight. But
that we cannot know until we receive further reports. In
any event, I believe that all of us would wish that you,
Sir-and there can be no more suitable person to do
so-would be good enough to send on behalf of us all an
immediate message to the President expressing our deep
concern at the news which has reached us and our prayer
that he will rapidly recover.

120. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further spe&rs
on my list who wish to take part in this general debate,1
should like to make a statement in my capacity ssthe
representative of ZAMBIA.
121. Today the Security Council looks like a courtroom b
which, after the accused has pleaded guilty to somevery
heinous and barbarous crimes, the judge, instead of severely
punishing the criminal, turns round to him and says“The
jury is hoping to see you again soon”. It has not taken
Portugal more than two weeks to return to the stand,Its
representative even appears to have become a permanent
member of the Security Council. He is answering the same
charges of banditry, looting and violation of territorial
integrity of independent sovereign States of mother Africa.

115. Many of us in this Council know President Obote
personally and have done so for many years. We have seen
him grow in confidence and authority as he has exercised
his exacting duties. We greatly hope that he will be spared
to serve for many years the great Commonwealth country
of which he is the head.

122. The fact is that Portugal no longer respectsthe
pronouncements of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. As if wanting to chide the Ambassador of
Guinea, Mr. Toure, the representative of Portugal in his
usual arrogant fashion stated:

116. On 9 December I voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 273 (1969). That resolution dealt with complaints brought to us by the Government of Senegal. I said
then that what we had to do was to form a judgement on
the basis of the reports put before us. The reports then
represented to us were not denied, They were detailed and
categorical and we were consequently satisfied that the
complaints were justified. I go on to say that I have no need
to repeat what I said in explanation of our vote on that
occasion when I spoke on general questions of Portuguese
policies in Africa and about the right of African peoples to
self-determination and also about the dangers and evils of
violence and retaliation,

“It appears that the Republic of Guinea has taken upon
itself the task of enforcing resolutions of the General
Assembly. But it should not be forgotten that resolutions
of the General Assembly are only recommendations
which Member States may accept or reject.” [1522nd
meeting, para. 51.1

This type of attitude by a Member State certainly cuts
across the very spirit of the United Nations Charter. It
reduces the United Nations to impotence, and impotence
makes this place a mere debating chamber. Being a member
of an organization, as I had the opportunity of stating
earlier, calls for more responsibility than has so far been
demonstrated by the old-fashioned reactionary rtgime
based in Lisbon. It is the peace-loving nations of the world
that will adhere to the resolutions of the Security Council;
it is the peace-loving nations of the world, which have
respect for mankind, that will respond positively to theCall
of the General Assembly and strongly condemn any kindef
Portuguese cynicism by which the representative of the
Lisbon regime wishes to besmear the commendable aspects
of moral and material assistance that the independent
States of Africa-and the sister Republic of Guinea stands
prominently among them-give to the heroic freedom
fighters of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique.

117. I have often had opportunities of expressing our
strong feelings on those subjects, In this debate a number of
matters have been raised and allegations and counterallegations made. It has been impossible, partly for reasons
of time and distance, fully to establish the facts-all the
facts. Consequently, we do not feel that it is possible to
form a conclusive judgement on all the matters raised, and
it is for that reason that we shall abstain in voting on the
draft resolution which has been put to us.
118. There is another question which I think deservesour
special attention. It is the possibility of an impartial
investigation. Whenever facts are disputed and the evidence
is incomplete or is challenged, we would naturally wish to
have an unbiased investigation. Such an inquiry has been

123. When my delegation salutes the achievements of our
brothers in their just struggle against Portuguese colo~al*
12

ism, we
cornmu

killed, b
for rega
destroye
reaffirm
circums
are an j
Peninsu
Zambia
to For
self-detc
with t:
1514 (2
Portuga
of attri
coexist
incomp
exploi tr
124. (
contine
cannot.
them se
the pe
intensil
of fort
which
races tc
12.5. 1
which
wars al
they u
from s
Wester
undou
peace -1
fourth
the rn’
which
the sfl
domin
sudd er
termir
moral
a who

ism, we do so not much because we read from war
commuruqu@s that SO many Portuguese soldiers have been
killed, but because we begin to see a ray of hope-a hope
for regaining a personality that has for many years been
destroyed and brutalized by foreign exploiters, It is also a
reaffirmation
of our knowledge that, under whatever
circumstances, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)
are an integral part of Africa and not parts of the Iberian
Peninsula or Europe. The Government and people of
Zambia will be among the first to extend a fraternal hand
to Portugal as soon as it has granted the right of
self-determination
to its colonial peoples in accordance
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960. That is the first step
Portugal must take, for it will lead to the cessation of wars
of attrition, massacres and hostilities. Colonialism cannot
coexist with freedom, and our claim for a free Africa is
incomplete if parts of the continent are still tormented and
exploited.

es
‘T
4
I

5
G
i

.i

i

124. C)n the other hand, the patience of the African
continent is not unlimited and if the authorities in Lisbon
cannot come out of their deep slumber and reconcile
themselves to the facts of modem change and development,
the people of Africa will have no alternative but to
intensify the struggle until the entire continent has rid itself
of foreign domination. That may produce consequences
which !may make it difficult, if not impossible, for different
races to live and work together as people of one God.

.

12.5. I. know that there are Members of the United Nations
which have continued to support Portugal in its criminal
wars against the independent States of Africa, and we know
they will do so again. The support which Portugal enjoys
from some of the members of the Western Powers-and the
Western Powers deserve special mention in this respect-will
undoubtedly encourage it further to violate and attack
peace-loving African States with impunity. The twentyfourth session of the General Assembly witnessed one of
the most important political developments of this century
which will go down in history; I refer here to the revolt of
the small nations against big-Power bureaucracy, which has
dominated them for so long. We, the small States, have
suddenly rediscovered ourselves; we have emerged determin,ed to make use of the enormous power-and I mean
moral power-that we possessfor the benefit of mankind as
a whole. That is a trend which we are proud of, which we

hope will continue with even greater intensity and in which
we shall always be honoured to participate actively.
126. Many countries, including my own, are worried
about the impotence of the Security Council as an
instrument for peace, justice and progress. They are worried
because of the indifference and insensitivity of some of US
in the Council to. African and in general small-Power
problems. We have the power but we are too selfish to use
it for the benefit of mankind; we have the power but we do
not have the will to use it for just causes,and our refusal to
do SO will continue to undermine world public confidence
in our activities. If we continue to care only about our
micro-national interests, the Council will soon and very
soon sink into an abyss of disgrace.
127. My country, which continues to climb the long
stairway to peace for all mankind, will as always draw a’
sharp distinction between the aggressor and the victim of
aggression: That?approach is as important to us aslight is to
darkness. In this particular complaint before the Council we
are convinced ‘beyond any reasonable shade of doubt that
Portugal is the aggressor and we are equally convinced that
the Republic of Guinea is the victim of aggression. For that
reason Zambia fully endorses the just and legitimate
complaint of the Republic of Guinea against the Portuguese
colonialist oppressors. It is my hope and that of my
Government that the Security Council, while reiterating its
severe condemnation of the barbaric and inhuman activities
of Portugal directed against independent African States,
will meet its obligations and responsibilities. The demands
made by the Republic of Guinea are modest and reasonable
in every sense of the word; they are that justice must be
done and that it must be seen to be done. Unless that is
done, it is my humble but rather staggering submission that
the conscience of the Security Council will stand condemned in the eyes of the world.
128. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I would say that there are
no further speakers on my list and on the basis of informal
consultations, the next meeting of the Security Council will
be held on Monday at 10.30 a.m., at which time it is hoped
that the Council will take a decision on the draft resolution
which has been formally presented by Nepal on behalf of
five member States (S/95741.
The meeting rose at 6.30 P.m.

I
f

13

HOW

TO OBTAlN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consul1
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be

obtained
or write

from
bookstores
lo: United
Notions,

and

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les
publications
d6positoires

du

Notions

Unies,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los

publicaciones

en todos
portes
Ventos,
Nvevo

Litho

in Utlitcd

Nations,

der
monde

New

York

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

Section

des

Unies
sent
Informez-vous

ventes,

New

PUBLICACIONES
de

Ias

Price:

Unidar

Consulfe

$U.S.

York

en

0.50

NATIONS

vente

UNIES

de

dans
votre

vento

en

q up&

les
librairies
libroirie
ou

et les agencet
adressez-vour
6:

ou GenBve.

DE LAS

Nociones

del mundo.
York o Ginebro.

DES

NAClONES

UNIDAS

estirn

en

o III

tibrero

o dirliore

{or

equivalent

in other

librerios
o:

Nocioner

currencies)

y cosos
Unidos,

dislribuidoras
Seccidn

de

82310-January

1973-2,050
