UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-NINTH

,COUNCIL

RECORDS
YEAR

J/ii’: 6 u v&u

2533rd

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2533) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..t.........

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SfPV.2533

.

.

.d

.

’

~Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters.‘combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
<
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally publi&ed in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of ‘the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in.‘Ghich
‘information about it is given.
‘- ‘The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance. &h ‘a
‘system ,adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been apblied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2533rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 4 May 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Woolcott
(Australia), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador) and Mr. Wijewardune (Sri Lanka) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2533)

of the a agenda
I

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume’its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker on my list is
the representative of Ecuador. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to. make his statement.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

4. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) [interpretation
from
Spanish]: I welcome you, Sir, as President of the Security Council and thank you and the other members of
the Council for affording my country the opportunity to
participate in this discussion.

was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

5. The problem that Cyprus has brought before the
Security Council is of interest to the international community and a matter of serious concern to Ecuador
because it involves principles that constitute the essential bases of our country’s international policy and that
affect the authority of the Security Council, the primary
organ of international
law in our time.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the previous
meetings on this item [253Zst and 2532nd meetings]
I invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Iacovou (Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr. Jacobs (Antigua and Barbuda) and Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

6. Those principles are in particular the sovereign
equality of States, respect for the territorial integrity of
States, rejection of the threat or use of force in international relations, the self-determination
of peoples,
non-recognition
of territorial conquests obtained by the
use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
These positions are accompanied by our continued support for any action on the part of the international
community aimed at achieving the withdrawal of foreign troops from territories of countries not their own.
In enumerating in United Nations debates the cases in
which such withdrawal has been demanded, Ecuador
has always cited the case of Cyprus as well as others
elsewhere in the world.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Australia, Ecuador and Sri Lanka in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item

7. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have adopted a good number of resolutions in the past
20 years on this issue designed to achieve a just and
lasting solution that will not only benefit the Cypriot
people but also eliminate a conflict that poses an immi1

nent danger to the peace and security of the eastern
Mediterranean region. But unfortunately those resolutions have not been implemented, and that is precisely
why there has been continued violation of the sovereign
rights of a Member State.of the United Nations, which
brings us to the situation before the Council today.

Furthermore, Mr. Denktag knew Mr. Galo Plaza very
well and dealt with him, just as Mr. Galo Plaza also
dealt, in Ankara, with the President of the Republic of
Turkey, with its Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and other officials
of both the Iniinti Government and the succeeding
administration. Mr. Galo Plaza’s report was offered as
a “basis for an exchange of views” and recognized that
any solution would presuppose concessions on both
sides in respect of their initial positions. Anyone who
might try to give this a unilateral interpretation should
analyse the report objectively; they would find the balance and realism that have been so highly praised by all
who have studied it thoroughly and without prejudice
as an important document of the United Nations. It is
one of the many contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security made by Ecuadorian
citizens and by our country itselfin its international life
as a founding Member of the United Nations.

8. My country considers that the substantive issue in
this crisis, which so seriously affects the Cypriot population vis-d-v& its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of Cyprus; is the need for an understanding
between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities-n an equal footing and under the auspices of
the United Nations-that will lead to a peaceful settlement of the problem and ‘assure the well being and
harmonious coexistence of those communities.
9. Ever since 1960, when the Republic of Cyprus was
created, Ecuador, also a democratic country, has
expressed its solidarity with it. The 26 March 1965
report by the United Nations Mediator on Cyprus,
the former President of Ecuador, Mr. Galo Plaza,
addressed to the Secretary-General [S/6253], indicated
the criteria accepted in Security Council resolutions
aimed at a solution to the Cypriot problem based on
justice and the interests of the inhabitants of that country, a solution based on talks between the two communities that constitute the population of the island, free
of the pressure of foreign intervention and under the
auspices of the United Nations. There can be no free
discussions on the destiny of a people, even when different communities are involved, as long as foreign
troops are present on their territory.

12. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) [interpretation from AraThis is the first time the Egyptian delegation is
participating in the work of the Council under your
presidency, Sir. It is pleased to do so, especially since
your well-known tact, outstanding competence and diplomatic experience will guarantee the good conduct of
the business of the Council in the month of May. Allow
me to express sincere appreciation to Mr. Vladimir
Kravets, the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, on the exemplary manner in which
he conducted the work of the Council last month.
bic]:

13. At the outset I should like to affirm the great
importance Egypt attaches to the achievement of a
permanent, just and peaceful settlement of the Cyprus
problem. Egypt has an interest in stability in Cyprus for
several reasons, including the fact that both States are
among the founding members of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and Cyprus is a Mediterranean country for which Egypt desires the preservation of peace
and security, just as it desires it for the whole region.
Thesejoint concerns were reflected in the recent visit to
Cairo by the Foreign Minister of Cyprus.

10. The stature and integrity of the former President
of Ecuador, who was mentioned yesterday morning
[253Zsr meering], are unassailable in view of his extraordinary work in support of the United Nations, not
only during the drafting of the Charter at the San Francisco Conference, but also on missions to Cyprus and
also ‘to Lebanon and the Congo, not to mention his
outstanding work as Secretary-General of the Organization of American States. All this is a matter of
history. Moreover, his contributions have been commended in lofty terms by respected, high-ranking tigures on the international scene. Mr. Galo Plaza has
been a democratic President of Ecuador, respectful of
human rights and of the sovereign expression of the will
of peoples through free elections, which are the basis of
the political fabric of my country, where, in worthy
continuation of that process, elections will again be
conducted on Sunday next.

14. Egypt has always been convinced that the basis of
such a settlement cannot be other than full respect for
the independence, sovereignty, unity and non-alignment of Cyprus. This position stemsfrom the principles
of the Charter, the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on the question of Cyprus, and
the decisions of the Non-Aligned Movement.
15. In the light of those facts, last November Egypt
defined before the Council [2500th meeting] its clear
position on the declaration of the establishment of a
separate republic in northern Cyprus, which declaration constituted a grave development in the situation.
For the same reasons, today we express our grave
concern at the recent developments, especially declarations and actions that are completely at variance with due compliance with Security Council resolution 541 (1983). Those steps diminish the prospects for

11. In his report of 1965Mr. Galo Plaza demonstrated
his absolute impartiality and his desire to find a solution
to the problem of Cyprus on the basis of meetings
between the representatives of the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities in accordance with Security Council resolution 186(1964), and he indicated that
any agreement reached by the Cypriot communities
must have the support of all the parties concerned.
2

the month of May. Your skills, long experience
dedication are well known to us all.

achieving a permanent, just and peaceful solution to
the question of Cyprus, which we feel must guarantee
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
the two communities,
Greek and Turkish, and must
represent a firm basis for coexistence within a single
Cyprus. At the same time, Egypt has supported, and
still supports, the view that dialogue and negotihion
between the two Cypriot communities
is the only approach that will lead to the achievement of that objective, although we do not underestimate the difficulties
obstructing that approach.

and

22. It is a matter of serious concern to the Australian
Government that recent developments in Cyprus have
made it necessary for the Security Council once again
to consider the situation in that troubled island. The
statements to the Council yesterday [253Zsf meeting] of
President Kyprianou of the Republic of Cyprus and the
leader of the Turkish Cypriot community,
Mr. Denktas, emphasized the extent to which the situation
in Cyprus has drifted further into what we can describe only as an increasingly dangerous and divisive
deadlock.

16. The delegation of Egypt has studied with great
attention the Secretary-General’s
report in document
S/165 19, especially the account therein of the persistent
efforts to implement United Nations resolutions. The
developments and facts outlined in that report speak for
themselves, as stated.by the Secretary-General;
they
also identify the reasons for the frustration of the constructive efforts and sincere endeavours of the Secretary-General and his.assistants. Here, we cannot fail
to express our great sorrow at the threat posed to.the
negotiation process itself.

23. Our participation in this debate today reflects our
concern about those developments. Australia’s interest
in and concern for the situation in Cyprus is also demonstrated by our .participation in the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
and in the
Commonwealth
Action Group on Cypyus; established
at the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeiing
at New Delhi last November.

.

24. When the Security Council adopted resolution 541
(1983) last November,‘the
Australian Government was
hopeful that that resolution might pave the way for a
reduction of tension on the island. Regrettably, that has
not been the case; instead; new d&elopments
have
taken place which have led to a further deterioration of
the situation. We deeply regret the recent exchange of
ambassadors between Turkey and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which we see as
undesirable and unhelpful, particularly in terms of its
timing, and we have made this clear in representations
to the Turkish Government;

17. Our delegation has listened attentively
to the
statements made in the Council so far. We shall continue to follow the debate in the hope of finding the best
way for the Council to assist the Secretary-General
to
continue his good offices mission.
18. The statements made by the parties directly concerned should undoubtedly give everyone pause for
reflection, rather than our merely recording our positions or rushing into something that wouid diminish the
prospects for negotiations at this critical stage of the
question of Cyprus. In our view, thought must be given
to finding the best means of re-establishing a favourable
atmosphere to support the Secretary-General’s
mission
and to pave the way for the resumption of negotiations
between the Turkish and Greek communities
as partners having the same destiny, to enable them to live in
harmony and coexist in a single, undivided country.

25. The Secretary-General
is to be commended once
again for presenting the Security Council with a forthright report on recent developments.’ His latest report
[S/16519], however, is a sombre document and it makes
depressing reading. As he says in paragraph 23, “The
developments outlined in this report speak for themselves.”

19. Hence my delegation is ready to co-operate with
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council in any such endeavour at this very sensitive
time that we all agree is fraught with difficulties. At
the same time we concur with the Secretary-Gem&l’s
statement in his report to the effect that the current
situation requires the maintenance of continued dialogue and negotiation.

26. Australia has consistently supported the Secretary-General in his efforts towards a resolution of the
Cyprus question, and we shall continue to do so. The
ideas that the Secretary-General
has outlined in his
report, in our view, merit far more serious attention
than has so far been given to them. His mandate still has
the potential to reduce tensions on the island. His readi- ’
ness to provide his good offlces is indispensable and
deserves the unambiguous and unanimous support of
the Security Council and of the parties principal. In this
regard, let me say frankly that the Australian Govemment considers it would be helpful if the leader of the
Turkish Cypriot community,
Mr. Denktag, were to
look again, and in a co-operative spirit, at his exchanges
with the Secretary-General.

20. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Australia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
21. Mr. WObLCOTT
(Australia): May I thank you,
Mr. President, and, through you, the other members of
the Council for agreeing to my request to address the
Council today. May I also congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for

27. In his report the Secretary-General
describes the
continued deployment of UNFICYP
as essential. The
3

;
. .

Australian Government calls upon the parties principal
to the conflict to do nothing which would hinder the
peace-keeping and humanitarian role which the United
Nations Force in Cyprus carries out with distinction in
both sectors of the island.

created by the unilateral proclamation of independence
of the part of Cyprus occupied by Turkish armed forces
in 1974 and that that unilateral proclamation
was a
direct violation of the decisions ofthe Security Council
and the General Assembly and ‘hindered the efforts of
the Secretary-General to seek a peaceful solution to the
problem of Cyprus through talks between the two Cypriot communities.
. i 1,-,
34. The Presidency considered’it
indispensable that
new efforts be undertaken immediately
with a view to
starting negotiations between’ the two Cypriot communities on an equal footing, in order to achieve a
solution acceptable to both parties, with full respect for
the independence,
sovereignty; 8territorial
integrity,
unity and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus
and based on the decisions of theSecurity Council and
the General Assembly and on;,the principles of non.
alignment.

28. The history of Cyprus has been bedevilled by
intransigence and lack of trust on both sides. We have
seen this manifested already in the current debate. The
Australian Government
believes that, despite recent
setbacks, the best hope for progress towards a ‘settlement in Cyprus lies in renewed discussions and contacts, with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities which would take into account the legitimate
concerns of both. Moderation
from all parties is an
essential requirement at this difficult and delicate stage,
if there is to be progress towards a solution in Cyprus.
i
29. The Security Council has a clear responsibility in
the current situation. We ask the Council to make clear
to the parties theessential need for co-operation, communication and genuine negotiation, and we call on the
parties themselves to heed such a call. Only then will
peace and stability return to the island of Cyprus, which
for too long has known too little of both.

35. It may also be recalled that the-heads of State or
Government of non-aligned countries at their Seventh
Conference, held at New Delhi in March last year,
reiterated full solidarity with andsupport for the people
and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus and also
reaffirmed respect for that country’s independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment. They expressed deep concern over the fact that
part of the Republic of Cyprus continued under foreign
occupation, and they demanded the immediate withdrawal of all occupation forces as an essential basis for
the solution of the Cyprus problem. At that time they
pointed out that the defucto situation created by force
of-arms and unilateral actions should not in any way
affect the solution of the problem.

30. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia;
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
31. Mr. GOLOB
(Yugoslavia):
First of all, Sir,
I should like to congratulate
you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
As the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, you are well known at the United Nations
for your wisdom and knowledge and for the high esteem
in which we your colleagues hold you. We are gratified
that so eminently qualified a person should be occupying the presidency of the Council for this month.
I wish also to express our great admiration for the way
in which Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic presided over the Council in the month of
April.

36. In its resolution 541 (1983) of November last year
the Security Council, inter ah, considered the unilateral declaration of independence invalid and called
for its withdrawal. It requested the Secretary-General
to pursue his mission of good offices in order to achieve
the earliest possible progress towards a just and lasting
settlement in Cyprus and called upon the parties to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General.
It also called
upon all States and the two communities in Cyprus to
refrain from any action that might exacerbate the situation. That call of the Security Council was supported by
the international
community at large. It was strongly
hoped at that time that it would bring about restraint
and the reversal and withdrawal of the unilateral proclamation of independence purporting to create an
independent State of Northern Cyprus. It was also
hoped that the efforts of the Secretary-General
would
pave the way to dialogue and a negotiated settlement.

32. At the core of the situation in Cyprus currently
being considered by the Security Council is the unity,
sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity and
non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus, a Member
of the United Nations and a founding member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Moreover, this
situation is a component part of the sensitive region of
the eastern Mediterranean
and of the uncertainties,
challenges to peace and threats to international security
prevailing there.’

37. The Members of the United Nations withheld
recognition of the new self-proclaimed
entity. However, the Security Council’s call was not heeded by the
leaders of the Turkish Cypriot community,
and they
have taken measures in direct contravention of resolution 541(1983) and the efforts of the Secretary-General.
Thus another link has been added to the long chain of
faits accomplis.

33. It may be recalled here that, immediately after the
unilateral proclamation
of independence in November
last year, the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia issued a statement to the effect,
inter ah, that it had considered the latest situation
4

38. Once again the policy of fait accompli has delivered a heavy blow to, efforts to resolve the problem
through negotiations .based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. One fait accompli is
being used as justification
for another, and thus the
crisis is developing ‘iii a vicious downward spiral of
events. It would be dangerous for us to get accustomed
to long-lasting violations of sovereign rights of a State
-in this case the Republic of Cyprus-and
to allow one
fait accompli to follow another.
/.
39. An end must be put to this downward spiral that is
threatening to result in the partition of Cyprus and its
eventual disappearance as a unified island entity. These
and other important aspects of the crisis were most ably
and effectively put forward yesterday by the President
of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou..
1;
40. Intercommunal
talks and dialogue are the way to
peace and stability in Cyprus, and all parties should shy
away from actions that make dialogue more and more
irrelevant and bring the partition of the Republic of
Cyprus closer and closer. The unilateral proclamation
and the ensuing measures in no way promote these
negotiations. We cannot but conclude that all these
measures undertaken’aby the leaders of the Turkish
Cypriot community
are attempts to consolidate the
grounds for the dismemberment
of the Republic of Cyprus and to render the basis for dialogue non-existent.
We feel it is indispensable to call again for the withdrawal of the unilateral proclamation
and the ensuing
measures and to make them null and void.
1
:.
41. There are no questions we know of that cannot be
resolved through dialogue, and surely none can be resolved in the long run by force, going against the General Assembly and the Security Council in particular,
and against the standards of the international community.

between the parties to the dispute is indispensable
the search for a solution. I

in

44. However, the efforts of the Secretary-General can
have meaningful effect only if they have the undivided
and unambiguous support of all and if all parties involved show political will and co-operation. This thus
implies the need for the most urgent cessation of all acts
leading to the partition of the Republic of Cyprus and an
end to the occupation of a part of the country. This also .
implies the cessation of all acts contrary to Council
resolution 541 (1983), which calls for the withdrawal of
the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot authorities that
purports to create an independent State in Northern
Cyprus.
45. We consider of particular importance urgent action by the Security Council, aimed at providing a
peaceful solution on the basis of the adopted resolutions, in order to prevent any further deterioration, to
re-establish the unity and territorial-integrity
of the
Republic of Cyprus by peaceful means and to lend its
full support to the sovereignty, independence and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus. .
46. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation>om
Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic containing a request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representative of that country to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter-and rule 37 of the
provisional rules,of procedure.
.
A’t the invitation
of the President, Mr. Al-Atassi
(Syrian Arab Republic), took the place reservedfor him
at the side of the Council chamber.

42. It may be appropriate to stress again, at this stage,
that the solution to the problem of Cyprus can be based
only on the withdrawal of foreign forces from the Republic of Cyprus and on cessation of occupation and of
foreign interference. The presence of foreign troops
threatens to spread the conflict by creating opportunities for the involvement of other factors. No amount of
foreign troops will help, and an increase in foreign
military presence will jeopardize even more the peace
and security of the region.

47. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
I now call on Mr. Al-Atassi to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
48. Mr. AL-ATASSI
(Syrian Arab Republic) [interpretation from Arabic]: At the outset, Sir, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are convinced that your experience, ability and skill will lead to
success in .your conduct of the Council’s work. You
represent a friendly country, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, which has always supported peoples threatened by aggression or struggling for independence and freedom. We should also like to voice
our admiration for the exemplary way in which your
predecessor, Mr. Kravets, the representative of the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, conducted the
work of the Council last month.

43. Further active engagement of the Secretary-General is invaluable. His readiness to discharge the mission of good offices entrusted to him by the Security
Council is extremely welcome. His most recent report
on the situation testifies to the fact that he is taking into
account the interests of the two Cypriot communities,
on the basis of his extensive knowledge of the situation
and the possibilities for a political solution of the problem. His services and initiatives are indispensable in
this new situation, particularly since maintenance of a
continuous process of communication
and negotiations

49. Our delegation, having studied with interest the
report of the Secretary-General,
published as docu5

terranean is precarious and threatens to explode at any
time. Needless to say, Israel-and
behind it the United
States of America-is
imperilling
the security of the
region. This danger of explosion is compounded by the
strategic co-operation between the United States and
its favourite ally, Israel. Recently the United States
Navy and other navies were in the eastern Mediterranean and, not content with making a show of force,
even bombed the civilian population of the region.

ment S/16519, dated 1 May 1984, commends the efforts
he has been making to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions and believes that the proposals
calling for high-level dialogue are a constructive initiative to implement the Council’s resolutions.
50. The Syrian Arab Republic has high hopes that it
will be possible to achieve a just and comprehensive
solution to the problem of Cyprus based primarily on
the maintenance of the territorial integrity and independence of the island and its non-aligned status, and also
on the basis of respect for and implementation
of Security Council resolutions. In that connection, as the
President of the Syrian Arab Republic, Hafez al Assad,
stated at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, during the consideration of major
international
questions:

53. Finally, my delegation would like to express its
concern over the fact that it has not been possible
thus far to resolve the problem of Cyprus in accordance
with United Nations resolutions. We believe that the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
adopted since 1974 are a unanimously accepted basis
for achieving a solution to .the problem of Cyprus.
I think in particular of General Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX), which contains, inter alia, the intercommunal negotiating principle in the context of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus and of non-intervention
in its internal affairs.

“This. neighbouring
country, Cyprus, is suffering
from partition, which has caused great suffering to
the people of that country. We favour a peaceful
solution, which would unite it and enable its people to
recover its national unity and total independence and
to coexist and co-operate with its neighbours and
maintain its non-aligned status. We also favour negotiations between representatives of the two Cypriot communities
under the auspices of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in keeping with
United Nations resolutions.”

54. My delegation reaffirms that we must continue to
make greater international efforts. We very much hope
that the Council will achieve a just solution to the
problem of Cyprus and urge the two Cypriot communities to resume intercommunal
negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General,
on the constructive
basis accepted by both parties. These negotiations
should take place on a basis of equality, in the context
of freedom and the comprehensive proposals made by
both sides to achieve an agreement guaranteeing their
basic, legitimate rights. These negotiations should also
take place with respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and non-aligned status of Cy-,
prus, as well as being in keeping with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.

51. The fact that Cyprus is a friendly neighbouring
non-aligned country explains Syria’s interest in the
situation in that island. Furthermore,
this concern
emanates from Syria’s obligations vis-d&s the Charter
of the United Nations and the purposes and principles
of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
52. The concern shown by our country over the prolongation of this problem is a sincere and sound reflection of this position. The security situation in the Medi-

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

The meeting

00300

rose at 12.15 p.m.

90-61313~Januq

1993-2.050
