29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and
chosen in accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical representation, to prepare the necessary
operating procedures and administrative arrangements
of the organization established under paragraphs 1 to
5 above, taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, 83 a note by the
Secretary-General, 34 the reports of the Committee for
Industrial Development35 and the relevant views expressed in that Committee, in the Economic and Social
Council, at the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in the General Assembly, and
to report thereon to the Committee for Industrial Development at its sixth session, to the Economic and
Social Council at its forty-first session and to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session;

7. Decides to review, in the light of experience, the
effectiveness and further evolution of these institutional
arrangements with a view to deciding upon such
changes an<l improvements as might be necessary in
order to meet fully the growing need~ in the field of
industrial development;
8. No tes with satisfaction that the Secretary-General
has, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1081 E (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, provided a
substantial increase in the budget of the Centre for
Industrial Development with a view to carrying out
its existing an<l expanding functions ;
9. Expresses its appreciation of the work done by
the Centre for Industrial Development since its establishment and the efforts made by the Commissioner
for Industrial Development in the field of industrialization, within the limited possibilities of the resources at
his disposal ;
10. Expresses its satisfaction at the decisions taken
by the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-ninth
session on the holding of international an<l regional
symposia on industrial development;
11. R equests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the organization of the symposia, to take into acconnt
the decisions embodied in the present resolution.

1404th plenary meeting.
20 December 1965.

*

• •

At its 1408th plenary meeting, on 21 December 1965, the
General Assembly apbointed, on the proposal of /he Presiden/
of the Assembly, /he members of the Ad Hoc Committee on
the United Naiions Organization far Industrial Dez•elopmenl,
establishcd under Paragraph 6 of the above resolution.
The Ad Hoc Committee z.vill be composed o/ the followinq
States: ARGENT1NA, AUSTRALIA, BRAZJL, CHAD, COLOMBIA,
COSTA

RICA,

GERMANY,
JORDAN,

CUBA,

FINLAND,

LIBYA,

CzECHOSLOVAKIA,
FRANCE,

MEXICO,

FEDERAL

REPUBT.IC

GUINEA, INDIA, !TALY,

NETHERLANDS,

NIGERIA,

OF

]APAN,

PAKISTAN,

PERU, PHILIPPINES, Ro:vrANJA, SPAIN, SUDAN. SWEDEN, SYRIA,
THAILAND,

TuNISIA,

UGANDA,

UNION

OF

SovrET

Soc1ALTST

REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGllOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
lRELAND, UNITED REPUBLTC OF
AMERICA and Yur.osi.AvTA.

T ANZANTA, UNITF:n STATES OF

ss [bid., documents A/5826 and A/6070/Rev.1.

3 4 A/C.2/L.794.
311 Official Records

of the Economic and Social Council
Thirty-seventh S ession. S11pplement No. 6 (E/3869) ; i/,iri '
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4065).

2090 (XX). The role of the United Nations in
training national tccbnical personnel for the
accelerated industrialization of the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1824 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1029
(XXXVII) of 13 August 1964,
Attaching great importance to the training of national
technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization
of the developing countries on the basis of the latest
achievements of science and technology,
Considering that, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1029 (XXXVII), the report
of the Secretary-General3 6 was transmitted to the Governments of Member States, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the regional
economic commissions and the Committee for Industrial
Development, for their comments and recommendations,
Desiring to contribute further to the successful solution of the problem of training national technical personnel for the accelerated ir,dustrialization of the developing countries with a view to attaining the ai111s of
the United Nations Development Decade,
1. No tes with appreciation the valuable report prepared by the Secretary-General in co-operation with
the specialized agencies;
2. Commends the Centre for Industrial Developrnent,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency for their activities in training national
technical personnel for the industrialization of developing countries, such as symposia, seminars and advanced training courses, undertaken within the framework of the United Nations technical assistance
programmes ;
3. Requests the Centre for Industrial Development
to continue and to expand such activities, financecl
frorn the funds of the United Nations Development
Programme, and to co-ordinate them with the related
activities of the specialized agencies concerned, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the regional
economic cornmissions ;
4. Requests Governments, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United
Nations Development Programme and the regional
economic commissions to consider the recommendations
contained in the above-mentioned report and to transrnit to the Secretary-General their comments and
suggestions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
action taken in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4
above and on proposals for further measures in this
field to the seventh session of the Committee for Industrial Development, which would present its recommendations on the question to the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-third session for consideration ami
submission to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session.

1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
3ft lhid., Thirty-se1•rnth Session, Anne.i-es, agenda
rlornments E/3901 an<l Add.l and 2.

ítem

12,
