S/PV.7879

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7879th meeting

Wednesday, 8 February 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-03376 (E)
*1703376*

S/PV.7879

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

oil and gas exports for the benefit of all Libyans and
end the dire humanitarian situation in the country.

Adoption of the agenda

I would like to update the Council on the items I
put before members at my last briefing (see S/PV.7827).

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: First, I would like to congratulate
Ukraine on presiding over the Council this month.
More than a year has passed since the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat. That year, 2016,
was spent seeking to implement the Agreement and to
begin to re-establish State authority all across Libya.
While there was not nearly enough progress, some
important gains were made. The Presidency Council
and Libyan economic institutions continue to work
together on disbursing the funds of the 2017 budget. The
budget will enable State institutions to deliver muchneeded basic services. Oil production has increased to
over 700,000 barrels per day. This provides the Libyan
State with much-needed revenue.
On the security front, the Islamic State, which one
year ago was expanding its territory in Libya, now
controls none. It still poses a threat, however. I once
again pay respect to those who lost their lives fighting
terrorism on the battlefields in Sirte, Benghazi and
elsewhere.
Despite these gains, Libyans are not yet in a position
to address the root causes of division. This year must
be a year of decisions — decisions on possible limited
amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement that
would enable the House of Representatives to endorse
the Government of National Accord; decisions on how
to form a strong, united army and police force, only after
which armed groups can be effectively demobilized;
and decisions on how best to utilize the revenues from
2/6

08/02/2017

First, on current political issues, the past two
months have brought visible progress and converging
visions from the east, south and west on possible
amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement. Most
agree on the following principles. First, the Libyan
Political Agreement must remain the framework of
the political process. Secondly, solutions must be
found through inclusive dialogue, and not resolved
through violence. Thirdly, possible amendments to
the Political Agreement should be endorsed by the
House of Representatives as a package, followed by
a constitutional amendment and the endorsement
of the Government of National Accord. Lastly, the
discussions should take place under the umbrella of the
United Nations. However, the political process must be
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. Only Libyans can take
decisions on the future of Libya.
In many meetings both inside and outside the
country, possible amendments were discussed, in
particular the question of the supreme commandership
of the Libyan army; the chain of command of the army
and in particular the role of General Haftar; and the
future composition and role of the Presidency Council.
I am confident that a format will be found in the next
weeks within which these questions can be decided upon
and recommendations can be put forth for approval to
the relevant institutions.
In January, informal consultations of members
of the Libyan political dialogue in Tunisia, and the
13 December Cairo communiqué, were important
milestones in identifying contentious issues. However,
no individual or group can decide the way forward alone.
It must be a collective effort. All Libyan institutions
need to uphold their responsibilities and obligations to
implement the Agreement. Together, they can advance
the process to endorse a Government. Only by doing
this can they address the needs of Libyan citizens. In
this regard, I urge the House of Representatives to
conclude its deliberations and nominate its delegation
for further discussions.
I would like to take this opportunity to recognize
the efforts of the neighbouring States and regional
organizations, which continue to contribute towards
fostering consensus. I attended the neighbouring States
17-03376

08/02/2017

The situation in Libya

conference in Cairo on 21 January and the meeting of
the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya
in Brazzaville, under President Sassou Nguesso, on
27 January. I am impressed by the coherence of the
approach of both the neighbouring States and the
African Union. The Troika formed between the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the United
Nations has contributed to improving coordination
and building trust. We agreed in a meeting in Cairo on
21 January to associate the European Union with this
important forum. These past weeks have seen a truly
best-practice effort on how to converge the views of
Libyans, on the one side, and the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the European Union and the
neighbouring countries, on the other.
Secondly, no political process can continue
without addressing the issue of armed groups and the
proliferation of weapons. While some of these groups
are nominally controlled by State institutions, too many
are driven by narrow interests. The ongoing formation
of the Presidential Guard is a step in the right direction.
However, the Presidential Guard is no substitute for a
unified Libyan army; it is a transitional measure. The
Presidential Guard must be integrated once a consensus
on the command structure of a future united Libyan army
is reached. National security institutions, including
the police, must be empowered and developed. There
are no alternatives. Without a strong army and police,
armed groups cannot be demobilized. The citizens of
Libya deserve security and an end to the rampant crime
and lawlessness.
Thirdly, while the Islamic State no longer controls
territory, the fight against terrorism is far from finished.
The country’s borders remain porous. Terrorists, human
and weapons traffickers and criminal gangs continue
to exploit the security vacuum. Libya’s neighbours are
rightly concerned that this will affect their own security.
I also welcome efforts of regional organizations,
including the African Union and the European Union,
to assist regional States in improving their capacities
and coordination. Regional solutions are required to
effectively and comprehensively address the security
threats. Now is the time to consolidate the hard-won
victories in the fight against terrorism. I am pleased by
the efforts to create and deliver post-liberation plans
in Sirte and Benghazi. I will continue to work with the
Presidency Council and the international community
to meet the humanitarian, stabilization, reconstruction
and recovery needs.

S/PV.7879

Fourthly, recent months have seen positive
developments in Libya’s economic performance. Libya
is a wealthy country with abundant natural resources.
However, despite its wealth, living conditions and public
services have deteriorated in recent years. Institutional
frailty, poor financial management and corruption,
among other factors, are taking their toll. Now, Libya
has a unified budget. The Presidency Council and the
Central Bank agreed on a 2017 budget framework of
37.5 billion Libyan dinars.
This is an opportunity to address much-needed
service delivery. Some sectors must be prioritized.
Health services are inadequate. Visiting a children’s
hospital in Tripoli, I saw first-hand the implications of
poor management and insufficient financing. With the
hospital lacking basic supplies and medicines, people
were left to find their own means to relieve the suffering
of their loved ones. The Presidency Council and the
Government must quickly improve the poor service
delivery and tackle outstanding economic challenges.
Fifthly, human rights, the rule of law and
irregular migration must be addressed seriously and
comprehensively. The rule of law continues to be
undermined by armed groups that abduct, mistreat
and commit other human rights abuses with impunity.
This must end. I would like to make a special note on
the plight of migrants. Libya’s wealth has long made it
attractive to economic migrants. Their labour continues
to contribute to the development of the country.
However, migrants are extremely vulnerable. Those
held in detention have no legal recourse and suffer
appalling conditions. Many have died.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights published a report on 13 December detailing
the disastrous situation and ill-treatment in detention
centres. We have submitted concrete recommendations
to the Libyan authorities and the international
community. While fully understanding the concerns
of neighbouring States and the region, all actions
must respect international humanitarian law and the
dignity of the migrants. I am working together with the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to address these problems. These efforts include saving
lives at sea, combatting human trafficking, and training
the Libyan Coast Guard.

17-033763/6

S/PV.7879

The situation in Libya

I would also like to reiterate my continued support
to the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. Human trafficking may constitute a crime
against humanity, and it could be prosecuted by the
International Criminal Court.
Beyond institutional and political agreements,
a national reconciliation process is long overdue. A
process is needed to heal the wounds of years of conflict
and oppression. In January, we held a workshop in
Malta with Libyan experts and activists to establish a
road map for national reconciliation for Libya. We need
to find ways to support community reconciliation and
make it resonate at the national level. We will establish
more channels of communication between traditional
leaders, elders and youth, and also with women, who
too often remain at the margins of these processes.
I am encouraged by the renewed Libyan efforts
and regional activity, in particular among Libya’s
neighbours, to overcome the political deadlock. We are
beginning to see an emerging consensus among parties.
The year 2017 must be a year of decisions and political
breakthrough.
I would like to thank the Security Council for its
cohesive support. There is no alternative to a sustainable
Libyan-owned political solution. The Libyan Political
Agreement still provides a viable framework for
resolving differences and restoring the democratic
transition. I am hopeful that, with bold decisions and
actions, we will witness a political breakthrough that
can place Libya back on the path of peace, prosperity
and stability. The people of Libya deserve it.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kobler for both his briefing and his steadfast work.
More than a year after the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement, regrettably no significant progress
has been made in the political transition process that
has given concrete legitimacy to the establishment of
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. The support the former has garnered within
the Libyan political system has been minimal, which
undermines the chances for quickly stabilizing the
country and putting it back on the path to normalcy.
It is crucial that the Presidency Council succeed in
securing broad support among the population, thereby
4/6

08/02/2017

achieving full legitimacy, failing which it will be very
difficult for it eventually to govern the country, or even
the majority of its territory.
Among the few news we can highlight once again
is the progress in the counter-terrorism fight, which has
made it possible to defeat the troops of the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, especially in the cities of Sirte and
Benghazi. We also welcome the announcement by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
that the remaining Libyan chemical weapons arsenal
had been eliminated following its removal from the
country for subsequent destruction, in line with the
provisions of resolution 2298 (2016).
We continue to be concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation affecting the Libyan people,
given that, according to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 1 million people
are urgently in need of assistance. Similarly, we are
concerned about information in the latest report
(S/2016/1011) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
report condemns attacks against civilian infrastructure,
especially hospitals and medical facilities. Almost one
year since the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we
note with concern the continuation of those crimes. As
such, we would like to have more information about
those attacks, to include how many have taken place,
the number of victims and any other information that
may be deemed relevant to shed light on such despicable
acts.
The situation of migrants who use Libya as a
country of origin and transit in order to cross over
into Europe in flight from hunger, war and political
crises in their countries continues to be a desperate
one. In spite of the measures adopted by the Security
Council, in 2016 the number of deaths resulting from
shipwrecks in the Mediterranean Sea of vessels in a
precarious state increased, although the total migration
flows decreased as compared to previous years. In that
connection, the meeting a few days ago between Prime
Minister Serraj and European Union officials takes on
special importance in trying to reduce migration flows.
We hope that the measures to be adopted prioritize the
human rights of migrants and refugees.
We reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for
UNSMIL’s role. We encourage them to continue
their joint work with Prime Minister Serraj and the
17-03376

08/02/2017

The situation in Libya

Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. That will be key in the Government being able
to enjoy legitimacy throughout the country, which is the
only way by which it will be able to urgently address the
enormous challenges before it in responding to Libya’s
multiple and growing needs, including combating
terrorism and the grave humanitarian, economic and
security crisis affecting millions of people. In that
context, we think it will be important to carefully set
the Mission’s new mandate. Likewise, the strategic
assessment review recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report will be a good opportunity
for the presence of the United Nations in Libya to be
adjusted to the political, operational and security
realities on the ground.
The President: The representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia has asked for the floor to
make a statement.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia appreciates the briefing by Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
and reiterates its support for the work he and his team
are doing.
We regret that there has not been significant progress
in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement by the
Government of National Accord, with the support of the
Mission. Nevertheless, we underscore that any effort by
the Security Council should lead to a peaceful political
solution of the conflict that also comprehensively
addresses the interests of the Libyan people and
respects their rights.
We believe that it is important to acknowledge
and encourage the resolute fight by the Libyan people
and their Government against Da’esh. We underscore
the fact that, as territory is liberated, the necessary
humanitarian assistance be facilitated and ensured
for the population. We vigorously condemn terrorism
and any type of political, social or economic violence,
regardless of the perpetrators or their motives.
Likewise, I would like to highlight the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between Libya
and Italy on 2 February, which aims at strengthening
Libyan State institutions and, above all, to develop
humanitarian support efforts for refugees escaping
the region due to the grave humanitarian, political and
economic crises affecting the region, who, according

S/PV.7879

to figures released by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, as of December 2016 totalled
313,000 persons since the conflict began in 2011.
It is important to arrive at a political solution
that puts an end to the tragic situation not only in
Libya but also in the region, given the alarming fact
that so far this year 255 people have lost their lives in
the Mediterranean while fleeing the crisis — in 2016
there were 4,218 such drowning deaths, according to a
5 February 2017 report by the International Maritime
Organization.
We believe we have an obligation to look ahead and
to support efforts towards a peaceful political solution
to this tragic situation. However, as we have said
previously, Bolivia believes it is timely and important
to recall the causes for which the Security Council has
to discuss this issue today. I refer once again to policies
of intervention and regime change, through which
entire populations have been decimated and onslaughts
have been carried out that led to the emergence of the
self-declared Islamic State and the rise of Da’esh. That
phenomenon has spread to various countries of the
region, ushering in a period of instability that continues
to have a catastrophic effect to this day, and not just in
the region.
We continue to remember the phrase
(spoke in English)
“We came, we saw he died”.
(spoke in Spanish)
He did indeed die, but so did thousands upon thousands
of Libyans died as well. In fact, thousands upon
thousands of Libyans continue to die as an outcome
of that political intervention. Allow me to recall a
statement made by Mr. Michael Flynn, former Director
of the United States Defense Intelligence Agency:
(spoke in English)
“This was a disaster. This was not a failure; it was
a disaster. We made it worse. All I know is that
in Libya we took a guy out — again, not a great
guy, but a guy who maintained stability in a bad
neighbourhood”.
(spoke in Spanish)
We believe that the international community must
learn from the lessons of the past. Interventionism
and regime change have led to an instability that goes

17-033765/6

S/PV.7879

The situation in Libya

beyond the Middle East or North Africa. It is only
in learning from these lessons that we can fulfil the
mandate of the Charter of the United Nations and the
aim of maintaining international peace and security,
which constitutes the main objective of the work of the
Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I reaffirm the full support of the Government
of National Accord for the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to assist the Libyan parties in reaching a full consensus
on the various issues of contention, with a view to
putting an end to the crisis and bloodshed in Libya and
relieving the Libyan people of their suffering.
It would be remiss of me not to commend
neighbouring Arab countries for their central role and
effotrs to settle the Libyan crisis. I recall in that regard
the ministerial meeting held on 21 January in Cairo,
which was presided over by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt. That meeting, which resulted in
positive outcomes aimed at returning stability to Libya
and maintaining its unity and the social cohesion of its
people, was held in addition to various bilateral meetings
convened by Egypt with various Libyan parties, such
as the President of the House of Representatives and
the Head of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord. We also commend the final
communiqué of the meeting of the African Union
High-level Committee on Libya, held in Brazzaville on
27 January. The communiqué called upon the Libyan
parties to reach consensus on amending — if need
be — the Libyan Political Agreement. It also reaffirmed
the support of those countries to the Presidency Council,
the House of Representatives and the State Council.
The suffering of the Libyan people continues to
escalate by the day on all fronts. The deteriorating

6/6

08/02/2017

security situation and political fragmentation have
affected the economy, security and status of health.
Moreover, differing political viewpoints among
stakeholders have led to prolonged instability and
hindered the ability of the Government to carry out its
tasks, in particular with regard to the livelihoods of our
citizens. We hope that regional and international efforts
to reach a political consensus among the Libyan parties
that will restore stability and security to the country and
enable the Government of National Accord to undertake
its tasks to the best of its ability will continue.
Despite what has been said, there are some positive
indicators on the economic front, exemplified by
increased petroleum exports, which have reached
700,000 barrels per day. In addition, the sums pledged in
the London meeting, which will enable the Government
of National Accord to address the stifling problems
currently facing citizens, have been disbursed.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
success of the Government of National Accord depends
on the implementation of the terms of the Political
Agreement, starting with the security measures,
including protection for Government buildings via
the Presidential Guard, which is under formation.
The measures include unifying the regular army and
police, which are subject to military law under the
command-and-control principle, securing Libyan cities
and borders, providing all capabilities to those entities
facing such challenges as terrorism, illegal migration
and smuggling, and protecting the oil fields and the
power stations. To ensure the appropriate undertaking
of those tasks, such entities must be exempt from
the embargo imposed by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, so
that they can be supplied with weapons and necessary
equipment.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-03376
