S/PRST/2005/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2005
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5209th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 June 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000) as well as statements made by its Presidents on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, reiterates its commitment to address the
widespread impact of armed conflict on civilian populations.
“The Council reaffirms its strong condemnation of the deliberate
targeting of civilians or other protected persons in situations of armed conflict,
and calls upon all parties to put an end to such practices. It expresses in
particular its deep concern at the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. It
calls upon all States to put an end to impunity also in this regard.
“The Council is gravely concerned about limited progress on the ground
to ensure the effective protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It
stresses in particular the urgent need for providing better physical protection
for displaced populations as well as for other vulnerable groups, in particular
women and children. Efforts should be focused in areas where these
populations and groups are most at risk. At the same time, it considers that
contributing to the establishment of a secure environment for all vulnerable
populations should be a key objective of peacekeeping operations.
“The Council invites, accordingly, the Secretary-General to include in his
next report recommendations on ways to better address the persisting and
emerging protection challenges in the evolving peacekeeping environment.
Upon receipt of this report, it expresses its intention to take further action to
strengthen and enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including,
if necessary, a possible resolution in this regard.”

05-39314 (E) 210605 210605

*0539314*
