S/2018/676

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2018
Original: English

United Nations operation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 19 December 2017 to 20 June 2018. It brings
up to date, since the issuance of my report dated 9 January 2018 ( S/2018/25), the
record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council resolution
186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2398 (2018).
2.
As at 20 June 2018, the strength of the military component stood at 807
(753 men and 54 women) for all ranks, while the strength of the police component
stood at 65 (43 men and 22 women) (see annex).

II. Mission context
3.
My report on progress towards a settlement in Cyprus issued on 14 June 2018
(S/2018/610), submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2398 (2018), set out
in detail the most significant political developments during the period under review.
While acknowledging the continued hiatus in the talks since July 2017, I encouraged
greater efforts towards creating more propitious conditions for their possible
resumption, and outlined next steps to be taken by the United Nations. The role of
UNFICYP in contributing to conditions conducive to negotiations will be covered in
the present report.
4.
The environment in which UNFICYP operates includes the area in and around
the buffer zone, a porous stretch of land representing approximately 3 per cent of the
island, and two ceasefire lines delineated by the United Nations but not formally
recognized by the sides. The opposing forces are deployed on either side with a
strength of approximately 1,000 armed soldiers each, consisting mostly of young
conscripts, facing each other daily along the respective ceasefire lines. Thousands of
additional soldiers are deployed across the island, making Cyprus one of the most
militarized places per capita in the world. The buffer zone stretches 180 kilometres
east to west, with a width varying from seven kilometres to less than four metres in
the capital, Nicosia. The two opposing forces and the sides more broadly have
fundamentally different perceptions of the buffer zone: the Turkish Forces and
Turkish Cypriots see it as a sterile area, whereas the Republic of Cyprus encourages
Greek Cypriot civilian activities in the buffer zone.

18-10881 (E)

100718

*1810881*

S/2018/676

5.
The de facto division of the island, which has persisted for decade s, has been
characterized by the lack of direct communication between the opposing forces,
police services and civilian authorities; UNFICYP is the sole interlocutor between
them. In addition to its patrols, the mission passes messages daily, decreasing te nsions
by ensuring that disagreements and disputes are resolved quickly and at a technical
level, whenever possible.

III. Implementation of the strategic review of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
6.
In a previous report on UNFICYP (S/2017/1008), I presented the
recommendations of the review team I appointed pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2369 (2017), led by an independent expert, Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber. I
am pleased to state that, as at 20 June 2018, 94 per cent of the review
recommendations have been implemented, except for those depending on the
approval of the mission’s budget request for 2018/19.
7.
During the reporting period, the military force reduced its authorized strength
from 888 to 860 personnel and its actual strength to 807, while strengthening its
liaison functions.
8.
The police component redeployed six individual police officers from
headquarters to patrolling functions, which has allowed increased joint military and
police patrols and some, albeit limited, night-time patrolling. Those changes, together
with the transfer of the mission’s three international civil affairs officers from the
mission’s headquarters to the existing Sector Civilian Activity Integrated Offices,
along with five Cypriot national staff, have strengthened integration among the three
components, as well as liaison and engagement capacity vis-à-vis respective
interlocutors at the sector level.
9.
While Ledra Palace Hotel will continue to be used for offices and
intercommunal activities, the accommodation of sector 2 military personnel will be
relocated from Ledra Palace Hotel to the United Nations Protected Area, subject to
available resources. In addition, the mission plans to recruit a Head of Joint Mission
Analysis Centre, which will enable UNFICYP to increase its situational awareness
and use its resources more effectively.

IV. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
10. Prevention is at the core of the work of UNFICYP. The mission works
continually to maintain calm and stability in and around the buffer zone and keep
tensions low, actively engaging with the sides to ensure that incidents do not escalate
and that the military status quo is maintained. Through their daily patrols in the buffer
zone and their liaison and engagement with the opposing forces and respective police
forces, the military and police components of UNFICYP deter and prevent military
violations or other incidents that could raise tensions between the opposing forces,
between civilians and the opposing forces, and among civilians.
11. The civilian component of UNFICYP, in coordination with the military and
police components, works, inter alia, to manage the authorized activity of civilians
who farm and work in the buffer zone and to address unauthorized activity, including
hunting, which contributes to the overall calm and stability in that area. The mission
also helps to build confidence between the two communities through a variety of
intercommunal initiatives, further contributing to maintaining calm, promoting

2/13

18-10881

S/2018/676

mutual understanding and creating conditions conducive to a resumption of viable
talks.
12. In the absence of any direct contact between the opposing forces, police or
civilian authorities, continual liaison by UNFICYP between those entities on both
sides of the island is critical to preventing a recurrence of fighting.

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
13. The respectful relationship and professional interactions between UNFICYP
and the opposing forces remain paramount to the mission’s ability to achieve its
objectives, and they have been further enhanced through the implementation of the
recommendations of the strategic review, including the increased focus on liaison and
engagement. Those relationships and interactions are crucial to preserving stability
and de-escalating tensions, especially in the absence of acceptance by the sides of th e
aide-memoire of 1989.
14. In addition to enhanced liaison and engagement activity, the number of patrols,
including combined military-police patrols, has been increased and broadened across
all sectors. The mobile force reserve has been increasingly use d as a surge capacity
and a force multiplier to provide additional support at flashpoints across the buffer
zone; to address reports of ill-discipline between the opposing forces; and to gather
information on and deter smuggling, illegal migration and huma n trafficking through
the buffer zone.
15. During the reporting period, 207 military violations were recorded, compared
with 184 during the same period in the previous year. Most of the violations involved
moves forward into the buffer zone and the overma nning of positions by the opposing
forces, which occurred on both sides. UNFICYP also continued to monitor and report
on breaches of the maritime security line, which is routinely crossed by Turkish forces
conducting resupply to the Kokkina pocket.
16. The prevalence of closed-circuit television (CCTV) equipment at positions that
remain manned and other enhancements of military positions is a growing concern.
CCTV equipment installed by either side at a position confers a military advantage
unless the position is simultaneously unmanned. Since my previous report, and
despite objections by UNFICYP, there have been 17 new military violations involving
the installation of CCTV equipment at Turkish forces positions along the buffer zone
without evidence of accompanying unmanning of those positions. The investment in
solar panels to power the cameras and in a networked microwave communications
system to transmit information to local headquarters, along with the installation of
water pipes at the positions, as observed by UNFICYP, are indications of the
envisaged permanence of those cameras and of the positions themselves.
17. Further to the recommendations of the strategic review and the military
capability study of UNFICYP, the mission enhanced its patrolling, w hich, inter alia,
led to the detection of unauthorized heavy weapons at Greek Cypriot National Guard
observation posts in Nicosia and on the southern ceasefire line in the west of the
island, including mortars, rocket-propelled grenades and M-60 machine guns.
18. Military positions established by both forces inside the buffer zone that violate
the status quo, including at Strovilia, remain in place and are classified as permanent
violations. The United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey
responsible for the status quo in Varosha.

18-10881

3/13

S/2018/676

19. Civilian activities in the buffer zone continued to be reported in connection with
military violations, including some of the moves forward into the buffer zone or
overmanning of positions. For example, in May and June, Turkish Cypriot security
forces moved forward in sector 2 to help organize a “North Cyprus rally” with support
from the Turkish Cypriot authorities but without authorization from UNFICYP.
20. Over the past months, both sides have been conducting training within visibility
of the other side without prior notification to UNFICYP, which constitutes a military
violation. Instances of ill-discipline by the opposing forces in areas of central Nicosia,
where the buffer zone is narrowest, is a worrying issue that UNFICYP continued to
address through liaison, both at the political and tactical levels.
21. Given the passage of time and new challenges presented by increasing civilian
activity in the buffer zone, UNFICYP has taken steps to update the 1989 aid ememoire on the supervision of the ceasefire, referenced in previous reports. The
updated version is based on current realities and good practices observed on the
ground, and is intended to provide greater clarity and transparency on the modus
operandi of UNFICYP.

B.

Contribution to law and order
22. The police component of UNFICYP continued to focus on contributing to the
maintenance of law and order in the buffer zone, where the respective police services
are not present. In accordance with the recommendations of the strategic review, the
UNFICYP police component increased its patrols, including jointly with the military
and civilian components, as well as its engagement with civilians and security forces.
The police component, jointly with the military and civil affairs components of the
mission, paid special attention to land disputes in the buffer zone so as to avoid their
escalation.
23. The mission continued to facilitate the work of the bicommunal Technical
Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters and the Joint Communications Room,
including through the deployment of two police officers dedicated to the Room. The
Joint Communications Room is a unique arrangement built on delicate but
constructive working relationships among the four Cypriot indi viduals manning it,
who are associated with the respective police services on the island. It allows for
information-sharing regarding crimes that concern both communities, including
murder investigations, abductions, drug trafficking and theft, and facilit ates the
handover of suspects as appropriate. During the reporting period, the Joint
Communications Room received 123 requests, including to facilitate the transfer of a
British citizen detained in the north back to the south, to facilitate the exchange of
information regarding the murder of a Greek Cypriot in the north and to facilitate the
transfer of a Turkish national incarcerated for a double murder, who had escaped
prison in Turkey and fled to the north of Cyprus, and was eventually apprehended in
the south.
24. The UNFICYP police remained the only continuous police presence in Pyla, the
sole bicommunal village in the buffer zone, constituting the first point of contact for
the local inhabitants when reporting crimes. The UNFICYP police continued to liaise
closely with the respective police services, including with regard to the nine
unlicensed casinos in the village and related crime. Following the simultaneous search
of the casinos by both police services in November 2016, which was facilitated by
the UNFICYP police component, 33 people were brought before the courts in the
Republic of Cyprus and charged with offences related to illegal gambling. The matters
are still before the courts.

4/13

18-10881

S/2018/676

25. Similarly, the 11 cases concerning the incidents of 18 Nove mber 2015, in which,
during protests in south Nicosia, Greek Cypriot youths threw stones at two vehicles
belonging to Turkish Cypriots, resulting in injury to two Turkish Cypriots, are still
before the courts. A Greek Cypriot involved in one of the cases was given a suspended
sentence of four months in prison.
26. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Cyprus has seen a steady increase in the number of asylum applications
since 2013, with 4,499 persons applying for asylum in 2017, a 54 per cent increase
compared with 2016. The largest group of asylum seekers came from the Syrian Arab
Republic, followed by India, Nepal, Bangladesh and Egypt. The upward trend in the
number of asylum applications continued in the first quarter of 2018, with 1,372
persons applying for asylum, representing an 18.72 per cent increase compared with
the same period in 2017. UNHCR estimates that most of the undocumented migrants
currently present in the south crossed illegally through the porous areas of the buffer
zone. In response, UNFICYP increased its patrols in areas of the buffer zone
suspected to be used by refugees and undocumented migrants. If the trend continues,
it will add another challenging dimension to the work of UNFICYP in Cyprus.

C.

Management of civilian activity in the buffer zone
27. Authorized civilian activity in and adjacent to the buffer zone has steadily
increased over the past decade, as part of a return to normal conditions on the island.
Meanwhile, unauthorized incursions into the buffer zone are slowly decreasing,
possibly reflecting greater compliance with UNFICYP procedures for civilian use of
the buffer zone.
28. Despite those trends, the more than 2,000 unauthorized activities reported each
year, together with more than 2,500 authorized activities each year, continue to
challenge the capacity of UNFICYP to manage and maintain calm in the buffer zone.
Civilian activities can lead to confrontations, either between civilians, including
armed, camouflaged hunters, or between civilians and the opposing forces. During
the reporting period, tensions continued to be registered between civilians in the
buffer zone over contested ownership of property. Given that incidents can involve
both the opposing forces and civilians, all three components of UNFICYP are
involved in the response through engagement with military and civilian authorities as
well as community representatives and civilians who use land in and around the buffer
zone.
29. As part of its efforts to manage the buffer zone, the mission issues permits for
authorized activities, including farming, grazing, construction and utility
maintenance. Currently, there are 5,049 active permits issued for ongoing activities;
650 of those were issued during the reporting period. Each permit requires a resource intensive three-component analysis of the security and other implications of the
requested activity. As I noted in my previous report (S/2018/25), ensuring that official
hunting maps do not include areas in the buffer zone and the provis ion of vector data
would help UNFICYP map and better monitor activity in the buffer zone. I note that,
despite the commitment previously made by the Republic of Cyprus, those issues
remain unaddressed. I also note that the university in Pyla continues to o perate
without authorization from UNFICYP.

18-10881

5/13

S/2018/676

D.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
Intercommunal relations
30. Despite the opening of the first crossing in 2003 and six others thereafter, as
well as multiple efforts over the years to promote meaningful contact and strengthen
intercommunal relations, sustained cooperation between the communities remains
limited. Several generations have now lived and grown up apart. In that context,
UNFICYP has developed an intercommunal strategy to contribute to trust-building
and a return to normal conditions on the island. The strategy is based on the mission ’s
comparative advantage as convenor and connector, supporting Cypriots who are
interested in reaching across the divide and engaging in intercommunal dialogue and
cooperation. That “multiplier effect” is particularly important given the mission’s
limited resources. Such an approach is also anchored in the reputation of UNFICYP
as an honest broker and provider of a “neutral space” for contact and cooperation. A
promising initiative facilitated by UNFICYP, with its strengthened presence in the
sectors, involves promoting local ownership of common community spaces at
locations outside Nicosia. The initiative is based on the successful “Home for
Cooperation” in Nicosia — a space that is used extensively by civil society
organizations from both sides for a broad range of intercommunal activities and
events.
31. In that regard, the mission’s intercommunal strategy is focused on support for
local initiatives in and around the buffer zone. During the reporting period, UNFICYP
supported 81 intercommunal activities organized by civil society actors and convened
113 intercommunal gatherings at Ledra Palace Hotel with more than 4,927
participants. Of particular note is that UNFICYP has been supporting the
revitalization of the Nicosia Master Plan, which was established in 1979 to bring the
two communities of Nicosia together to work for an improved city for all, but which
has seen little activity in recent years. With support from the Technical Committee on
the Environment, funding from the European Union Programme Support Office and
assistance from UNFICYP, which has, inter alia, facilitated collaboration between the
Nicosia mayors, the Nicosia Master Plan has been carrying out a feasibility study to
extend a linear park across divided Nicosia as a venue for Cypriots to use together.
32. Additional efforts to enhance intercommunal relations included continued
scoping and outreach to new actors. In total, UNFICYP held 90 meetings with
established civil society organizations to support their activities and facilitate
meaningful interactions between civil society actors from both communities. As part
of a “networking group” composed of non-governmental organizations seeking to
establish contacts with the other community, UNFICYP established two clusters, one
for youth and one for those interested in cultural and artistic initiatives. Another
objective is to expand existing activities to more remote areas and to support
initiatives with civil society outside Nicosia, as well as to promote sustained
interaction and cooperation.
33. Following the deployment of the first Gender Affairs Officer, UNFICYP
launched several initiatives to promote gender equality and strengthen its work with
women’s civil society organizations island-wide. The mission made special efforts to
reach out to more women through the establishment of a series of diverse focus groups
aimed at better informing the mission’s implementation of the women, peace and
security agenda.
34. UNFICYP is responsible for facilitating the work of 8 of the 11 bicommunal
technical committees, established by the leaders in 2008 to work on confidence building measures aimed at improving the everyday life of Cypriots. The Technical

6/13

18-10881

S/2018/676

Committee on Cultural Heritage, with financial support from the European
Commission and technical support from the Partnership for the Future programme of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), completed five major
architectural restoration projects, providing opportunities for Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots to come together regarding their common heritage. The Technical
Committee on Crossings, facilitated by UNFICYP and supported by the European
Union and UNDP, continued to work towards opening two crossings at Lefka Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya. However, as at 20 June, outstanding issues
remained relating to the completion of infrastructure works at both crossings and the
relocation of a Turkish Forces post north of the Deryneia/Derinya crossing that had
been addressed by the Technical Committee on Crossings. The Technical Committee
on Education met twice during the reporting period, lending its support to the Imagine
project (see para. 35). The other committees did not meet or engaged in limited
activities during the reporting period. As noted in my report on progress towards a
settlement in Cyprus (S/2018/610), several confidence-building measures that the
leaders jointly agreed to in May 2015 have not been implemented.
35. Education is a key conduit for helping young generations develop critical
thinking and openness to other perspectives, which is in turn necessary to develop
trust and ultimately reconcile with other communities. Peace education can help
children, youth and adults create, inter alia, the conditions conducive to peace,
whether at an interpersonal, intergroup, national or international level. While efforts
by the sides have been modest in that regard, the Imagine project, developed by the
bicommunal Association for Historical Dialogue and Research under the auspices of
the Technical Committee on Education, with support from the Embassy of Germany
and facilitated in part by UNFICYP, continued to increase connections between
children from both communities. It provided, for example, 50 “twinning” experiences
(i.e., mixed classes) focused on peace education and joint activities.
Civil society support to the peace process
36. Given the current political climate in relation to the Cyprus problem and the
notable lack of leader-led talks, discouragement among Cypriots who continued to
hope for a reunified island was palpable. As I noted in my report of 14 June 2018
(S/2018/610), there were nonetheless civil society actors who became increasingly
vocal and steadfastly continued their work to build a foundation for peace during the
reporting period, some of whom were supported by members of the international
community.
37. The religious leaders of Cyprus continued to demonstrate their commitment to
joint dialogue and the promotion of religious freed om within the framework of the
religious track of the Cyprus peace process, under the auspices of the Embassy of
Sweden and with ongoing support from UNFICYP. During the reporting period, they
launched an unprecedented joint initiative to provide Greek- and Turkish-language
classes in the buffer zone for members of the clerical orders, nuns and laypersons
working in different religious institutions. The religious leaders also released a joint
statement in support of refugees and asylum seekers on the occasion of World Refugee
Day 2018.
38. The Embassy of Slovakia continued to facilitate gatherings of political parties
from both sides to engage in dialogue on a broad range of issues, including
confidence-building measures and missing persons. The parties met four times during
the reporting period, and on 28 April issued a joint declaration calling upon the two
leaders to resume the negotiations. Similarly, the celebration of 1 May in the buffer
zone in Nicosia saw a gathering of more than 3,000 members of tra de unions from
both communities, who repeated the call for the leaders to return to the negotiating
table.
18-10881

7/13

S/2018/676

Facilitation of access
39. As part of its wider efforts to support freedom of worship, UNFICYP continued
to liaise with the authorities on both sides in response to requests by Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots to hold religious and commemorative activities. UNFICYP
facilitated the participation of more than 16,475 people in 42 services and
commemorative events, of which 41 were in the north and 1 in the buffer zone,
reflecting an approval rate of 74.5 per cent, compared with 71.4 per cent in the same
period in 2017. I note and welcome the increase of authorizations to UNFICYP supported requests provided by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. I also welcome the
continued support of the Republic of Cyprus for the UNFICYP-facilitated annual
pilgrimage to Hala Sultan Tekke mosque in Larnaca as well as the mosque ’s increased
opening hours during Ramadan, and I encourage those new hours to continue beyond
the Ramadan period.
40. In my report dated 9 January 2018 (S/2018/25), I informed the Security Council
that as at 1 October 2017, UNFICYP had been unable to continue to deliver food
supplies and other items provided by the Republic of Cyprus to Greek Cypriot and
Maronite communities residing in the north, due to the imposition of “duties” on all
items except for medical supplies by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. However, in
May 2018 UNFICYP was informed that those “duties” would be lifted and, in a
positive development, on 31 May deliveries to those communities resumed.
41. During the reporting period, Turkish-speaking pupils continued to have access
to Turkish-language education at a primary school and high school in Limassol. There
were no developments, however, with respect to the establishment of a Turkish
Cypriot elementary school in that city.
42. UNFICYP assisted in addressing the legal and humanitarian issues faced by 11
Turkish Cypriots apprehended in the south and the 3 Greek Cypriots held in the north
through visits to the detention facilities where they were held.

E.

Demining activity
43. UNFICYP data indicates there are 47 suspected hazardous areas remaining in
Cyprus, covering approximately 1.7 million square metres or roughly 0.02 per cent
of the land across Cyprus. The four remaining minefields in the buffer zone account
for approximately 42 per cent of the suspected contaminated land.
44. The two sides have not begun clearance of the four known minefields in the
buffer zone, of which three belong to the National Guard and one to the Turkish
forces. While the Turkish Cypriot side has indicated that it would accept the clearance
of all four areas as a package, the Greek Cypriot side maintains that its three
minefields are required to counter a perceived threat. No additional areas have been
released for survey or clearance despite the leaders agreeing to consider doing so in
July 2016. On 2 February, the Republic of Cyprus requested a third ex tension to its
deadline, until 1 July 2022, to clear the remaining anti -personnel mines in the north,
in accordance with its obligations as a signatory to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti -Personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction.

V. Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
45. As at 20 June, the bicommunal team of archaeologists of the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus, a long-standing humanitarian initiative, had exhumed the
remains of 1,217 persons on both sides of the island. To date, the remains of 870
8/13

18-10881

S/2018/676

missing persons, of a total of 2,002, have been identified and returned to their
respective families, including, during the reporting period, those of 20 individuals.
Following the permission received in November 2015, the Committee has thus far
conducted 23 excavations, including 1 during the reporting period, in military areas
in the north, leading to the recovery of the remains of 34 persons.
46. The Committee continued its efforts to convince countries that had a military or
police presence in Cyprus in 1963/64 and 1974 to search their archives for
information on possible burial sites of missing persons. During the reporting period,
the Committee conducted research visits to the archives of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross as well as those of Canada and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. So far, 11 of the 12 countries
contacted have answered the Committee’s request for cooperation. While extensive
efforts have been undertaken by the United Nations to provide the Committee with
access to all relevant archival holdings in both Nicosia and New York, none of the
parties have thus far shared archival information on possible burial sites with the
Committee.

VII. Transition planning
47. As requested by the Security Council, UNFICYP maintained its transition plans
in relation to a settlement. No progress was made in the further elaboration of such
plans during the reporting period, however, because of the absence of new
developments on the issue between the sides.

VIII. Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
48. The mission held 20 information sessions during which 639 military and police
personnel were briefed on United Nations Standards of Conduct, including the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. The mission used social media to
highlight how the United Nations tackles sexual exploitation and abuse and
distributed to all mission personnel the “No Excuse” for sexual exploitation and abuse
pocket card, which all personnel are expected to carry at all times.
49. During the reporting period, four category 2 allegations were reported and
referred for investigation. Six category 1 allegations and four category 2 allegations
remain pending, none of which relate to sexual exploitation and abuse.

IX. Financial and administrative aspects
50. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/300, appropriated the amount of
$54.0 million gross for the maintenance of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018, inclusive of the voluntary
contribution of one third of the net cost of the mission, equivalent to $18.3 million,
from the Government of Cyprus and the voluntary contribution of $6.5 million from
the Government of Greece.
51. As at 19 June 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus amounted to $15.0 million. The
total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date
amounted to $2,136.5 million.

18-10881

9/13

S/2018/676

52. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 April 2018,
while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for
the period up to 30 September 2017.

X. Observations
53. UNFICYP has served the interests of peace in Cyprus for over 50 years,
preventing a recurrence of fighting and contributing to the maintenance of law and
order and a return to normal conditions. I am convinced that Cyprus has remained
calm and stable throughout the years in large measure because of the unwavering
presence of UNFICYP, its preventive and deterrent capabilities and its role in
defusing tensions. During this long period, UNFICYP has preserved the trust of the
opposing forces, ensuring that incidents do not escalate, cause tensions or disrupt
ongoing negotiations. In that respect, it has acted as the sole channel of
communication between the opposing forces, working to avoid misunderstandings or
miscalculations and ensure a continued climate of calm and security.
54. The impact of the 94 per cent completion rate of the implementation of the
November 2017 strategic review recommendations, particularly the increased focus
by the mission on liaison and engagement, is starting to manifest itself in the sectors,
with strengthened component coordination and more effective outreach. Through its
deterrence and prevention roles, which have been enhanced as a result of the strategic
review, UNFICYP was able to resolve low-level incidents by patrolling the length of
the buffer zone and liaising and engaging more systematically with its military, police
and civilian interlocutors.
55. I welcome the mission’s initiative to update the 1989 aide-memoire. I reiterate
that support and respect for the authority of UNFICYP in the buffer zone is required
from both sides if the mission is to resolve security concerns, including those linked
to civilian activity, and ensure the maintenance of peace.
56. As I also noted in my report on progress towards a settlement in Cyprus
(S/2018/610), it is encouraging that, despite the current hiatus in the talks, some
segments of society on both sides, including trade unions, some political parties,
women’s groups and other organized civic groups, continue to promote a solution
based on the bizonal, bicommunal federation with political equality. In order to help
create conditions conducive for peace, I appeal to the leaders to provide visible and
direct support to civil society organizations in their efforts to increase intercommunal
engagement and participation and to bolster trust and reconciliation between the
communities. I also encourage the leaders to implement the remaining confidence building measures they agreed to in 2015, in particular the interoperability of mobile
phones, and to consider other confidence-building measures. In addition, I urge the
sides to agree on a plan of work to demine and achieve a mine-free Cyprus.
57. Divergent school curricula and rhetoric in the media have reinforced parallel
narratives across generations, making it particularly difficult for some Cypriots to
envisage a common and mutually beneficial future. It is time for the leaders and both
communities to address this most critical of issues, and while the Imagine programme
is to be applauded, efforts must go beyond that initiative if the dividends of peace
education and pedagogy across all levels of education are to take hold.
58. The opening of the crossings since 2003 has allowed Cypriots freedom of
movement across the island, contributing to a return to normal conditions and
facilitating contact and interaction for those who wish to avail themselves of the
opportunity. In that regard, I call on the leaders to support the opening of the crossings
at Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and at Deryneia/Derinya as soon as possible and for the

10/13

18-10881

S/2018/676

Technical Committee on Crossings to focus on additional, impact ful crossings
thereafter.
59. Linked to the above, I continue to urge greater efforts to create a climate
conducive to achieving more economic and social parity between the two sides and
to broaden and deepen economic, social, cultural, sporting and simil ar ties and
contacts, including with a view to encouraging trade. Such contacts promote trust
between the communities and help to address the concerns of Turkish Cypriots with
regard to isolation. With regard to intra-island trade, I would underscore the
importance of and the opportunities presented by the full implementation of European
Council regulation No. 866/2004, the “Green Line regulation”, for the benefit of both
communities.
60. Normal conditions in and along the buffer zone will always remain li mited as
long as that stretch of territory remains locked between two belligerent forces. The
resolution of the situation clearly lies with a political solution to the Cyprus problem,
which I appeal to the sides to address with the requisite political will . As noted in my
report on the strategic review of UNFICYP (S/2017/1008), and notwithstanding the
mission’s ongoing liaison role, it is my hope that the two sides will work with
UNFICYP on coming together to address some of their differences directly to
alleviate tensions and resolve day-to-day issues that affect all Cypriots.
61. Regarding the sensitive and tragic issue of the missing, the United Nations
remains committed to supporting the important humanitar ian work carried out on
behalf of the families of victims by the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus. In
the light of the advanced age of both relatives and witnesses, it is critical that the
Committee continue to receive sufficient financial support an d the information,
including from relevant archives, required to accelerate its work. In particular, I
encourage the parties to intensify their efforts to share relevant archival information
with the Commission.
62. In the light of the mission’s continued relevance on the ground, I recommend
that the Security Council extend the mandate of UNFICYP for six months, until
31 January 2019. I look forward to seeing the further dividends of the mission ’s
enhanced liaison and engagement capacity resulting from the recent strategic review
recommendations, which recognized the ongoing critical role of UNFICYP in
preventing serious incidents and keeping tensions low. At the same time, the
Secretariat remains ready, as with all missions, to keep UNFICYP continuously und er
review.
63. I should like to thank the 36 countries that have contributed, since 1964, either
troops, police or both to the mission. I pay tribute to the 186 peacekeepers who lost
their lives during that period in support of peace in Cyprus.
64. The work of the United Nations in Cyprus is strengthened immeasurably
through cooperation with local, regional and international actors. I should like to take
this opportunity to thank those partners and in particular the European Commission
and UNDP, which have provided assistance in a number of areas, including support
to the ongoing work on two new crossing points and to the Technical Committee on
Cultural Heritage and the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus.
65. I should like to express my gratitude to Elizabeth Spehar for her service as my
Special Representative in Cyprus, the Head of UNFICYP and my Deputy Special
Adviser. Lastly, I extend my thanks to all the men and women serving in UNFICYP
for their continued commitment to the implementation of the mandate of the mission.

18-10881

11/13

S/2018/676

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at 20 June 2018)
Country

Military personnel

Argentina

239

Austria

4

Bangladesh

2

Brazil

2

Canada

1

Chile

14

Hungary

65

Paraguay

14

Serbia

45

Slovakia

141

Ukraine

2

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

278

Total a

Country

807

Police personnel

Bosnia and Herzegovina

11

Bulgaria

3

China

6

Ireland

12

Italy

2

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

4

Romania

4

Russian Federation

6

Serbia

2

Slovakia

3

Sweden

2

Ukraine

9

Total a
a

12/13

65

Of the military personnel, 753 are men and 54 are women. Of the police personnel, 43 are
men and 22 are women.

18-10881

S/2018/676

18-10881

13/13
