General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

12

Bearing in mind the various recommendations in the
field of natural disaster prevention and the measures
adopted in General Assembly resolution 2816 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 with a view to improving the
co-ordination and effectiveness of international efforts
to deal with natural disasters, and stressing the importance of pre-disaster planning,
Noting the work being carried out by the joint
Typhoon Committee of the World Meteorologic~l Organization and the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East and the large degree of collaboration
between the World Meteorological Organization and
other national, regional and international organizations
in matters relating to tropical cyclones,
1. Notes with appreciation the report of the World
Meteorological Organization entitled "Tropical cyclone
project: plan of action'',1 prepared ~y its Executi~e
Committee Panel of Experts on Tropical Cyclones m
response to General Assembly resolution 2733 D
(XXV) of 16 December 1970, in which the Assembly
requested the World Meteorological Organization to
find ways and means of mitigating the harmful effects
of tropical storms;
2. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the plan of
action should be brought to the attention of Member
States;2
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to co-operate to the fuHest possible extent with
the World Meteorological Organization with a view to
achieving the objectives laid down in resolution 2733
D (XXV);
4. Requests the World Meteorological Organization
to pursue actively the implementation of its tropical
cyclone project, continuing and intensifying its other
related action programmes, including the World
Weather Watch and, especially, the efforts being undertaken towards obtaining basic meteorological data and
discovering ways and means to mitigate the harmful
effects of tropical storms and to remove or minimize
their destructive potential;
5. Calls upon the Member States concerned to undertake or intensify research, as well as operational
projects, towards this end and requests other Member
States to contribute and assist in these projects;
6. Recommends integrated action through increased
co-operation and co-ordination between the World
Meteorological Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office. of the ~isaster ~elief
Co-ordinator and the future Umted Nat10ns env1ronment programme, particularly with regard to the preparedness for, and the prediction, detection, prevention
and control of, natural disasters;
7. Requests the World Meteorological Organization
to submit a report, through the Secretary-General, to
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its next session, to the Economic and Social Council
and to such other United Nations bodies as may be
appropriate on the progress achieved and on the cooperation measures and other steps taken pursuant to
the present and other relevant resolutions.
2081 st plenary meetinR
9 November 1972
1 See A/AC.105/105.
2 Official Records of the Gent'Yn/ Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/8720), para. 29.

2915 (XXVII). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2776 (XXVI), 2777
(XXVI), 2778 (XXVI) and 2779 (XXVI) of 29
November 1971,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,3
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Believing that the benefits deriving from space exploration can be extended to States at all stages of
economic and scientific development on an expanding
basis if Member Sta-tes conduct their space programmes
increasingly with a view to promoting maximum international co-operation, including the widest possible
exchange of information in this field,
Convinced of the need for increased international
efforts, particularly through the United Nations, to promote and expand practical applications of space technology,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
l. Endorses the repoct: of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 4
and the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the
Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Outer Space5 to give early consideration
to ratifying or acceding to those agreements so that
they may have the broadest possible effect;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the recent entry into
force of the Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects 6 and invites States
that have not yet become parties to it to give early
consideration to ratifying or acceding to the Convention
so that it may have the broadest possible effect;
4. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has
achieved significant progress in approving a substantial
part of the draft treaty relating to the Moon, observing
at the same time that some issues are still unresolved;
5. Notes further that the Legal Sub-Committee has
made notable progress in preparing the draft convention on registration of objects launched into outer
space, observing at the same time that some issues are
still unresolved;
6. Agrees that the Legal Sub-Committee should at
its next session pursue, as a matter of priority, its work
on the draft treaty relating to the Moon and the draft
convention on registration of objects launched into
outer space;
3 Ibid., Supplement No. 20 (A/8720).
4 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

5 See resolution 2345
6 See

(XXII), annex.
resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

7. Notes that because of lack of time, the Legal
Sub-Committee ~as not able to consider in any detail
the remaining matters on its agenda, as mentioned in
paragraph 19 of the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and expresses the hope
that early consideration will be given to those matters;
8. Welcomes efforts of Member States to keep the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space fully
informed of their space activities and invites all Member States to do so;
9. Welcomes also the continuing progress achieved
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
and the Secretary-General, through the Expert on
Space Applications, in their efforts to ?ev~lop . the
United Nations programme on space appbcat10ns mto
a significant means of promoting international ~ooperation in this field and commends to the attention
of Member States, the specialized agencies and interested United Nations bodies the programme set forth
in the report of the Committee's Sci~ntifi_c and -i:echnical Sub-Committee on the work of its nmth session; 7
10. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications for 1973 and the guidelines f?r !he
programme for 1974 and recommends the contmumg
development of the programme, taking especially into
account the needs of the developing countries;
l l. Notes with appreciation that several Member
States have offered educational and training facilities,
under United Nations sponsorship, in the practical
application of space technology and draws the attention
of Member States, particularly the developing countries, to these opportunities as outli~ed in paragraphs
28 to 32 of the report of the Scientific and Techmcal
Sub-Committee;
12. Notes with appreciation that data from experiments testing the feasibility of remote sensing of the
earth from space platforms will soon be made available
to the Working Group on Remote Sensing of the Earth
by Satellites;
13. Welcomes the fact that the Working Group on
Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites plans to
begin its substantive work in January 1973 and notes
that the Working Group has requested the SecretaryGeneral to prepare, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2778 (XXVI), a background pap_er
assessing the documents and other data ~rought to its
attention including the data referred to m paragraph
12 abov: and that it has set up a task force to assist
the Secretary-General in this respect;
14. Looks forward to a comprehensive progress report on remote sensing to be submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
15. Takes note with gratification of the consideration being devoted by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to the potential of satellites and
other space platforms in monitoring the environment
with a view ,to helping to achieve the objectives of the
future United Nations environment programme;
16. Welcomes the efforts of a number of Member
States to share with other interested Member States the
practical benefits that may be derived from programmes
in space technology;
17. Welcomes the further progress achieved in international co-operation among Member States in space
1 Al AC.105/102.

13

research and exploration, including in particular the
continuing exchange and analysis of lunar material on
a broad international basis, experiments in earth resources surveying making use of the United St~tes
satellite ERTS-I and the agreement between the Umon
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the development of compatible r~ndezv?us
and docking systems for manned spacecraft with a v1~w
to developing joint flight and improved rescue capabilities;
18. Notes that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has recommend_ed t~at _its W<?rki_ng
Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites, !-ll v_1ew of it~ mterdisciplinary character and its co-ordinatmg functions,
should be reconvened to study the substantive material
concerning the subject-matter under its mandate that
has become available since the Working Group's last
session, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of
the Committee's report;
l 9. Reiterates the importance of the goal of making
satellite communications available to States on a worldwide and non-discriminatory basis, as expressed in
General Assembly resolution 1721 D (XVI) of 20
December 1961;
20. Takes note of the progress achieved in implementing agreements relating to space communications
recently concluded among a number of States and reiterates the desirability of keeping the United Nations
currently informed concerning activities and developments in this field;
21. Approves continuing spo11:sorship by the Uni!ed
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launchmg
Station in India and the CELP A Mar del Plata Station
in Argentina, expresses its satis~action. at the work
being carried out at these ranges m relat10n to the use
of sounding rocket facilities for internationa~ co_-operation and training in the peaceful and scientific exploration of outer space and recommends that Member
States should continue to give consideration to the use
of those facilities for space research activities;
22. Welcomes the announcement by Sweden that
the ESRANGE-Kiruna range will also be made available for international co-operative projects;
23. Notes that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public
registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on
the basis of information furnished by Member States;
24. Notes with appreciation that a number of specialized agencies, in particular the World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication
Union, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, have continued
to take an active part in the United Nations programme
for the promotion of international co-operation in the
practical application of space technology, including the
organization of technical panels;
25. Takes note of the programmes currently undertaken by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the International Telecommunication Union in satellite broadcasting for the purpose of contributing to the advancement of education
and training, including consideration by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of the draft Declaration of Guiding Principles on
the Use of Satellite Broadcasting for the Free Flow of

14

General AHembly-Twenty-seventh Seuion

Information, the Spread of Education and Greater
Cultural Exchange, 8 and also notes the need to coordinate activities of the specialized agencies in this
field with the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space as set out in General Assembly resolution 2776
(XXVI);
26. Requests the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue, as appropriate, to provide the Committee on the Peace~ul Uses
of Outer Space with progress reports on their work
relating to the peaceful uses of outer space and to
examine and report to the Committee on the particular
problems that may arise from the use of outer space
in the fie,lds within their competence and that should,
in their opinion, be brought to the attention of the
Committee;
27. Notes that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has agreed to grant observer status to
the European Space Research Organization and the
European Launcher Development Organization and to
invite them to participate in the Committee's work;
28. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present resolution and in previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session.
2081st plenary meeting
9 November 1972
2916 (XXVII). Preparation of an international
convention on principles governing the use
by States of artificial earth satellites for
direct television broadcasting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966, in which it stressed the importance of international co-operation in the field of activities in
the peaceful exploration and use of outer space and
the importance of developing the rule of law in this
new area of human endeavour,
Recalling further its resolution 2453 B (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, in which it stated that the benefits
of space exploration can be extended to States at all
stages of economic and scientific development,
Reaffirming the common interest of all mankind in
furthering the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for the benefit of all States and for the development of friendly relations and mutual understanding
among them,
Bearing in mind that direct television broadcasting
should help to draw the peoples of the world closer
together, to widen the exchange of information and
cultural values and to enhance the educational level
of people in various countries,
Considering at the same time that direct television
broadcasting by means of satellites should take place
under conditions in which this new form of space technology will serve only the lofty goals of peace and
friendship among peoples,
Mindful of the need to prevent the conversion of
direct television broadcasting into a source of international conflict and of aggravation of the relations
among States and to protect the sovereignty of States
from any external interference,
s See A/ AC.105/104.

Noting the draft convention on principles governing
the use by States of artificial earth sateHites for direct
television broadcasting, submitted to the General
Assembly by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 9
Desiring to further the elaboration of specific rules
of international law governing the activities of States
in this field on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies10
and the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 11
Believing that the activity of States in the field of
direct television broadcasting must be based on the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, non-interference in domestic affairs, equality, co-operation and
mutual benefit,
Considering at the same time that the introduction
of direct television broadcasting by means of sateUites
could raise significant problems connected with the
need to ensure the free flow of communications on a
basis of strict respect for the sovereign rights of States,
1. Considers it necessary to elaborate principles
governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites
for direct television broadcasting with a view to concluding an international agreement or agreements;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to undertake the elaboration of such
principles as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space all
documentation relating to the discussion, at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly, of the item
entitled "Preparation of an international convention on
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satellites for direct television broadcasting".
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

2917 (XXVII). Preparation of international instruments or United Nations arrangements
on principles governing the use by States
of artificial earth satellitt>s for direct television broadcasting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2448 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, dealing with freedom of information, and the
preamble of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 12
which stipulates that General Assembly resolution 110
(II) of 3 November 1947 is applicable to outer space,
Notes that the work done on the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and deliberations thereon in
the General Assembly may be useful in the discussion
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Annexes, agenda items 28, 29 and 37, document A/8771.
10 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
11 See resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
1 2 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
