UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/55
16 November 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3594th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 November 1995, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The question
concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
6 November 1995 on the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
(S/1995/922), issued pursuant to resolution 1007 (1995).
"The Security Council commends UNMIH on the substantial progress it
has made towards fulfilling its mandate, as set out in resolution
940 (1994), to assist the Government of Haiti in sustaining a secure and
stable environment, protecting international personnel and key
installations, establishing the conditions for holding elections and
creating a new professional police force. The Council commends the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and other dedicated
personnel of the United Nations who have contributed to this effort.
"The Security Council also commends the Government of Haiti for
holding local and legislative elections in a peaceful and non-violent
environment, and notes the recent convocation of the special session of the
National Assembly and its approval of the new Cabinet and plan of
government. The Council notes with satisfaction the role of UNMIH and the
joint United Nations/Organization of American States (OAS) International
Civilian Mission (MICIVIH) in assisting the Haitian authorities with the
electoral process.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the continued engagement and
commitment of all Haitian parties is necessary to the successful
organization of free, fair and peaceful presidential elections. Consistent
with the objectives of Security Council resolutions 940 (1994) and
1007 (1995), the Council welcomes the announcement by the provisional
Electoral Council of presidential elections scheduled for 17 December 1995
that should allow a transition of power to a duly-elected successor before
UNMIH's scheduled termination on 29 February 1996. The holding of
presidential elections on schedule is a crucial step in consolidating long-

95-35815 (E)

161195

/...

S/PRST/1995/55
English
Page 2

lasting democracy in Haiti and ensuring a smooth transition of government.
The Council calls on all political parties in Haiti to participate in the
forthcoming elections and to contribute actively to maintain the secure and
stable conditions necessary for their conduct.
"The Security Council notes with concern recent instances of violence
in Haiti and calls for respect for the rule of law, national reconciliation
and cooperation.
"The Government and people of Haiti bear the primary responsibility
for Haiti's political, economic and social reconstruction. The Security
Council underlines its firm support for the progress Haiti has already made
in this regard. The Council emphasizes that a sustained commitment by the
international community is indispensable for long-term peace and stability
in Haiti. In this regard the Council encourages the Haitian Government to
continue its dialogue with the international financial institutions.
"The Security Council shares the view of the Secretary-General that
the establishment of a professional police force capable of maintaining law
and order throughout the country is central to Haiti's long-term stability.
As the end of UNMIH's mandate approaches, attention should be focused on
the selection and training of the Haitian National Police supervisors and
on interested Member States providing the police force with the necessary
equipment.
"The Security Council also supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to streamline UNMIH, including the CIVPOL component.

"The Security Council expresses its confidence that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNMIH and UN/OAS MICIVIH will
continue to assist the Government and people of Haiti. It notes in
particular the useful role played by the OAS and the valuable cooperation
with Haiti of interested Member States on a bilateral basis and stresses
the importance of continuing such cooperation. The Council requests that
the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Friends of Haiti and the
Haitian authorities, report to the Council, at the appropriate time, on
next steps in the areas of security, law enforcement and humanitarian
assistance, including by United Nations specialized agencies and
programmes, which the international community may take to help Haiti
achieve a long-term future that is secure, stable and free."

-----
