VI.

Resolutions a~op~te~d~o_n_t~e_r_ep_or~s~_!h~!:hird Commitk,· .. _...__ ~

38/26. Channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth organizations
The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations, and its resolution 37/50 of 3 December
1982,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of effective channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations for the proper
information of young people and their effective participation in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies at the national, regional and international levels,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, ",
Also taking note of the efforts in inter-agency cooperation to promote and strengthen channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations within the context of the International
Youth Year,
Convinced that the existence and proper functioning of
channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations form a basic prerequisite of the active involvement of young people and thus of
the successful preparation for, observance of and followup to the International Youth Year at all levels,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to give
full co-operation and support to inter-agency co-operation
and co-ordination in promotional and information activities within the context of the International Youth Ycar;
2. Calls upon Member States, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations, in co-operation
with youth and with youth organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council and other
youth organizations concerned, to continue to promote
actively the full and effective implementation of the guidelines and additional guidelines adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 32/ I 35 and 36/1 7, in particular through informing young people of relevant policies
and programmes and encouraging them to participate in
the preparation and implementation of these policies and
programmes;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year at its third session to monitor and evaluate the measures taken with respect to the implementation of the guidelines on the basis of the relevant reports of
the Secretary-General and other relevant information provided to it and to make recommendations for the full and
effective implementation and the further elaboration of the
guidelines as an integral part of the preparation for,
observance of and follow-up to the International Youth
Year;
4. Decides to review at its thirty-ninth session the
question of the channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth organizations, on the
basis of the report of the Advisory Committee for the
International Youth Year.
66th plenary meeting
.'2 No\'emher 1983
61 A/38/339.
62 See Report o(the World Assemh!.,· 11/1 .lglIl).;. J ·I,·/lIld. Cl' .fll/,·I> .llIgIII!
/982 (United Nations publication. Sales No. 1'.82.1.161. char VI. sect A.

_

193

38/27. Question of aging
/171' Gcneral .lss1'mhlt.
Rcaflll'lning its resolutIOn 37 51 of 3 December 1982, in
which it endorsed the International Plan of Action on
Aging 02 adopted by the World Assembly on Aging, and
called upon Governments and the Secretary-General to
make continuous efforts to implement the principles and
recommendations of the Plan of Action,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/
87 of 25 November 1981, in which the Council decided to
convene in 1984 an International Conferencc on Population, and also recalling the International Plan of Action on
Aging, in which it is acknowledged that aging is a population issue that affects development and requires increasing
international assistance and co-operation,
Recognizing the significant contributions of the World
Assembly on Aging and the United Nations Trust Fund
for the World Assembly on Aging in the promotion and
strengthening of internatIOnal co-operation in this field.
('onscIOUS of the positi ve response of many countries to
the World Assembly on Aging and to the recommendations contained in the Plan of Action and of the need to
provide national authorities, at their request, with assistance in their efforts to implement the Plan,
Noting with salis(acti"ll that many Governments have
retained or established national mechanisms to facilitate
the planning, implementation and co-ordination of the
activities recommended in the Plan of Action,
Recognizing the role played by the United Nations and
the specialized agencies through their efforts in the field of
aging and the need to strengthen this role, especially at the
regional level, in order to ensure the implementation of the
Plan of Action and the systematic and efficient functioning
of the technical advisof\ and co-ordination services of the
United Nations,
.
'lcKnowledging the role played by the international network of existing inlormation, research and training centres
in exchanging information and experience at the international level and in stimulating progress and encouraging
the adoption of measures to respond to the economic and
social implications of the aging of populations and to meet
the needs of older persons.
Noting that the relationship between aging and youth,
particularly as it relates to intergenerational matters, is recognized in the Plan of Action,
Recognizing that women have a longer life expectancy
than men and that they will increasingly constitute the
majority of the older population,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of aging; oJ
2. At/irms that the question of aging should be considered in the context of economic development, political.
social and cultural systems and social values and changes:
3. Calls upon Governments to continue to make efforts
to implement the principles and recommendations contained in the International Plan of Action on Aging in
accordance with the economic, social and cultural circumstances of each country:
4. Invites Governments to retain or establish, in a suitable form, mechanisms at the national level to promote
the implementation of the Plan of Action;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to ensure effective implementation of and follow-up action
to the Plan of Action and to maintain the impetus generto., A,8 .J7().
