S/PV.8546

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8546th meeting

Wednesday,12 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sheikh Al Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and mediation
Letter dated 31 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/456)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17206 (E)
*1917206*

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

parties to conflict and other partners in regions and
countries around the world to further these aims.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and mediation
Letter dated 31 May 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/456)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson
and His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/456, which contains a letter dated
31 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank Kuwait and His
Excellency the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for this opportunity to brief
the Council.
I welcome two representatives of The Elders, former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and former President
Mary Robinson. I also see before me the former
President of Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón. I welcome them to the Chamber today
and thank them for contributing with their personal
wisdom to support to the debate.
Conflict prevention and mediation are two of the
most important tools at our disposal to reduce human
suffering. When we act early and are united, we can
successfully prevent crises from escalating, saving
lives, reducing suffering and fulfilling the most
fundamental mandate of the United Nations, as set out
in the Preamble to the Charter. We are working with
2/25

12/06/2019

There are some encouraging signs, including
successful constitutional transfers of power in Mali
and Madagascar. The rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan have also created a sense of renewed hope. And
after decades, the name issue in south-eastern Europe
was resolved with an agreement between Athens and
Skopje, allowing the designation of the Republic of
North Macedonia to be internationally recognized.
Elsewhere, we face serious challenges to our
efforts but we continue to push on all tracks. The
agreement reached in Stockholm by the parties to the
conflict in Yemen was an important step that must now
move to a negotiated settlement. My Special Envoy
is working extensively with the parties to support the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement and to
prevent a return to open conflict as a basic condition
to allow political negotiations to take place afterwards.
In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations is helping the parties to implement the African
Union-mediated Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation, conducting robust operations to
ensure armed groups’ adherence to the agreement
and facilitating local peace accords. And in Burkina
Faso, we are working with a wide range of national
stakeholders, including civil society and women’s
groups, to strengthen local infrastructures for peace
as part of the response to rising sectarian violence
and terrorism.
Despite these efforts, peace faces enormous
obstacles. Divisions in the international community
mean that wars continue to rage as external actors dither
or even fuel the violence. Civilians pay the price. The
fragmentation of non-State armed groups and militias
causes even greater chaos. There is a resurgence of
populism and policies that contribute to resentment,
marginalization and extremism, even in societies that
are not at war. There are attempts in some countries to
roll back human rights and the progress that has been
made over recent decades on gender and inclusion.
Space for civil society is shrinking.
My Special Representative in Libya has detailed
to the Council the heavy toll in human lives resulting
from armed clashes and fighting in that country and the
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8546

lack of moral motivation to end the war. He is working
for a ceasefire and a return to the negotiating table.

fostered trust and enabled us to support joint approaches
and viable solutions.

The continuing crisis in Venezuela and its
humanitarian impact are a grave concern. I support
ongoing international efforts to find a peaceful,
negotiated solution reached by the main Venezuelan
political actors, and have been closely following the
process in Norway. My good offices remain available
to support serious negotiations, when required, by
the parties.

The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is working to resolve
transboundary issues and to implement our Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Our peacekeeping
operations and special political missions undertake
vital conflict prevention and resolution efforts. In some
situations, the prospect or application of well-targeted
sanctions regimes, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter, can help move parties towards peace.

In Syria, we face a scenario of ongoing cycles of
instability, violence and suffering. We cannot have a
sustainable peace if different parties continue to conduct
military operations in the country. There is no military
solution to the conflict. Without a comprehensive
political solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), that
addresses the root causes of instability, Syria will never
know stability or peace. My Special Envoy for Syria is
working to build trust with all parties, to signal that a
future that takes into account the legitimate needs and
aspirations of all Syrians is possible, and to launch a
credible and balanced constitutional committee to open
the door to a Syrian-led political process, facilitated by
the United Nations.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations sets
out a broad range of tools for parties to use to prevent
and resolve conflict. These include
“negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peace means of
their own choice”.
I urge Governments to make full use of these tools and
the Council to use its own authority to call on parties
to pursue them.
My own good offices and those of my envoys aim
to help parties peacefully resolve differences. Members
of my High-level Advisory Board on Mediation have
provided discreet counsel to me and my representatives
on various political processes. Our mediation advisers
on the Standby Team have supported processes from
Afghanistan to South Sudan, Papua New Guinea
to Syria. We have also deepened our strategic and
operational partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, with a particular emphasis on Africa.
From the Central African Republic to South Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar,
increased interaction with the African Union has

Sustainable development is an end in itself, but it is
also one of the most effective tools we have to prevent
conflict. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is our blueprint for creating resilient, stable societies and
for addressing the root causes of violence of all kinds.
This means a strong focus on inclusivity, with a special
emphasis on mainstreaming women’s rights and gender
equality across our prevention and mediation work.
Progress on women’s participation in formal peace
processes is still lagging. We will continue to use
creative strategies to advance women’s participation,
building on previous efforts, including the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and the Yemeni Women’s
Technical Advisory Group. Regional women mediators’
networks like the African Union’s FemWise-Africa
network are an important development. My High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation is available to support
their efforts.
Some 600 million young people living in fragile
and conflict-affected States have a vital contribution to
make to mediation and peacebuilding processes. The
first International Symposium for Youth Participation
in Peace Processes, held earlier this year, was an
important step forward. Independent actors and
non-governmental organizations, including The
Elders, who are represented here today, are a critical
complementary element to our efforts.
The human and financial costs of conflict are high
and rising. Forced displacement is at the highest levels
since the Second World War and hunger is resurgent
after years of decline. We cannot afford to reduce
the energy and resources we invest in prevention
and mediation.
But let us not fool ourselves. Prevention and
mediation will not work without broader political
efforts. I urge Council members and all Member States

19-172063/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

to strive for greater unity so as to ensure that prevention
and mediation efforts are as effective as possible. That
is the only way to meet our responsibilities to the
peoples we serve.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Robinson.
Ms. Robinson: It is a privilege to speak to the
Council today at this important meeting on conflict
prevention and mediation — two issues that lie at the
very heart of the mission of the Security Council and
the wider multilateral rules-based system.
I am speaking today in my capacity as Chair of
The Elders, the group of independent global leaders
founded by Nelson Mandela, who work for peace,
justice and human rights. I am honoured, too, to be here
alongside someone who needs no introduction to people
in the Chamber: His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
former Secretary-General, who today serves as one of
the Deputy Chairs of The Elders, together with Graça
Machel. I am also happy to be joined by President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón.
On behalf of all the Elders, I would like to sincerely
thank His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad
Al Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait, for extending
the invitation to address the Council as part of
Kuwait’s presidency.
I recall when serving as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes of Africa and
the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2013 and 2014,
how invaluable it was to have a united Security Council
to report to. I know that President Santos had the same
appreciation of the support of the Security Council for
his work on peace in Colombia. The Elders want to urge
all members of the Security Council today to approach
the topics under discussion in the same spirit of inclusive
dialogue and willingness to work for compromise and
consensus in the interests of peace. We know that the
world is more divided and polarised at the moment,
but the Council has a unique responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, and we encourage the
10 elected members to play as full a part as possible in
their work.
When Nelson Mandela founded The Elders in 2007,
he charged us with a precise mandate: “Support courage
where there is fear, foster agreement where there is
4/25

12/06/2019

conflict and inspire hope where there is despair.” I
believe it is testament to both Mandela’s perspicacity
but also to the grim realities of our world that his words
continue to feel as urgent in 2019 as they did when he
uttered them on stage in Johannesburg a dozen years
ago — not least when we think of conflict prevention
and mediation.
Fear, conflict and despair are all too obvious, from
the streets of Khartoum to the townships of Harare; the
bombed-out hospitals of Idlib to the ruined schools of
Yemen; and the slums of Gaza to the Rohingya refugee
camps of Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh. In all these cases
and so many more the world over, the Security Council
should be seen as an instrument of deliverance, a
defender of rights and a provider of protection.
But too often over the decades the Council and, in
particular, its five permanent members have failed to
live up to their responsibilities and favoured realpolitik
or short-term power stratagems rather than meeting
the solemn commitments outlined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Nowhere has this been more
apparent than in the repeated use of the veto by certain
permanent members on draft resolutions aimed to
prevent mass atrocities, including the use of chemical
weapons on civilians. In the words of my immediate
predecessor as Chair of The Elders, the late and sorelymissed Kofi Annan, “you cannot put down a veto,
paralyse operations, create a stalemate and not propose
a way forward”.
To propose positive ways forward in our
deliberations today, I would like to focus on three
specific areas where we, The Elders, believe that
the Council can play a proactive and positive role
on conflict.
The first is the importance of prevention. Everyone
here in the Chamber will recognize that prevention is
by far the most effective way to deal with conflicts. But
that should not be narrowly viewed in terms of securing
immediate security and stability or distorted to justify
deals with unscrupulous leaders who pay lip service to
peace and mediation as a way to retain power without
ever taking the necessary steps to address the root
causes of conflict and division.
Inclusive government and a commitment to justice
and human rights are also crucial. Violations of or
disrespect for the fundamental values of human rights
and undemocratic and unaccountable actions by longserving leaders have often festered to become bigger
19-17206

12/06/2019

S/PV. 8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

crises. I have also felt for a long time that insufficient
attention has been paid to the role and voice of women
on the ground in terms of conflict prevention. The
Council has shown leadership on that issue in past years,
particularly through the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). It should now redouble its collective efforts to
make sure that women’s perspectives and experiences
are reflected in the mainstream of peacekeeping and
conflict prevention policy. I echo the strong emphasis of
the Secretary-General today on the full participation of
women. Overall, the international community has too
often not paid enough attention to all those issues, and
the citizens of conflict-blighted countries and regions
have paid far too high a price for that neglect.
The second is climate change. Together with
nuclear weapons, there is no greater existential threat
to our planet than climate change. The United Nations
has shown commendable leadership on the issue,
brokering the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in
2015 and ensuring that climate is an integral element
of the Sustainable Development Goals. The Elders are
pleased to see that the issue of climate change continues
to be of concern to the Security Council. We feel that
if the Council were to adopt a more holistic approach
to conflict prevention, including climate change, this
would both make it more effective and support the
mandate of other parts of the United Nations system.
We support the creation of an institutional focal point,
in the form of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, to pull together expertise on climate change
from across and beyond the United Nations in order
to help the Council assess the diverse, complex and
shifting impacts of climate change on conflicts.
The third is the impact of technology. Another
aspect of a more long-term and more holistic view
of the causes of conflict and how to prevent it needs
to be the impact of technology, including artificial
intelligence and automation. As Elders, we make no
claims to be part of the vanguard of the debate here, but
again I would recall a wise epigram from Kofi Annan:
“You are never too young to lead, and never too old to
learn.” We need to listen to and learn from the young
people — the digital natives who are fluent in the brave
new world of technology but who also risk paying the
price for progress as previously secure jobs and career
paths become obsolete.
Youth unemployment is especially high in the
Middle East and Africa and has been a driver of social
unrest in many countries. Similarly, social media, while

being a powerful tool for connecting people around the
world, has also been used as a tool for enabling violent
extremism and for spreading misinformation, which
has contributed to violence and social unrest. There is,
additionally, an urgent need to develop global norms and
rules around cyberconflict prevention. Currently, there
is no international mechanism to regulate offensive
cyberthreats, and States and non-State actors alike are
able to operate with a large degree of impunity. As a
minimum, we need to develop a process whereby States
and Governments become more transparent about their
cybercapabilities and deterrence mechanisms. The
international community must not wait until a major
tragedy occurs to develop those rules. We believe that
the Security Council is uniquely placed to lead the
efforts to find a progressive, inclusive consensus.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to raise those issues with the Council today. It is now my
pleasure to hand over to my colleague, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who will expand upon more of our
priorities and concerns.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Robinson for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Ban.
Mr. Ban: Let me begin by echoing the words of my
colleague, the Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson, and
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
this gathering.
As a former Secretary-General, I have the utmost
respect for the institution of the Security Council and
the principles and values it is designed to uphold. When
the Council can cooperate and speak with a strong
common voice, its decisions can have a decisive impact.
That strong, common voice is needed more than ever at
this current time, when the deceptive allure of populism
and isolationism is growing across all continents, from
North and South America to Africa, Asia and Europe.
Faced with the complex, multifaceted and gravely
serious challenges, from nuclear proliferation to climate
change, and a radical transformation of our economic
and social paradigms, it is perhaps understandable
that many people from everyday walks of life feel
overwhelmed and seek solace in simplified narratives
of a bygone golden age when they had a sense of being
in control of their individual and national destinies.
What is profoundly irresponsible, however, is
for politicians — especially but not exclusively in

19-172065/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

democratic societies — to collude in or deliberately
stoke those illusions for their own aims of securing
and sustaining power, in full knowledge that no one
country, however powerful, will be able to meet those
global challenges on its own. That is why I believe it
is absolutely essential for global peace and security
that the States Members of the United Nations, and
especially those that have the honour to serve as
members of the Security Council, understand and
meet their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and act in the service of all humankind
rather than the narrow fields of national, ideological or
sectarian interests.
The Council needs to be bold and assert its
collective voice to meet common challenges, while
heeding the words of my illustrious predecessor as
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld:
“It is when we all play safe that we create a
world of utmost insecurity. It is when we all play
safe that fatality will lead us to our doom. It is in
the dark shade of courage alone that the spell can
be broken.”
The Council has always been intended as a forum
for collective engagement in the broader interests
of peace and security, as well as an opportunity for
member States to reflect their capitals’ perspective on
the issue under discussion.
In the humble view of The Elders, based on our
substantial collective experience of working for and
within the international system, the working methods
of the Council could be improved to encourage Council
members to agree on a joint common position to
address conflicts in their early stages. The Council
should explore ways to be more efficient and effective
and to assert its collective voice through timely
and strong statements. Whether it is a presidential
statement or a press statement, it requires a consensus
view. However, that is unrealistic and illogical when
a binding resolution of the Security Council requires
only nine affirmative votes without vetoes. It needs to
speak for and to the whole of the United Nations, rather
than being constrained by the respective agendas and
priorities in the national capitals of its member States.
Building on the remarks of President Robinson, I
would like to highlight three more areas where I feel
the Council can show effective leadership to support
the work of the Secretary-General and improve general
conditions for peace and conflict resolution.
6/25

12/06/2019

First is the importance of prevention. The
Secretary-General’s emphasis on the priority to be
given to prevention is very welcome, and Member States
must ensure that the work of the United Nations for
prevention and peacebuilding is properly supported and
funded. Council members should do more to support
the Secretary-General in using his good offices to
help prevent and reduce the threat of conflict. Council
members should also recognize that the Council’s work
on peace and security is undermined when its members
subvert the United Nations own peace envoys and peace
processes. The human cost of those machinations is all
too painful to see, with Libya and Yemen standing out
as just two grim examples.
Secondly, I turn to regional institutions. Strong
multilateral regional institutions are essential for the
maintenance of peace and security, both as forums for
dialogue and as mechanisms for economic and political
cooperation between States. Positive examples include
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. By contrast, the absence
of dialogue among States or inclusive forums for
dialogue in the Middle East is one of the reasons for the
persistence and recurrence of conflict there.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend our
host, the State of Kuwait, for its ongoing commitment
to and support for the values that have historically
underpinned the Gulf Cooperation Council. I would
urge all other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
to act in the same spirit to restore that body to its vital
role as a guarantor of regional stability, governed by
mutual respect for national sovereignty and a shared
understanding of common challenges.
The role of regional organizations in preventing
and resolving conflict should be strengthened, not only
in the Middle East but across the wider world. Greater
coordination between the Security Council and regional
organizations would also be beneficial.
Third is the nuclear threat. The risks of nuclear
conflict are higher than they have been in several
decades. As Mary Robinson so rightly said, nuclear
weapons and climate change pose two of the most severe
existential threats to life on Earth as we know it. When
it comes to nuclear non-proliferation, the international
community is confronted with two serious challenges,
namely, the Iranian nuclear development programmes
and the need to secure the complete denuclearization of
North Korea.
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8546

Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, I am deeply
concerned by the United States decision to withdraw
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, because
it not only weakens the regional stability of the Middle
East but also sends the wrong signal to ongoing
negotiations over North Korea’s nuclear issues.
Unfortunately, the negotiations between the United
States and North Korea have come to a deadlock since
the failure of the Hanoi summit last February. I support
the United States Government’s efforts to realize the
complete denuclearization of North Korea. In that
context, we should maintain and faithfully comply with
the sanction measures imposed by the Security Council
on North Korea. I sincerely hope that all the States
Members of the United Nations faithfully implement
the sanction measures.

nuclear proliferation, particularly in the lead-up to next
year’s NPT Review Conference. The consequences of
failure do not bear contemplation.

On the other hand, according to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme, actual food shortages in North
Korea might reach around 1.5 million tons. Considering
the fact that North Korea has suffered chronic food
shortages over the past two decades, the situation seems
to be worsening, with no support from the international
community. In view of that, the Government of
the Republic of Korea has announced that it would
contribute $8 million to United Nations agencies to
help North Korea address the current humanitarian
situation. I sincerely hope that the currently deadlocked
negotiations will resume among the parties concerned
as soon as possible.

At the outset, I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his valuable briefing and assure him that
the State of Kuwait fully supports him in his efforts
to improve the mechanisms of the United Nations and
enhance their efficiency with a view to reducing the
risks and threats confronting our world today. We
especially support his call for a surge in diplomacy
and the enhancement of conflict prevention and
mediation measures as part of his reforms of the pillars
of peace and security to render them more coherent
and comprehensive.

But beyond those two regional issues, there is also
the very real risk that the whole architecture of arms
control and nuclear non-proliferation that was built up
during the decades of superpower confrontation may
collapse through a combination of neglect, hubris and
ill-founded threat analysis. That issue goes to the very
heart of the Security Council. Its permanent members
are all nuclear-armed States, and they therefore possess
a uniquely heavy responsibility to develop effective
processes of non-proliferation and disarmament.
Yet the failure of the five permanent members to
make progress on their disarmament commitments
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) risks undermining the
NPT, which has been a highly effective multilateral
mechanism for preventing proliferation. It is in the
interest of the five permanent members to get serious
about disarmament if they wish to maintain the nearuniversal international commitment to preventing

I hope that in our contributions, The Elders have
highlighted opportunities for progress, as well as
challenges to be overcome. We look forward now to
a stimulating interactive discussion with the Council
members, and express gratitude again for the privilege
to take part in this debate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ban
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

I also thank The Elders for their presence with
us today, for we will surely benefit from the wisdom
and expertise that they have acquired over decades of
hard work in various decision-making positions as they
have striven to improve the lives of millions of people
around the world. Among them we have an advocate for
women’s rights, human rights and a former President of
her country. We also have a former Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who succeeded in putting in
place the goals for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We also have a leader who was able to make
peace and end 50 years of conflict in his own country,
for which he was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize. I
welcome Ms. Mary Robinson, Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, and I would like to
thank Ms. Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon for their
valuable and enlightening briefings on our topic today.
We begin today’s meeting on conflict prevention
and mediation, under the agenda item of the maintenance
of international peace and security, by quoting the first
paragraph of Article 1 of the Charter of the United

19-172067/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations, which sets out the purposes of the United
Nations as follows.
“To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to
bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace.”
The State of Kuwait has called this meeting today
to provide the Council with an opportunity to evaluate
its role in conflict prevention and mediation and to look
at ways to strengthen that role with a view to addressing
security, political and humanitarian crises in their early
stages before they escalate, get complicated and become
threats to international peace and security. In the past
few years, the frequency of the crises confronting our
world has increased. They have become more complex
and intertwined than ever before, but it is certain
that we could have addressed some of them earlier
and prevented their escalation had we used the tools
available to the Council in an effective way.

12/06/2019

number of the issues confronting the African continent.
Tomorrow, as part of our efforts to form a similar
model of cooperation, Kuwait will hold a meeting on
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States. We believe that it is timely,
given the turmoil and instability that a number of Arab
countries are currently facing.
As part of our discussion today, we should highlight
the important role of the Secretary-General, based on
Article 99 of the Charter, which confers on the SecretaryGeneral an inherent right and responsibility to play a
role in preventing conflicts through his good offices or
those of his Special Envoys and Special Representatives
in any conflict zone. The Secretary-General has made
mediation a priority, and we commend the fact that he has
established a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
as a tool for conflict prevention, which we should all
support, as it will unquestionably save us a great deal of
trouble, sorrow, pain and resources, including financial
resources. Billions of dollars are spent every year to
contain crises through peacekeeping operations or to
address their consequences and implications, including
on the humanitarian front.

The Charter of the United Nations provides us
with many tools that encourage conflict resolution by
peaceful means, especially Chapter VI, which puts
steps in place for resolving any dispute between parties
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement, or by resorting to
regional agencies and organizations as well as other
peaceful means of their choice. Chapter VI also
stresses the importance of the preventive role of the
Security Council. It gives the Council the right to call
on parties to conflicts to resolve their disputes by the
aforementioned means and to investigate any dispute
or situation that might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether its
continuation is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The challenges that many mediation efforts
confront are local, regional and international, and
sometimes all of them at once. Mediation efforts
must therefore be comprehensive and deal with the
root causes of conflicts and their various political,
security, development, economic and social aspects.
They must also address the issues of living conditions,
good governance and respect for human rights, among
other things, and must therefore work fast to ensure
that disputes do not escalate. Different views must be
taken into account, and work must be done behind the
scenes to gain the trust of all the parties to a conflict
by adopting an honest, neutral and clear approach,
free of private agendas, with a view to achieving
a comprehensive and sustainable resolution of the
conflict. I want to commend the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoys and Representatives and their teams
for their efforts to resolve conflicts around the world,
often without media attention.

In Chapter VIII, the Charter encourages the peaceful
resolution of local conflicts through arrangements with
regional and subregional organizations, as they have
historical knowledge of such conflicts and geographic
proximity to them. In that regard, I would like to
commend the important cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union in addressing a

The accumulated experience and lessons learned
are sufficient to enable the Security Council to take
innovative measures and steps in helping to maintaining
international peace and security, and certainly there is
nothing preventing the Council from taking innovative
initiatives and measures for conflict prevention and
mediation. In the concept note circulated to Council

8/25

19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

members (S/2019/456, annex) we have identified
some steps that could support conflict prevention and
mediation efforts, including sending a small delegation
of Council members to undertake mediation efforts
between parties to conflicts, a practice that the Security
Council has adopted in the past. Field visits by the
Council to conflict zones could cover prevention and
mediation. The Council could also benefit further from
meetings held in various formats to discuss matters that
could threaten international peace and security. Besides
that, it has traditional tools such as peacekeeping
operations and sanctions imposed on individuals and
entities at its disposal, and those could be used in
a more efficient manner to achieve the purposes of
preventive diplomacy.
After reviewing these preventive tools in the
Security Council, I cannot help wondering how many
crises the Council could have avoided, prevented or
de-escalated had it used the tools available to it in
accordance with the Charter and actively pursued
preventive diplomacy. A more difficult question is
how many human lives and resources could have
been saved had we ignored political calculations and
narrow interests and instead focused on assuming
our responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, including by activating these preventive
tools. The Council’s success in using those tools
depends on the unity and consensus of its members. We
have witnessed many conflicts in which the Security
Council was unable to reach solutions because of the
differing views of Council members and the use of the
veto. Perhaps the most important issues where we have
seen a division between the members of the Council
and the use of the veto are the Palestinian question and
the Syrian crisis.
The unity of the Security Council, especially among
the five permanent members, is important to ensuring
that the Council can carry out its functions and take
decisions in an effective and decisive way. Confronting
political, security and humanitarian challenges in our
world today requires all of us to work together within
the context of multilateralism. Those international
challenges need international solutions.
Because Kuwait is a small State and the smallest
member of the Security Council today in terms of
surface area, preventive diplomacy is a main pillar
of its foreign policy. We believe that dialogue is the
best way to resolve conflicts based on the rules of
international law and the principles and purposes of

S/PV. 8546

the Charter of the United Nations. We also believe that
underdevelopment and economic and social challenges
are the root causes of many conflicts around the world.
That is why the State of Kuwait engages in humanitarian
and development diplomacy to improve the living
conditions of millions of peoples throughout the world
and to contribute to achieving stability for communities
and countries. I assure all Council members that the
State of Kuwait will remain just as they have known
it — a supporter of peace as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council and even outside the Council,
through our diplomacy based on preventive measures,
conflict prevention and the resolution of conflicts by
peaceful means.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to express my admiration and gratitude to
our speakers, who are all extraordinary and tireless
peacemakers. The briefings delivered by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon and
Ms. Mary Robinson are particularly inspiring to all of
us, as they reflect their exemplary commitment. With
several days left before I leave New York in order to
take on new responsibilities in Paris, it is a great honour
for me to broach, in their presence, one of the major
questions that has mobilized all of us during the five
years that I have had the privilege to spend in this
role. The question is: How can the United Nations
better prevent conflict? I warmly thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening this meeting on such an
important subject, and I welcome the presence of the
Kuwaiti Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I would like to begin by commending the SecretaryGeneral for giving top priority to conflict prevention.
France fully supports his vision, according to which
we need to do more to head off conflict. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s reforms, which should enable
the entire United Nations system to be more effective
in preventing crises. I am thinking in particular of the
strengthening of United Nations mediation capacities,
for example through the creation of the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. I also note that members
of the Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers are
being deployed increasingly on the ground, sometimes
at very short notice. Their activities, often discreet,

19-172069/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

is immensely valuable. I would also like to highlight
the indispensable work carried out by the Office of
Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide.
We can see that the new impetus spurred by
the Secretary-General is starting to bear fruit. For
example, in Madagascar last year, the mediation
conducted by Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Madagascar, in close
coordination with the African Union and the Southern
African Development Community, made it possible
to avert a political crisis that could have had tragic
consequences. In that case, the unfailing commitment
of the United Nations ensured that all international
actors spoke with one voice, which was decisive. The
elections were a success and helped to consolidate
the Malagasy democracy after the upheavals that had
shaken the political life of the country over the past
10 years.
I will give a second example. Early in the year,
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
and the African Union facilitated the negotiation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation,
thanks in particular to the strong and perfectly
coordinated commitment of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Smaїl Chergui. In addition, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic played a valuable role in
the negotiation process and continues to play a key role
in supporting the implementation of the agreement in
the difficult context with which we are all familiar. In
that regard, I would like to welcome more generally
the contribution of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General who support the political processes
in Mali, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Middle East. Those who, in addition,
are responsible for a peacekeeping mission play a vital
role in promoting peace.
In addition, strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union contributes to
enhancing the effectiveness of our preventive diplomacy.
In Burkina Faso in 2015 and in the Gambia in 2016, the
coordinated and united action of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States was critical to success. As I have had the
opportunity to say on many occasions in this Chamber,
this partnership is of strategic importance to us, and
we are therefore determined to give it our full support.
Our mobilization concerning conflict prevention and
10/25

12/06/2019

mediation must remain stronger than ever, because
today’s needs are very great.
Turning to the Middle East, the dangerous
exacerbation of tensions in recent weeks in the Gulf
highlights the need to defuse any risk of escalation
through the gradual structuring of a regional dialogue.
The efforts of France tend to that end. The regional
dialogue must address all legitimate concerns that
threaten the peace and security of the region and
beyond. Dialogue is also necessary to promoting the
implementation of political solutions in the conflicts of
the region, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to which the Council must lend its unanimous support.
I emphasize the essential role that the countries of
the region play and must play in conflict prevention.
I particularly commend Kuwait’s initiatives to build
bridges in the region and foster dialogue.
After years of bloody conflict in Syria, and on the
eve of a new humanitarian catastrophe with the ongoing
Idlib offensive by the regime and its allies, there is an
urgent need for us together to implement resolution 2254
(2015) to achieve a national ceasefire and a political
solution in support of the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, also has our full support, with
particular regard to his work on the implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreements, among others. I also
wish to reiterate our support for Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, with a view to reaching a ceasefire agreement in
Tripoli, prior to the resumption of discussions between
the parties.
The need is also very great in Africa. I will cite a few
brief examples. The situation in the Sudan is extremely
worrying. We are horrified by the brutal repression of
peaceful protesters, the perpetrators of which will be
brought to justice, and we call for the resumption of
dialogue between the Transitional Military Council
and the opposition. We welcome the resolute and clear
position of the African Union and hope that the United
Nations can fully support the mediation efforts of the
African Union.
In the light of the high priority we attach to the
situation in the Sahel, we are also of the view that
Burkina Faso must now enjoy increased attention in the
light of the challenges the country is currently facing.
France therefore fully supports the process initiated
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

by the Secretary-General to adjust the United Nations
presence on the ground. We hope that the United
Nations response will be ambitious and commensurate
with the expectations of the Burkina Faso authorities in
the areas of humanitarian assistance and development,
as well as in training security forces, respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and support
for the fight against terrorism.
With regard to Cameroon, we are very concerned
by the deterioration in the north-west and south-west of
the country. We must all join our voices to encourage
the authorities of Cameroon to launch an inclusive
political dialogue, establish détente measures and
deepen decentralization.
Finally, I would like to speak briefly on several
challenges and issues for preventive diplomacy and
mediation in the coming years.
The first challenge is the meaningful participation
of women in mediation processes. We absolutely need
more women mediators. In that regard, I welcome the
contribution of the FemWise-Africa network, which
makes it possible to deploy women mediators in the field.
Mediation must also fully involve women at all stages
of the process and at all levels. We know that peace
agreements reached with the meaningful participation
of women are stronger and more sustainable. Those
same agreements must include provisions on the
rights of women and children. And we are counting
on the guidelines being developed by the Office
of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Children and Armed conflict, Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, to be able to learn all the lessons from
previous mediation processes on that matter.
The second challenge is that of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We should provide more support to
countries and societies emerging from conflict by
investing in reconciliation, transitional justice and
reconstruction in order to prevent them from relapsing
into crisis situations. The Peacebuilding Fund is an
essential tool in that regard, and as Council members
know, France fully supports it. Similarly, it is essential
to continue to focus on mechanisms that detect early
warning signs of potential deterioration and record
specific indicators in order to help prevent relapse.
The third challenge is the impact of climate change
on international security. That issue must become
a central element of the conflict prevention agenda.
France is firmly convinced of that point. The Security

S/PV. 8546

Council, and more broadly the entire United Nations
system, must have a comprehensive overview of all
the dangers that the impact of climate change poses to
international security. In that regard, we recommend
that a report of the Secretary-General be drafted to
provide a regular assessment of those risks, as well
as recommendations for the development of tangible
actions to respond to and prevent conflicts related to
climate events.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
mediation and peaceful resolution of conflicts.
We recognize the leadership of Secretary-General
Guterres in advancing the United Nations mediation
and conflict prevention work, including the creation
of the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. We
welcome the Board’s engagement in both resolving
and preventing conflict. I would also like to thank the
Chair and Deputy Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson
and Ban Ki-moon, for their remarks today and for the
vital work they are doing to spearhead mediation and
conflict resolution.
Day after day, the Council bears witness to the
human toll of conflict, from Mali to Myanmar, Syria to
Somalia. This year, the United Nations estimates that
conflicts and disasters have affected over 130 million
people across 42 countries. The affected men, women
and children have an urgent need of assistance — of
our assistance.
The Security Council often debates how to use
this body to resolve crises. From those discussions, we
have established human rights monitoring mechanisms,
imposed sanctions and established peacekeeping
missions. However, we rarely explore mediation as
a tool in resolving conflicts, or how we might better
prevent conflict in the first place and thereby save lives,
as the Secretary-General and Minister Al Sabah noted.
States Members of the United Nations are
contributing $6.7 billion this year for peacekeeping,
and the United States pays a quarter of that cost. But
better prevention and mediation would help prevent
costly peacekeeping missions and help provide an exit
strategy for existing peacekeeping operations.
The United States has a long record of leading
mediation efforts that have provided breakthroughs
in some of the toughest conflicts, such as the Good
Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland and the Dayton

19-1720611/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

Peace Agreement that ended the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In both of those cases, the United States
brought the right people into the room and served as a
trusted facilitator of the agreements.
Mediation is most successful when the right set of
stakeholders are engaged and the mediator is trusted. In
that light, women’s meaningful participation increases
the likelihood of successful negotiations, reconciliation
and transition processes. Collectively, the Secretariat
and Security Council must do more to ensure women
play an integral role in peace processes both as
negotiators and mediators, as President Robinson, the
Secretary-General and the Ambassador of France have
all noted.
Including women in conflict resolution not only
accelerates the process, but it surfaces issues that matter
most to societies as a whole, making agreements more
durable. According to the International Peace Institute,
peace processes in which women are meaningfully
included are 35 per cent more likely to last for at least
15 years.
It is also important to support local and regional
mediation efforts, devolving authority to those on the
ground. Let me offer Senegal as an example where the
United States has worked to bolster local mediation
efforts, coordinating support for a high-level political
negotiation between the Senegalese Government and
the secessionist movement. By providing targeted
political support and funding, we have helped set the
conditions that led to high-level negotiations.
There are unresolved conflicts currently on the
Council’s agenda that would benefit from enhanced
mediation activities. In one example, improvements the
Security Council has mandated for the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, the peacekeeping
operation in Abyei, are stalled due to a lack of progress
in mediation between South Sudan and the Sudan.
Each of us should seek to strengthen the capacity
of regional and subregional organizations, given their
comparative advantage in securing local buy-in. The
Secretary-General has called for greater convergence
and cooperation in the Council as a means to support
mediation, and we agree completely.
We agree that those vital and often underappreciated
tools can have a transformative impact in conflicts.
We urge the United Nations to lead mediation efforts
within current budget parameters. Those efforts can
12/25

12/06/2019

save billions of dollars that would be spent on conflict
mitigation and, most importantly, again, can save lives
by preventing or ending conflict.
The United States stands ready to continue the
dialogue on doing more to effectively support the United
Nations conflict resolution and mediation efforts.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
highly appreciates Kuwait’s initiative in convening this
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing. I would like to thank in particular Their
Excellencies Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon
for their presence in the Council and for sharing
their perspectives on world issues. Their speeches
are inspirational.
Approximately two months ago, President Xi
Jinping met with Ms. Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon
and other members of The Elders in Beijing. President
Xi Jinping had an in-depth exchange of views
with them on international issues. In the meetings,
President Xi Jinping reiterated China’s firm support
for multilateralism and expressed China’s appreciation
of the efforts of The Elders members in facilitating a
dialogue-based solution to conflicts.
Conflict prevention is predominantly about
prevention. The concept of prevention is deeply rooted
in traditional Chinese philosophy. Ancient Chinese
proverbs, such as “Prepare for a rainy day” and “Take
precautionary measures before disaster strikes”
all highlight the importance of prevention. China
supports the United Nations in strengthening conflict
prevention. We support the Secretary-General’s reform
initiatives in the field of peace and security, including
increasing the United Nations commitment and input in
conflict prevention.
Conflict prevention must focus on tackling root
causes. Conflicts tend to have a variety of deepseated causes, such as extreme poverty, imbalanced
development, the lack of resources and ethnic and
tribal conflicts. Among them, the issue of development
is of paramount importance. Countries should make
development their first priority and persist in jointly
promoting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development so as to enhance developing
countries’ capacity to support indigenous development
and reduce or eliminate poverty on a global scale,
thereby laying the foundation for conflict prevention.
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Conflict prevention must adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. All
countries should abide by the basic norms governing
international relations, such as respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, non-interference in internal
affairs, non-aggression and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. It is imperative to fully respect the will
of the countries concerned, persist in carrying out
conflict prevention under their leadership, and provide
constructive assistance to them to advance their
political process and achieve national reconciliation.
Conflict prevention must emphasise the role of
mediation. Mediation is one of the tools for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and an important means for the
United Nations to carry out conflict prevention. It is
necessary to formulate and implement work programmes
for mediation in a targeted manner, make full use of
the unique influence of the Secretary-General and
the expertise of the Secretariat, and actively mediate
disputes through the Special Representatives and
Envoys of the Secretary-General. It is also necessary to
strengthen the ability of national envoys in mediating
conflicts and disputes.
Conflict prevention needs closer coordination
so as to generate synergy. As the most universal,
representative and authoritative intergovernmental
international organization, the United Nations
should play a central role in conflict prevention. All
departments of the Secretariat must abide by their
mandates and work in collaboration. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the League of Arab States, enjoy unique advantages
in dealing with issues in their own regions and should
be further supported in exercising their irreplaceable
role in the prevention of regional conflicts.
As a builder and defender of world peace, China
is actively committed to promoting international peace
and stability and to pushing for the establishment of
a new type of international relations with cooperation
and mutual benefit at its core. This is seen in China’s
active engagement in the mediation of international or
regional hotspot issues and the appointment of Special
Envoys on regional issues such as those of Asia, Africa
and the Middle East, to facilitate peace talks and
promote political solutions. That has already produced
positive results.
Our active support for the mediation work of the
United Nations also includes years of donations to

S/PV. 8546

United Nations prevention efforts and to the ChinaUnited Nations Peace and Development Fund, support
for the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, the rapid-response system of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
other United Nations mediation mechanisms.
China will join the rest of the international
community to jointly build a community with a shared
future for humankind so as to make greater contributions
to world peace, development and prosperity.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank
our briefers today. The United Kingdom held an open
debate on mediation during our own presidency of
the Security Council in August (see S/PV.8334). We
are very glad to see the Kuwaiti presidency taking
the debate further, because we believe that mediation
can and does work. We believe that properly deployed
and executed, mediation can help parties to resolve
disputes before they are allowed to spiral into darker
and more entrenched cycles of violence. We also
believe, as the Council recognized in its January 2018
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1), that mediation
has to be one element of a comprehensive conflictprevention strategy.
Ban Ki-moon talked about the importance of
conflict prevention, of dealing with issues before they
get out of control. I know that some members of the
Security Council are concerned by any expansion
of the Council’s agenda. If we do not find ways of
effective conflict prevention in countries not yet on our
agenda where we have concerns, then we make it more
likely that they will actually come onto the agenda.
We therefore have to find some way of collectively
resolving this dilemma. At a time when the concept of
conflict prevention can prompt different responses from
Security Council members, I believe that the question of
the importance of mediation is something that unites us
all, around which we all can find consensus. I actually
thought that the statement by the representative of
China underlined that very point.
Let me also salute the hard work of United
Nations Special Envoys and Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, who are on the front lines
of complex negotiations in situations such as Libya
and Yemen. Again, I find myself agreeing with Ban
Ki-moon on the importance of standing behind our
mediator when the going gets tough. In our recent press
statement on Yemen, the Security Council, among

19-1720613/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

other points, reiterated its unequivocal support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
need to stand behind the people we send out there, even
when things are difficult.
I also want to salute, as my French and Chinese
colleagues have done, the role that regional and
subregional organizations play. They are well placed to
assume mediation roles, as the African Union (AU) did
during the peace talks in the Central African Republic,
for example. Let me take this opportunity also to express
our strong support for ongoing AU-led mediation
efforts to resolve the current crisis in the Sudan and its
people’s calls for a civilian-led transitional authority.
It was good that the Security Council issued a press
statement last night standing behind African Union
efforts condemning violence and calling for talks to
resolve the situation.
It is therefore critical that the United Nations retains
an agile mediation capacity. The mediation standby team
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
(DPPA) is an important part of this prevention toolkit,
with a wide range of preventive diplomacy capacities
and expertise, including on the design and management
of dialogue processes, constitution-making, gender and
inclusion issues, natural resources, power-sharing and
security arrangements. The United Kingdom has been
one of the largest donors to the DPPA multi-year appeal
to support those activities.
The United Kingdom believes strongly, however,
that further progress is essential on the matter of
women’s participation. Women continue to build peace
when formal processes fail. They lobby for peace
processes to begin when parties refuse to talk and
implement peace agreements long after the international
donors have walked away. For that and other reasons,
the United Kingdom in 2018 committed $1.6 million to
increasing women’s participation in peace processes.
The Secretary-General talked about FemWise-Africa,
and I would also like to highlight the development of
the Commonwealth Women Mediators Network, which
I believe will play an increasingly important role in the
coming years. More broadly, peace processes including
and involving women fully are more likely to be
inclusive of all groups and of the grass roots, making it
more likely, in turn, that they will succeed. It is indeed
about achieving success.
The Kuwaiti presidency’s concept note for today’s
meeting (S/2019/456, annex) states that the Council’s
14/25

12/06/2019

“reactive” approach to crises means that action is often
taken only once political and security situations have
already deteriorated. Regrettably, it is difficult to
disagree with that assessment, but I am grateful that
we have an opportunity today to pause and consider.
Let me give an example of a country-level issue and
a thematic issue where I think we could be thinking
about these questions.
At the country level, the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the north-west and south-west regions of
Cameroon is an example of a developing crisis that has
implications for fragile regional stability and wider
international peace and security. But where there
may be scope to prevent further deterioration through
quick action by the United Nations and regional and
subregional bodies — including, in particular, the
African Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States — and to encourage and support efforts
to establish a credible political dialogue, the United
Kingdom is open to working together with all parties
and organizations to try and find solutions.
On the thematic issue, I would also note Mary
Robinson’s words on the behalf of The Elders on climate
change. I agree very much that this is an increasingly
concerning driver of instability. That is why the
United Kingdom called the first Security Council
debate on the impact of climate change on peace and
security in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). It is also why we
offered the groundbreaking resolution 2349 (2017) on
the Lake Chad Basin issue and its root causes, which
include climate change. Let me take the opportunity to
inform colleagues that the United Kingdom has today
announced that we will reduce our emissions to net zero
by 2050 and will enshrine that commitment in our law.
When the Security Council embraced the concept
of sustaining peace in resolution 2282 (2016), it
recognized the shared responsibility of all three pillars
of the United Nations to act to prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict.
As members of the Security Council, we too
have a shared responsibility to act, to come together
on the basis of these commitments and to continue
to strengthen our approaches, with the support of
others — the rest of the United Nations system — in
the area of conflict prevention and mediation. Mary
Robinson shared some wise quotes from Kofi Annan.
Let me end with his words: “We need to keep hope alive
and strive to do better.”
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the presence of the
Secretary-General, who expressed interesting ideas on
approaches to conflict prevention and mediation. We
also welcome the briefing by Mrs. Mary Robinson, on
behalf of The Elders, and we extend to her our deep
respect for her commitment to helping to resolve
conflicts and promote equality in societies. We welcome
the presence of Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Santos
Calderón, former President of the brotherly country
of Colombia.
Multilateralism has been coming under heavy
attack with the intention of questioning its efficiency
and necessity. The sustainability of multilateral forums
will depend on what we do today to preserve them.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic reaffirms
its commitment and confidence in multilateral
organizations as key settings for the maintenance
of international peace and security, with conflict
prevention and mediation mechanisms as cornerstones
for success.
Conflict prevention is a fundamental goal for
the development of peoples. Through prevention, we
preserve human dignity, ensure stable and sustainable
societies and build peace. In addition, prevention costs
much less than containing or managing conflicts.
Based on the above, prevention would seem to
be the best solution to conflict. However, that is not
the reality. Despite prevention efforts, currently all
regions seem to be on the verge of conflict, threatening
international peace and security. That leads us to ask
ourselves how in the Council we can be more efficient
in conflict prevention and mediation.
The importance of the role of the United Nations
in conflict prevention is unquestionable. Since its
founding, its objective and purpose have been to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, as
set out in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations. That same Charter extends that preventive role
to the Security Council, an organ entrusted to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
As States members of the Council, we must
therefore fulfil our responsibility to work to innovate
and continue to develop effective mechanisms for
conflict prevention and mediation. That requires of us
unity and fraternity and that our positions have a single
goal: human dignity.

S/PV. 8546

In order to fulfil the aforementioned mandate
of the Charter of the United Nations, we as Member
States are called on to focus more on preventing than
on containing or managing conflict. For the former,
the United Nations has tools such as special envoys,
political and peacekeeping missions, regional offices,
mediation experts, country teams, electoral assistance
and sanctions monitoring groups.
The Dominican Republic believes that it is relevant
for the Council to ensure and strengthen relations
with such actors through the Secretary-General. Early
warning by actors on the ground is essential for the
deployment of specific and appropriate prevention and
mediation tools. We must study successful mediation
processes and replicate them, such as the case of
Burkina Faso in 2014 and Colombia and its recent peace
process, among others. We must strengthen preventive
diplomacy, create resilience programmes for local
communities, cooperate in strengthening the capacities
of local authorities and support the development of
public social policies to leverage existing tools and
enhance them through better application and innovation.
Another challenge on which we must work is the
involvement of women and young people in mediation
and conflict prevention. In that regard, we congratulate
the work being done by a cluster of networks of
women mediators, such as the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and
the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network. We
believe that our region could learn from them and look
at the possibility of establishing a network of women
mediators in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Finally, we reiterate the need to create networks
of young mediators. It is essential that the Security
Council’s mediation tools ensure the inclusion of young
people in order to achieve lasting peace agreements and
build more just, inclusive and peaceful societies, taking
up their role as mediators within local communities and
as a point of contact with the international community.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, and Kuwait for convening this
important meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban KiMoon, whom I welcome back to the Chamber. Their
valuable and insightful briefings have always been food
for thought and given more momentum in discussing
this issue.

19-1720615/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the rise of conflicts in recent years, with an
unprecedented increase in fatalities and displacement
of innocents, the global citizenry is looking keenly to
the United Nations to perform its Charter responsibility
effectively. Unquestionably, conflict prevention and
mediation must take a higher precedence, as has been
noted by many in the Chamber today. The focus of the
United Nations should be clear in this regard; it must
help and assist national and regional-led efforts to
prevent and mediate conflict. Let me highlight several
pertinent points, as follows.
First, dialogue, mediation and prevention must be
high on our agenda. Indonesia strongly supports the
call of the Secretary-General for a surge in political
diplomacy in conflict prevention, which should be
translated into concrete action. Although there have
been some successes, there have been more cases of
emerging conflict, to which the Secretary-General
alluded earlier. The Security Council cannot just ensure
that the process for peacemaking technically continues,
on the one hand, while on the other it is impeded by the
narrow national interests of some members. Preventive
action will not success without political will and, I
should like to underline, a solid moral compass. The
unity of the Council is as essential as is the need for a
sincere, well-owned and resolute effort by the parties to
conflict to resolve their disputes peacefully. The Elders
have reminded us all once again this morning of the
need for the Council to be united, and we should heed
their call.
My second point concerns the importance of
stronger partnership with regional and subregional
organizations in fostering global peace. Indonesia,
together with the rest of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) family, have worked to
implement the ASEAN Charter, with its fundamental
reliance on peaceful dispute settlement through
dialogue and consultation. We realize that prevention
and sustaining peace must happen as a joint, principled
and well-owned partnership. Regional entities, with
their unique bonds of history and knowledge, can
have unmatched insights into workable mediation
approaches and prevention. Indonesia strongly believes
that neighbours know best. The Security Council
can utilize the advantages of regional entities by
engaging with them from the earliest signs of potential
conflicts and deepening its relations with them, as it
has done with the African Union and other regional
16/25

12/06/2019

organizations. During our presidency, we also engaged
with the European Union in addressing many issues.
Thirdly, the root causes of conflict must be
addressed meaningfully. In doing so, the Security
Council must fully uphold the principles of international
law, human rights and humanitarian law. But we also
need to be cognizant of the fact that conflict does
not happen without causes, be they issues related to
tribal ethnicity, poverty, competing resources or as
a result of pressures from climate change, such as
desertification, among others. Indonesia is encouraged
that the Security Council, along with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, is increasingly focused on
comprehensively tackling conflict factors. We believe
that United Nations entities should further support, in
particular, those Member States lacking the capacity
to integrate preventive measures to conflicts into their
national governance and development functions. We
need to ensure the provision of development aid so that
conflicts can be avoided.
Fourthly, adequate resources are needed. Prevention
and mediation should be reinforced and underpinned
through a significant increase of and more reliable
support, among other things, through the regular
budget. In that respect, Indonesia also acknowledges the
importance of voluntary financial support, including
through the indispensable Peacebuilding Fund, for its
conflict prevention and related projects.
Fifthly, it is important to welcome new initiatives
to enhance training and capacity-building to improve
and build the capacity of negotiators and mediators,
including women as agents of peace and mediators.
Every stakeholder that can contribute to peace
should be given a role. Inclusivity is the key word. It
was in relation not only to peacekeeping but also to
peacebuilding and prevention that Ms. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, hosted a
regional meeting on women and peace and security in
April with the intention of creating a global coalition
of women for peace and tolerance that would consist of
female peacekeepers, women negotiators and mediators.
It is high time, as others have also said in this forum,
that women are more visible at the forefront in carrying
the banner of peace. It should also be incorporated into
strategies or programmes related to peace maintenance
and special political missions.
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Indonesia, from its own experience, knows well that
prevention and mediation can be extremely delicate.
They have to be conducted diligently, intensively and,
in some cases, confidentially. What matters are the
positive and sustainable outcomes for peace. Indonesia
commends the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment and work on peace and mediation, as
well as his Special Envoys, peace emissaries and the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers for their
vital work, along with the Secretariat, in continuing to
strengthen the Mediation Support Unit.
We are also appreciative of the work of the
Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation, on which Indonesia is also represented.
Indonesia, together with Finland, as members of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, were pleased to co-host
a second meeting of the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation in Helsinki in June last year.
In conclusion, I have heard many speakers quote
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations. I looked
at the Charter as I heard the quotations. I would like
to add another Article that we tend to forget, which is
Article 24, concerning the functions and powers of the
Security Council.
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security”.
I would like to underline, italicize, put in bold
and highlight in bright colours the words “prompt and
effective action”. We tend to forget those very important
words. It is high time for us all here to be prompt and
effective. It is high time for us to be bold in preventing
conflict because conflict will not wait for us.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also thank Her
Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson and His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon for their briefings.
Germany very much welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s vision and priorities, which strongly focus
on conflict prevention and resolution. We highly
appreciate the work of the United Nations good offices,
notably through the Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. We need to
support them in their often very challenging work. At
the same time, we highly appreciate all the other ways
in which the United Nations contributes to mediation
efforts through special political missions and mediation

S/PV. 8546

support, which often remains invisible but is highly
important for conflict resolution and prevention.
Mediation is a key instrument for advancing the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. It can help bridge the
societal and ideological divisions between conflicting
parties because it covers the entire spectrum,
from conflict prevention and supporting ceasefire
negotiations to implementing agreements and the
political reform processes arising from them. We
are convinced that we need to think of prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a continuum.
Mediation processes can serve as a starting point
for additional support efforts, for example in cases
of pending comprehensive transformation processes,
such as demilitarization, promotion of the rule of law
and security sector or constitutional reform. In such
situations, mediating in conflict means creating entry
points for further engagement. In all such efforts,
human rights also play a very crucial role in mediation
processes, as well as in conflict prevention. That helps
to identify grievances that, if left unaddressed, can lead
to conflict. Human rights standards should not be used
negatively only for naming and shaming, but should
be used positively to provide a framework to devise
sustainable solutions to address those grievances.
Human rights can thus make mediation processes better
geared towards conflict prevention.
The Security Council can play a powerful role
in preventing conflict and in mediation processes
and should make use of it with regard to its mandate
of maintaining peace and security. Our Indonesian
colleague just reminded us of that core task of the
Council. We also feel that the Council should, more
often, not only identify early warning but go from early
warning to early action. That would be very important.
The Council’s work would be alleviated, much more
efficient and much better geared towards fulfilling its
mandate according to the Charter of the United Nations
if it were not merely reactive. For example, when it
comes to mediation, the transitions from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding often occur in environments of
political transformation of the peace process.
Mediation on different tracks needs to be included
when transforming the United Nations presence in
a country in order to align international support to
expectations and deal-making on the ground. We
believe that the United Nations, and in particular its
Mediation Support Unit, should remain a strong actor

19-1720617/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

in mediation. That is also why we — Germany — are
one of the main donors to the Mediation Support Unit,
with a contribution of €3 million in 2018.
The same applies to conflict prevention. Conflict
prevention remains a key priority for our membership
of the Security Council. It is a topic in which we
have invested politically and financially. We are the
largest donor to the Joint United Nations Development
Programme-United Nations Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Programme on Building
National Capacities for Conflict Prevention and have
also invested considerable resources into our own
Foreign Office, with a dedicated early warning unit.
At the same time, I would like to underline that the
Council should use the entire toolbox at its disposal when
it comes to conflict prevention. Very often, we focus
on the use of the military in peacekeeping operations.
We feel that we should invest more time and energy
into considering the use of police in peace operations.
Police work is often the best way to achieve prevention.
In many operations, police can be used much more
significantly, and we should always consider the use of
preventive police work wherever it makes sense.
Now, many colleagues have already alluded to the
issue of inclusion, which I would also like to underline.
When it comes to mediation and conflict prevention,
what we always need is an inclusive process. Peace
processes cannot be sustainable when they involve only
those in power or those who hold guns. They obviously
need to involve a broad range of parties, elites and
local actors, including women and youth. Experience
has shown that the most successful peace processes are
supported by the population and benefit from the buyin of all concerned groups. Women mediators are an
especially important part of successful and sustainable
mediation efforts. Germany is an active supporter of
the women and peace and security agenda, including
during our time as an elected member of the Council.
Before I conclude, let me say a few words on what we
are doing nationally to promote conflict prevention and
mediation. Our approach to peace mediation adheres
to the United Nations guiding principles for mediation,
and we will continue working closely with other United
Nations Member States to increase the role of mediation
as an instrument to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
In two days, on 14 June, the Federal Foreign Office will
launch its own peace mediation framework in Berlin
and discuss it with cooperation partners.
18/25

12/06/2019

Germany not only mediates directly, as in the
case of Ukraine, but also supports more than 30
peace processes by sending mediation experts and
assists in dialogue processes on the regional and
local levels. Independent and third-party actors are
close and important cooperation partners in those
endeavours. We also work in close cooperation with
local communities, both on the settlement of disputes
and climate protection issues.
Many speakers before me have alluded to the
important nexus between climate change and security.
As climate change is often a driver of instability, we
therefore feel that we have to look more closely into that
issue, including when it comes to conflict prevention and
mediation. The nexus among climate issues, sustainable
development, security and peace promotion is, from
our point of view, very relevant. It often goes hand in
hand and needs to be addressed as an interdependent
factor in mediation and conflict prevention.
In conclusion, let me say that Germany is also a
proud member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
chaired by Turkey and Finland, and I would like to
thank the Chairs and all the members of the Group for
their work. We believe that the Group has contributed
to the professionalization of mediation support.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): It is good to see you,
Sir, once again presiding over this meeting. We thank
the delegation of Kuwait for convening the debate on
this very important matter. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. It is such a great pleasure to see
former President Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders,
as well as Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General
and Deputy Chair of The Elders, and we thank them for
their valuable briefings and input.
Immediately after being sworn in as the first
President of a democratic South Africa in 1994, Nelson
Mandela said,
“[N]ever, never and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression
of one by another”.
With those words, he embarked on the long
and protected negotiations on a new, inclusive,
transparent, all-party, multi-racial South Africa that
would be non-racial, non-sexist, multi-religious and
multicultural. The democratic South Africa was born
after three and a half centuries of racial conflict in
South Africa. Those historic developments enabled
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8546

a democratic South Africa to begin making a modest
contribution to conflict mediation around the world,
including in Syria, Palestine, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Zimbabwe, Libya, Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Burundi and Madagascar. The list goes on.

Union and the United Nations undertook to enhance
collaboration, cooperation and coordination in the
search for sustainable solutions to ongoing and future
conflicts and to respond early, coherently and decisively
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts.

The promotion of the peaceful resolution of
conflicts is a cornerstone of South Africa’s foreign
policy. That is borne out of our historical experience
in successfully and peacefully transitioning from a
colonial past to a constitutional democracy based on
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. It is through that spirit and commitment that we
seek peaceful resolution and mediation for challenges
and crises in the Sudan, South Sudan, Venezuela, the
Central African Republic and many conflicts around
the world. Mediation brings about reconciliation, less
destruction, fewer killings and less displacement. We
believe that United Nations peacekeeping should not
be a means to an end, but instead complement those
essential tools of peacemaking.

In that regard, South Africa calls for enhanced
strategic and operational coordination of conflict
prevention, resolution and mediation efforts by the
United Nations, the African Union (AU), subregional
organizations and other international and local actors,
in the case of many conflicts. Such efforts should
be aimed at strengthening the efficacy of conflict
prevention and resolution efforts and supporting
African-led peace and security solutions based on
subsidiarity and comparative advantage.

Resolving disputes peacefully and through
mediation, ceasefire monitoring and assisting in
the implementation of peace accords should be the
hallmark of the United Nations approach to resolving
conflicts worldwide. It is important to remind ourselves
that the prevention of conflict remains the primary
responsibility of States. Actions undertaken within the
framework of conflict prevention by the United Nations
should support and complement the conflict-prevention
roles of national Governments and regions.
In that regard, the Council should strengthen its
own instruments for the pacific settlement of disputes,
in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Before considering the use of force
under Chapter VII, we must consider a peaceful
political solution to conflict, as envisaged in Chapter
VI. Article 33 of the Charter specifically states that
parties to a dispute shall “first of all” seek a solution
through political means, including negotiation and
mediation. The settlement of disputes through those
means has the added advantage of assisting parties to
a conflict to recognize and address the root causes of
conflict and embark on negotiations, thereby fostering
a spirit of trust and cooperation.
South Africa believes that cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations could play an important
role in conflict prevention. In that regard, the African

For its part, the African Union Commission
operationalized the AU Mediation Support Unit in
mid-March. The AU Commission has devoted efforts
towards strengthening the Mediation Support Unit,
including though capacity-building on mediation
and mainstreaming gender in mediation. In addition,
the AU Commission is also spearheading efforts
to institutionalize a mediation doctrine in the
Commission, while the process of validating and
adopting an advanced mediation training module for
the AU is under way.
The recent operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund will further boost AU capacities and efforts in
mediation and conflict prevention in Africa. The Peace
Fund is structured around three thematic windows:
first, mediation; secondly, preventive diplomacy
through institutional capacity; and thirdly, peace
support operations. In this regard, the AU member
States should be commended by the Council for their
efforts to contribute to the Peace Fund, the endowment
of which currently stands at $115 million.
The role of women and youth in peacebuilding and
mediation cannot be emphasized enough. It is common
knowledge that, when women are involved in peace
processes, such processes are more sustainable and
effective. We welcome the role already being played by
the FemWise-Africa network in various conflicts across
the continent. In particular, we believe that the Security
Council should commit to providing greater support
for the development of female mediators, specifically
women from countries and regions affected by conflict.
Without the adequate representation of women in these
efforts, the credibility of these processes is undermined.

19-1720619/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

12/06/2019

We are confident that the greater representation of
women in mediation efforts will correspond to the
greater success of our efforts.

With this vision in mind, I would like to share the
following key ideas that my country supports with
regard to preventive diplomacy in its current context.

We believe that a comprehensive, integrated
and coordinated approach to conflict prevention
should also address the root causes of conflicts and
strengthen political processes and respect for the rule
of law, as well as the promotion of sustainable and
inclusive development. Again, I turn to the wise words
of our former President, Mr. Nelson Mandela: “All
conflicts, no matter how intractable, are capable of
peaceful resolution.”

First, we highlight the role played by the United
Nations regional political offices as sources of early
warning in territories that are often not included
on the Council’s agenda. Their preventive potential
is enormous, but we regret receiving the valuable
information they produce only once every six months.
We believe it essential to develop more expeditious and
flexible mechanisms in order to receive this information
when the urgency of a situation warrants. Their actions
must also be strengthened with greater capacities for
analysis and evaluation of the situation on the ground.

South Africa supports the promotion of peaceful
solutions to conflict through mediation, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and appreciate
the briefings delivered by such distinguished speakers
as Secretary-General António Guterres; Chair of The
Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson; and former SecretaryGeneral Mr. Ban Ki-moon. We also welcome the former
President of our sister Republic of Colombia, Mr. Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón, to the Council.
We commend the special contribution made by The
Elders to the current global scene as an authoritative
voice of moderation and wisdom in the field of
international relations, as well as a permanent source of
innovative ideas and firm defenders of multilateralism
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
This morning, its senior representatives recalled the
central importance of the primary purpose enshrined
in that text, which is the maintenance of international
peace and security and the commitment we have
undertaken to adopting collective measures to prevent
and eliminate these threats to peace. Likewise, it is
essential to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes
or situations that have the potential to lead to conflict.
Nearly 75 years after the signing of the Charter, the
challenges and threats to peace and security are perhaps
more complex, but its purposes and principles remain
valid and unchanged. It is our responsibility to work in
a univocal manner to ensure that the Security Council
plays an active role, promoting and recommending a
more systemic approach to preventive diplomacy based
on timely risk analysis, early warning and management
plans, which the Secretary-General and various
agencies of the system should be able to provide.
20/25

In this regard, the elected members of the Council
have been promoting the holding of periodic informal
meetings with the Secretariat in order to learn, from
a regional perspective and on a rotational basis, about
potential threats to peace and security. We should also
strengthen synergies with regional and subregional
organizations, particularly in order to learn about any
relevant communication or decisions in the face of
possible threats in these areas. This will allow us to
explore possible routes for joint cooperation. It will also
be important to generate synergies with organizations
fostering development on the ground, which can offer
important complementary information.
We believe that it would be beneficial to make use
of the various meeting formats available to the Council
in a preventive context, such as the Arria Formula
and informal interactive dialogues. We also believe
that recourse to the means of peaceful settlement of
disputes, referred to in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, is an underutilized tool that has
a genuine capacity to offer positive alternatives for
action before, during and after conflicts. These include
mediation, which corresponds to a mandate from the
parties and requires their consent at all times, respects
their possible sensitivities and is based on applicable
international law.
In this connection, like other speakers, we strongly
support the efforts of the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General who, by engaging in mediation or
seeking to develop these capacities at the local level,
assume the special responsibility of guiding the parties
to a dispute or potential dispute, as a visible element
of an international rules-based system. Likewise, we
welcome the timely decision of the Secretary-General to
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

establish a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. We
believe that this opportunity should be taken advantage
of more frequently, both by the Council as well as by
regional and subregional organizations recommended
by the Organization’s regional political offices.
Finally, there is no better preventive activity than
the creation of more open and inclusive societies that
promote sustainable development and count on the
active, positive and innovative participation of new
actors such as women and youth.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation thanks the
delegation of Kuwait for having convened this meeting of
vital importance. We thank His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres for his extensive and exhaustive briefing. We
also thank Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson, Chair
of The Elders, and His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon
for their wise and enlightening statements.
As indicated in Chapter I of the Charter of the United
Nations, the purpose of our Organization is to maintain
international peace and security through the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We believe multilateralism
to be one of the main factors involved in achieving our
conflict prevention objectives. Multilateralism is the
highest expression, at the governmental level, of the
quest for a world of peace, prosperity, justice and human
rights — the founding pillars of the United Nations itself.
Multilateralism makes it possible to resolve issues and
conflicts in a formal partnership between States and
parties to disputes, and it is necessary in that regard
to support and promote the Secretary-General’s work
for preventive diplomacy. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s vision for focusing the Organization’s efforts
in the peace and security arena on prevention and
the expansion of diplomacy for peace, which affirms
the founding mission of the United Nations with the
aim of replacing a culture of reaction with one of
prevention. We encourage all Member States to adhere
to that doctrine and to accept the good offices of the
Secretary-General as crucial elements for preventing
and mediating conflicts.
Based on Chapter VI of the Charter, the Security
Council has all the tools necessary for the impartial
mediation of any dispute that puts our main goals
or others of a similar nature at risk. We therefore
urge States to use the resources available to them
appropriately, prioritizing principles such as respect
for the sovereignty of all States and non-interference in

S/PV. 8546

internal affairs, as well as other principles of conflict
mediation founded on international law. Extensive, close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is essential and demands
that we join forces to expand partnerships with a view
to doing more effective, efficient and transparent work.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea would like
to emphasize the importance of increasing the
participation of women and expanding their numbers
in conflict prevention and mediation missions. Their
involvement in mediation processes would help us to
better understand the causes of conflicts as well as
alternative solutions to them. We reiterate our thanks
to all the countries that contribute troops and police
to those missions, as their efforts and sacrifices make
the daily struggle to maintain international peace and
security possible.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank our eminent briefers for their valuable
contribution to today’s discussion.
The establishment of relations with the parties
to a conflict is an essential condition for successful
mediation. To gain their trust and confidence,
relationships must be genuine, and partners must feel
that their interests are truly understood. It is hard to
imagine a more reliable and trustworthy group of
people than the Elders, represented today by Ms. Mary
Robinson, former President of Ireland, and Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, our former Secretary-General. It is indeed an
unusual organization, but thanks to its uniqueness, the
members of the Elders may possess a unique opportunity
to have access to decision-makers at the highest levels,
creating a safe space for amplified dialogue. They bring
words of wisdom. Our job is to keep an open mind and
not shy away from action.
Conflict prevention and crisis management through
mediation are founding principles of the United Nations,
and we cannot overemphasize their significance to our
work in the Council. We should do everything possible
to further enhance the capacity of our Organization. The
changing nature of conflicts and increasing tensions
in our societies demand that we renew our efforts to
make progress in the area of mediation and conflict
prevention. We should collectively be ready to do more
and to act earlier. That means we have to take a further
step by matching early warning with early action. The
Security Council should be a powerful driving force in

19-1720621/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

12/06/2019

advocating for mediation and prevention efforts at an
early stage.

lists negotiation and mediation as important tools that
play a vital role in promoting peace.

If we are to achieve sustainable agreements it is
vital to involve all parts of society, from relevant local
actors up to top-level officials. It is also invaluable to
include women and youth from the very early stages in
order to accomplish real change on the ground and give
ownership of the process to those who will eventually
implement it. The entire population has to be involved.

In conclusion, I would like to call the Council’s
attention to the still unfulfilled calls for establishing
a system to improve the financing of mediation and
prevention efforts. Poland supports those efforts with
donations to the Multi-Year Appeal of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and we encourage
others to do the same.

Something that we have underlined many times
during our tenure on the Council and will again
today is that the United Nations cannot always be
expected to fulfil its role alone. We live in a world
of multifaceted challenges to peace and stability that
involve countless numbers of different actors and
dynamics. Regional organizations, individual Member
States and non-governmental entities have important,
at times exceedingly important, contributions to make,
depending on the specific features of the conflicts
in question.

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends the presidency of Kuwait for
holding today’s briefing on the topic of mediation as
a tool for conflict prevention. I am also pleased to
welcome to the Chamber Ms. Mary Robinson, former
President of Ireland and former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, former Secretary-General. I would like to
thank them for their significant contributions to our
discussion and to ask them to come back and visit us
here often. We need their wisdom and perspective. I
would also like to welcome the presence of President
Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, who honoured the
Council by participating in our meeting this morning.

We are not alone in thinking that the United Nations
should further strengthen partnerships to ensure greater
coordination and consistency in the mediation activities
of various actors. With no rigid rules, mediation can
be used flexibly and adjusted to a particular conflict.
It is crucial to ensure that negotiators and mediators
consult civil society, including women’s groups, on the
design, implementation, and monitoring of any peace
agreement, and that they guarantee the protection of
women leaders at risk of targeted political violence.
Initiatives led by women have frequently helped to
prevent and mitigate the escalation of violence through
their engagement in constructive dialogue and advocacy
for peace.
The United Nations already has the right tools for
advancing mediation. The Mediation Support Unit, the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers and the
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation all provide
exceptional assistance to countries in need. Due to the
delicate and confidential nature of their job, we often
cannot recognize their work or acknowledge their merits.
I therefore want to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to all those responsible for mediation and
prevention efforts in our system and beyond. I would
particularly like to thank the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts to promote mediation as the most costeffective and underrated method of conflict resolution.
It is not without reason that Chapter VI of the Charter
22/25

The ever-increasing human and material costs of
the multiplicity and complexity of armed conflicts
around the world demand that the international
community move from an approach based on managing
conflicts to one firmly focused on prevention, with
mediation as a priority tool. The Secretary-General’s
clear intention to place mediation at the core of United
Nations action is reflected in his report of 27 June
2017 (A/72/115) on the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The pacific settlement of disputes therefore remains
a priority for the United Nations and in particular for
the Security Council. It is enshrined in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, which provides for
a range of means that include negotiation, mediation,
conciliation and arbitration. It is in that context that
the Secretary-General is pursuing his tireless efforts,
mediated in theatres of conflict by his Special Envoys
and Representatives, often in difficult conditions.
The High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
was established along the same lines, as it reinforces
the effectiveness of existing mechanisms. However,
in order to achieve maximum efficiency, those
mechanisms require a strong political commitment at
both the national and regional levels. In other words,
ownership by States and regional organizations of those
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

tools is essential. Civil society, especially women,
young people, and traditional local leaders must also
participate fully in mediation efforts.
Under the Charter, conflict prevention through
mediation is a primary duty of States, which are
responsible for taking every possible measure to create
the sociopolitical conditions essential to maintaining
peace. In the light of that, since the end of our postelectoral crisis the Government of Côte d’Ivoire has
been working to implement a national strategy for
peacebuilding, based on national reconciliation and
strengthening social cohesion through our Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a Ministry
dedicated to social cohesion and victims of war. In
line with that vision, in 2017 we also created a national
coordination centre for our early-warning and response
mechanism, which enables us to identify the causes
of conflicts and to formulate responses aimed at
preventing or containing violence.
National conflict prevention and peacebuilding
strategies must be expanded through the activities of
the regional economic communities, which, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, can
contribute effectively to conflict prevention with the
valuable support of the United Nations. For example,
thanks to its special mechanism for conflict prevention,
management and resolution, and in accordance with the
principle of subsidiarity, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has often successfully
managed crises at the subregional level. I am pleased
to be able to point to ECOWAS’s resolute call for a
return to constitutional order in Mali following the
coup d’état in 2012 and its successful mediation of the
post-electoral crisis in the Gambia. Furthermore, and in
a subregional context marked by community violence
and transnational organized crime, the establishment of
early-warning mechanisms by regional and subregional
organizations, such as the ECOWAS Warning and
Response Network system, could help prevent emerging
crises, thereby avoiding what are sometimes long and
difficult negotiations.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that regional and
subregional strategies would be more effective if
they had greater support from the United Nations, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. My country therefore welcomed
the signing on 19 April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We commend the

S/PV. 8546

remarkable progress made in the implementation of the
Partnership, including through cooperation between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as through regular consultations
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate
its belief that mediation remains an effective tool
and can be used at every stage of conflict resolution,
including to prevent conflicts and address their root
causes. However, that effectiveness can be achieved
only if it has the advantage of support from the Council
as it is currently configured and if it is used in good
faith in order to ensure the effective maintenance of
international peace. We must therefore join our efforts to
make mediation a central element of the United Nations
system for the maintenance of peace and security.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council and thank you for organizing today’s
meeting. Mediating and preventing the conflicts that
threaten international peace and security is indeed one
of the most pressing tasks of the United Nations and of
global politics as a whole. We are grateful to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and to the Chair and Deputy
Chair of The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for their statements.
There can be no doubt about the importance of
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations for
preventing conflicts. The Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the States Members of the United
Nations provide all the necessary tools in that regard.
They reside first and foremost in Chapters I and VI of
the Charter and in the resolutions of Member States,
particularly resolution 2171 (2014), which enshrines the
fundamental principles of international assistance in
this area.
In the past few years the Secretariat, the
Security Council and some regional and subregional
organizations have made considerable efforts to
analyse the causes of crises and ways to prevent them.
Despite that, there is no universal or exhaustive list of
conflict indicators. That is not surprising, because the
Council’s practical experience has shown that every
situation has its own unique set of factors influencing
its development, which means that there is no universal
formula for solving problems. Each situation requires a
delicate, balanced and impartial approach and a patient

19-1720623/25

S/PV.8546

Maintenance of international peace and security

12/06/2019

search for a solution, and that is why one-size-fits-all
solutions are not useful in this area.

African Republic and South Sudan, although there is
still much work to be done, needless to say.

We firmly believe that international assistance can
be provided only with the consent of the parties to the
dispute. It must be impartial and free of preconditions.
Double standards and veiled political games designed to
overthrow legitimate authorities are also unacceptable.
Unfortunately, such situations are not uncommon today,
which understandably compels States to be suspicious
about mediation. We need only cite the examples of
Iraq, Libya and Syria. The international community is
still dealing with the consequences of the crises in those
countries, the result of shameless foreign invasions.

We value the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which is founded on the principles of neutrality,
objectivity and cooperation with the Governments of
the States of Central Asia and focused on cooperation
with regional integration organizations such as the
Eurasian Economic Community, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. We see excellent possibilities for
developing partnerships between the United Nations and
these organizations, which are expanding their political
authority and their contribution to strengthening
regional and international security.

But some learn nothing from history. Today the
same approach is being applied to Venezuela, where
the acute phase of the crisis began as a result of
external pressure through sanctions and direct foreign
interference. Not surprisingly, the most successful
mediation efforts there are being conducted by States
that have been smart enough not to take sides in
Venezuela’s internal confrontation.
Success in crisis prevention and resolution can be
achieved only through a painstaking collective quest
for political and diplomatic solutions, based on a direct,
inclusive dialogue between the parties involved. As the
most authoritative and representative organization in
the world, the United Nations is perfectly situated to
play a central role in international mediation efforts.
The good-offices missions of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoys and Representatives continue
to prove that they are needed. However, we believe it is
important to ensure that United Nations mediators are
chosen based on objective criteria and with respect for
regional balance.
It is also important to take advantage of the
potential of regional and subregional organizations,
in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Regional
mediators’ thorough knowledge of the nuances of local
conflicts enables a more accurate understanding of a
situation and therefore makes it possible to put forward
objective, realistic proposals for bringing the parties’
positions closer together. We are particularly pleased
about the fact that African countries are actively taking
the initiative to address the continent’s problems. That
is something that the leadership of the African Union
(AU) should truly be proud of. In that context, I want
to single out the AU’s efforts with regard to the Central
24/25

While we too are ready to work together with
others to develop preventive diplomacy, we believe
that prevention should not be seen as a panacea for all
ills, and it cannot become a pretext for interfering in
the internal affairs of sovereign States. Their consent
to this kind of United Nations involvement is a key
criterion for us.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that many
of the world’s problems today could be avoided if some
of our colleagues on the Security Council genuinely
made the interests of the States they say they want to
help their top priority rather than lecturing them and
inflicting sanctions and coercive unilateral economic
measures on them. Such unilateral approaches, founded
on blind faith in one’s own exceptional status and
righteousness and on an unwillingness to listen to the
views of others, not only prevent the Security Council
from reaching agreement on collective approaches but
also undermine the authority of the United Nations.
If we can deal with this kind of erroneous and shortsighted behaviour, our Organization’s potential with
regard to issues of conflict prevention and mediation
would increase significantly.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting. I also want to thank the
representatives of The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for their words of genuine wisdom,
which should serve as an inspiration to us. Their words
were also candid, and I believe they made us confront
our individual and collective responsibility as members
of the Security Council.
19-17206

12/06/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities. It is one of the foundations of the inclusive
approach to the sustainability of peace, to which we
subscribe. As you point out in your concept note for
today’s debate (S/2019/456, annex), Mr. President,
the underlying causes of conflict come under various
areas — peace and security, development and human
rights. It therefore makes sense that the Security
Council should obtain information from all three of
those pillars in order to assess possible threats to peace
and security. It is not only human rights violations and
restrictions on the political space, but also increasingly
scarce natural resources, the degradation of the living
space as a result of human activity, natural disasters and
climate change that are all indicators of tensions that in
the right circumstances can degenerate into conflict.
The Council can and should use them as a basis for its
analysis and action.
In that context, Belgium supports the continuation
of early-warning exercises and especially information
exchanges between the Council and the Secretariat,
including information related to the development
and human rights pillars. Early responses, including
through mediation, following early warnings, are not
necessarily the prerogative of the Security Council
alone but can include, as appropriate, the good
offices of the Secretary-General, his Special Envoys,
representatives and resident coordinators. It can also
take place outside the United Nations system, as we are
currently seeing with Venezuela and Cameroon. But if
need be the Council can send signals that help generate
the political will to resolve a crisis and support these
mediation efforts. However, that is possible only if the
Council is duly alerted well in advance.
That brings me to my second point. The
information that the Council receives is worth more
if it can include a regional dimension. The United
Nations regional offices offer added value both for
identifying risk factors and monitoring progress. We
believe that more dynamic and probably more frequent
informational meetings with the heads of those regional
offices would be correspondingly more valuable. For

S/PV. 8546

example, we look forward to hearing the regional
analysis of the Secretary-General’s new Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa. The regional offices are also
an ideal vehicle for supporting or collaborating with
regional and subregional organizations. We believe
these organizations have a leading role to play in
conflict prevention and mediation, and we encourage
them to further develop their capacities in that regard.
Dialogue between countries in the same region and
outside formal organizations can also have added value
by possibly enabling convergence on measures to ease
tensions, which would be very useful in the Middle
East, for example. The United Nations could provide
support for informal dialogues in this area as well.
Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the link between prevention and mediation, including
at the local level, and peacekeeping operations. Belgium
supports the Secretary-General in his desire to increase
mediation expertise within missions and strengthen
partnerships with local and national mediation
actors. Mediation needs an integrated, tailored and
well-coordinated approach. Engaging missions with
communities, including local authorities, traditional
or religious leaders and other relevant actors on the
ground, helps to prevent local tensions from fuelling
conflict and, more positively, helps to build peace
through local reconciliation.
Although community engagement is of course
the primary responsibility of the civilian and police
components, it is important that it also be supported
by missions’ military components. We welcome the
efforts made in that regard within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, for example. National
ownership of mediation and prevention processes
increases their chances of success. That is particularly
the case when women are involved as mediators,
negotiators and witnesses in those processes.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-1720625/25
