S/2017/640

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK and
developments relating thereto from 16 April to 15 July 2017.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in
Kosovo, in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008
(S/2008/692). The United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely
with the Mission.

II. Political and security developments
3.
The reporting period was marked by a collapse of the coaliti on government led
by the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the Democratic League of Kosovo and
subsequently, by early legislative elections. The government fell following a vote
held in the Assembly of Kosovo, on 10 May, on a motion of no confidence in the
government submitted by the then opposition party, Initiative for Kosovo. The
motion, which passed with 78 votes in favour, was supported by, inter alia, the votes
of 34 of the 36 deputies of the governing Democratic Party of Kosovo. As a result of
the vote, the Assembly was dissolved and early legislative elections were scheduled
for 11 June.
4.
In preparation for the elections, on 31 May, the Kosovo Central Election
Commission published the final voter list, consisting of 1,872,941 eligible voters,
including 155,202 first-time voters. The Commission announced that there would be
a total of 889 voting centres, comprising 2,490 polling stations. In response to an

17-12547 (E)

030817

*1712547*

S/2017/640

invitation from the President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, on 30 May, the European
Union announced the deployment of an election observation mission to Kosovo.
5.
The 10-day electoral campaign period began on 31 May. In total, 26 political
entities, comprising five pre-election coalitions, 19 political parties and two
citizens’ initiatives, competed for the 120 seats in the Assembly of Kosovo. After
intense negotiations, the Democratic Party of Kosovo formed a pre -election
coalition with the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, the Initiative for Kosovo and
10 other small Kosovo Albanian political parties, in a grouping of all major
“veteran” parties of the Kosovo Liberation Army within a single electoral entity.
The coalition nominated the leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo,
Ramush Haradinaj, as its candidate for Prime Minister. The Democratic Le ague of
Kosovo formed a pre-election coalition with New Kosovo Alliance and the newly
formed Alternativa party, with Avdullah Hoti, from the Democratic League of
Kosovo, as its candidate for Prime Minister. Vetëvendosje (“Movement for Self Determination”) was the only major Kosovo Albanian party that chose not to enter a
pre-election coalition. Vetëvendosje nominated former party leader Albin Kurti as
its candidate for Prime Minister.
6.
In the pre-election period, there was a reconfiguration of the Kosovo Serb
political landscape, with the transformation of the political grouping Građjanska
Inicijativa Srpska Lista into a political party that was publicly supported by
representatives of the Government of Serbia. In addition, a number of Kosovo Serb
politicians formerly aligned with Građjanska Inicijativa Srpska Lista decided to
present their own lists for the election, which contributed to a relatively tense
campaign period, with alleged instances of intimidation and politically motivated
security incidents. On 5 June, the Chief Observer of the European Union election
observation mission criticized the campaign environment and called upon police and
prosecutors to investigate all such incidents promptly and rigorously. In its
preliminary findings, on 13 June, the observation mission specifically noted that the
election environment in Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities “was marred by
intimidation and instances of violence from within the Kosovo Serb community
against candidates and voters”.
7.
Local and international election observers concluded that the legislative
elections on 11 June had been held without major incidents or irregularities other
than the aforementioned localized incidents of voter intimidation and long
unresolved problems regarding voter lists and the full participation of voters outside
Kosovo. The Chief Observer of the observation mission, in presenting the
preliminary findings, assessed the elections of 11 June in Kosovo as “genuinely
competitive and peaceful in most parts”. The President o f Kosovo welcomed the
mission’s preliminary findings, which, in his view, “confirmed that the elections
were free, democratic and in line with international standards”.
8.
The Central Election Commission announced the certified election results on
8 July. The coalition of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo, Initiative for Kosovo and others had obtained 33.7 per cent of the votes,
securing 39 seats in the Assembly of Kosovo. Vetёvendosje had obtained 27.49 per
cent of the votes and 32 seats and the coalition of the Democratic League of
Kosovo, New Kosovo Alliance and Alternativa had obtained 25.53 per cent of the
votes and 29 seats. Građjanska Inicijativa Srpska Lista had secured 9 of the 10 seats
guaranteed for representatives of the Kosovo Serb community, with the Independent
Liberal Party winning the tenth. Political representatives of the Ashkali, Bosniak,
Gorani, Roma and Turkish communities collectively filled the 10 seats guaranteed
for other non-majority communities. No party or pre-election coalition secured a
governing majority, and by the end of the reporting period, no post -election alliance

2/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

had been established in order to form a government. The Assembly must hold its
constitutive meeting no later than 7 August.
9.
Separately, following a consultative meeting with representatives of political
parties and the Central Election Commission, on 22 June, the President of Kosovo
announced that local elections in Kosovo would be held on 22 October.
10. Some serious tensions were evident during the period under review. On 5 May,
a young Kosovo Albanian was fatally shot at a bar in the vicinity of the main bridge
in South Mitrovica. In response to the incident, on 7 May, some 4,000 people
protested in South Mitrovica to condemn the violence and demand justice. Also on
5 May, some 100 Vetëvendosje activists demonstrated in front of the Ministry of
Justice in Pristina, demanding justice for Astrit Dehari, a member of their party who
had died in custody on 5 November 2016. The protest turned violent, with protesters
throwing stones at Kosovo police officers, injuring two of them, and vandalizing up
to 60 vehicles of the Ministry of Justice and the Kosovo police. In a separate
incident, on 13 May, in Pristina, a prominent Kosovo jour nalist, Arbana Xharra,
sustained serious injuries in a physical assault by unknown perpetrators. Ms. Xharra
had previously been the target of threats and attacks for her articles on political
corruption and the danger of religious extremism. Local leaders and international
community representatives condemned the attack and called upon law enforcement
authorities to bring the perpetrators to justice.
11. On 20 April, the Election Commission of the Republic of Serbia declared the
final results of that country’s presidential election, held on 2 April, confirming the
victory of the former Prime Minister, Aleksandar Vučić, with 55.08 per cent of the
votes. On 31 May, Mr. Vučić was sworn in as the new President of Serbia, at a
special session of the Serbian parliament. The new Government of Serbia was
approved by the Assembly on 29 June. The new Prime Minister, Ana Brnabić, is a
former Minister of Public Administration and Local Self-government. There has
been no change in the leadership of the Government of Serbia Office for Kosovo
and Metohija.

III. Northern Kosovo
12. The elections on 11 June marked the highest voter turnout in the northern
municipalities since 1999. On the day of the elections, OSCE, at the request of the
Central Election Commission, provided technical assistance at all 44 polling centres
in northern Kosovo. Significantly, the elections were publicly supported by the
Government of Serbia, and on 21 May, the newly elected President of Serbia,
Mr. Vučić, personally encouraged Kosovo Serbs to vote for Građjanska Inicijativa
Srpska Lista.
13. Several incidents during the reporting period fuelled perceptions of weak rule
of law, impunity and the influence of criminal elements in northern Kosovo. An
attempted armed robbery of an armoured vehicle carrying cash was reported on
17 May near the Gate 1 crossing of the Administrative Boundary Line; shots were
fired during the incident. Other incidents included a 29 May attack with a firearm
on the building housing the headquarters of the Party of Kosov o Serbs in
Leposavić/Leposaviq, and an altercation on 4 June in Leposavić/Leposaviq between
the head of the Party of Kosovo Serbs and Građjanska Inicijativa Srpska Lista
supporters, during which the Kosovo police confiscated a weapon. Subsequently, on
5 June, the driver of the mayor of Leposavić/Leposaviq was physically assaulted
during a protest organized by Građjanska Inicijativa Srpska Lista supporters in front
of the Centre for Social Welfare in Leposavić/Leposaviq. The incident reportedly
took place in the immediate vicinity of Kosovo police officers, who later reported
17-12547

3/17

S/2017/640

that they had not witnessed the assault. In a separate incident, on 26 June, four
unknown perpetrators assaulted three Kosovo Albanians in the pedestrian zone of
North Mitrovica; the victims were taken to the hospital in South Mitrovica. To date,
nobody has been prosecuted in connection with those cases.
14. The main bridge between North and South Mitrovica was not opened for
vehicular traffic. After a cluster of public security incidents in North Mitrovica in
mid-April, including a series of inter-ethnic incidents, the mayor of North Mitrovica
suspended construction on and around the northern side of the bridge, including on
the roundabout that constitutes the main feature of the construction plans for that
end of the bridge. Furthermore, the mayor requested KFOR to increase its presence
in Mitrovica, and Kosovo police to tighten security checks, in ethnically mixed
areas. Construction work on the bridge resumed on 10 July.

IV. Relations between Pristina and Belgrade
15. The reporting period was marked by limited progress in the European Union facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. On 3 July, the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini,
hosted an informal meeting between Mr. Vučić and Mr. Thaçi in Brussels.
According to a press release issued by the European External Action Service,
Presidents Vučić and Thaçi agreed “to work on starting a new phase of the
dialogue” and “stressed the importance of the implementation of the agreements
reached in the dialogue without delay”.
16. During the period under review, no progress was made in the implementation
of the existing agreement on the establishment of the Association/Comm unity of
Serb-majority municipalities or on judicial integration. On 1 May, however, in
accordance with the agreement on telecommunications, two Serbian telephone
service providers, VIP and Telenor, ceased operations in Kosovo. The newly
established Kosovo subsidiary of Telekom Srbija has been authorized to operate
fixed-line and mobile telephone services in Kosovo.
17. On 27 April, French judicial authorities declined a Serbian request for the
extradition of Ramush Haradinaj in response to an arrest warran t issued for war
crimes allegedly committed between 1998 and 1999. The Government of Serbia
submitted a formal protest note to the Ambassador of France to Serbia. In a public
address upon his return to Kosovo, Mr. Haradinaj termed Serbia’s extradition
request “a call to war” and, in reference to “our enemy, Serbia”, threatened that “we
will do to them far worse than we did back then”.
18. On 2 May, the Kosovo police began the implementation of a Kosovo directive,
under which Serbian passports issued by the Coordination Directorate of the
Ministry of the Interior of Serbia, which is responsible for issuing passports to Serbs
living in Kosovo, are no longer valid for travel to and from Kosovo. During the
reporting period, travellers using those passports were prevented from crossing into
or leaving Kosovo. The Minister for Dialogue of Kosovo stated, on 2 May, that the
Coordination Directorate is an illegal structure and, therefore, its passports are not
recognized. By contrast, the Serbian authorities contested that, as a central
institution located in Belgrade, the Coordination Directorate cannot be considered to
be a Serbian “parallel institution” operating in Kosovo. At the time of reporting, the
travel restriction remained in force. In practice, Kosovo Serb s seeking to acquire
personal identity documents in Kosovo continue to face administrative difficulties
resulting from stringent restrictions on the admissibility of supporting
documentation, in particular, civil documents issued by Serbian institutions.

4/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

19. In an 18 April interview with Politico Europe in Brussels, the Prime Minister
of Albania, Edi Rama, raised the prospect of regional unions, should the European
Union membership aspirations of Balkan countries not be realized. Other politicians
from the region seized the opportunity to shape this position into a nationalist
context. In an interview with Radio Free Europe on 19 April, the President of
Kosovo remarked that all Albanians in the region would be united in one space,
should the European Union membership aspirations of Kosovo not be fulfilled.
Subsequently, on 20 April, the President of the National Council of Albanians of
Serbia stated to the Albanian-language news agency, Presheva Jone, that Albania
and Kosovo should “show Serbia that this is a part of Albania that must not be
touched”, referring to mixed-ethnicity municipalities in southern Serbia. On 5 May,
the Government of Serbia delivered a non-paper to representatives of the diplomatic
community, protesting “the legitimization of the Greater Albania project”.

V. Returns, reconciliation, community relations and
cultural heritage
20. During the first half of 2017, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees recorded 218 individual voluntary returns to Kosovo by
members of non-majority communities, including 102 Serbs and 104 members of
the Roma-Ashkali-Egyptian community. The Office estimates that, as at the end of
June, the total number of voluntary returns by members of non -majority
communities since 2000 stood at 27,504. The total number of internally displaced
persons living in Kosovo stood at 16,439, a reduction of 24 compared with that of
the previous reporting period.
21. UNMIK continued its engagement with municipal authorities and community
representatives in support of their efforts to protect the rights of communities and
promote intercommunity reconciliation, trust-building and returns. My Special
Representative held discussions with municipal and community leaders in 23 of the
38 municipalities in Kosovo. As part of a broader strategy in support of
intercommunity trust-building, UNMIK also facilitated a range of activities with
municipal communities’ committees and the municipal offices of communities and
returns, with a view to identifying challenges and potential remedial measures and
enhancing communication between municipal and central institutions.
22. In a notable effort to promote reconciliation in Kosovo, on 19 May, more than
250 young people from Kosovo Albanian, Ashkali, Bosniak, Roma and Serb
communities participated in a 16-km “multi-ethnic march” in the municipality of
Obiliq/Obilić, with the aim of challenging prejudice and promoting dialogue.
23. UNMIK continued to implement Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on
youth, peace and security. On 28 and 29 June, UNMIK organized the first Koso vo
Youth Assembly under the heading “Advancing youth, peace and security in Kosovo
together”. The event, which was attended by more than 140 young leaders (60 per
cent women and 40 per cent men) from all communities and by representatives from
the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sport of Kosovo, the European Union, OSCE
and the United Nations Kosovo Team, paved the way for greater youth engagement
in support of intercommunity cooperation. Participants discussed concerns,
exchanged ideas and developed recommendations for local authorities, the United
Nations and other relevant stakeholders.
24. The authorities in Kosovo continued to implement the Kosovo strategy on
prevention of violent extremism and radicalization leading to terrorism 2015-2020.
Some municipalities, in collaboration with local and international organizations,
engaged constructively with young people in an effort to prevent the radicalization
17-12547

5/17

S/2017/640

of youth. On 18 May, a conference organized in Pejë/Peć by a local
non-governmental organization and the local Youth Action Council, on the theme of
joint engagement against violent extremism, addressed the importance of tolerance,
peaceful cohabitation and the greater political participation of young people and
women in order to prevent and counter violent extremism. In another initiative, also
in May, the regional directorate of the Kosovo police in Ferizaj/Uroševac launched a
series of awareness-raising campaigns on the consequences of extremism and
religious radicalization for secondary school pupils.
25. Incidents of desecration occurred during the reporting period, including the
desecration of two gravestones at the Serbian Orthodox graveyard in the village of
Vrbovac, in the municipality of Kllokot/Klokot, on 9 May, and damage to the
Serbian Orthodox Church in the village of Zallq/Žač, in the municipality of
Istog/Istok, on 10 May.
26. The local authorities in Deçan/Dečani continued to oppose the implementation
of the ruling of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo in 2016 in favour of the Visoki
Dečani Monastery in a case of disputed land ownership. The European Union
Special Representative issued a public condemnation of the lack of implementation
of the Constitutional Court ruling and called upon the Kosovo authorities “to
demonstrate respect for the rule of law”. The Deçan/Dečani municipal authorities,
however, refused to permit the registration of ownership in the municipal cadastre.
27. Civil society organizations expressed concern about contravention of the law
on the special protective zone for the historic centre of Prizren, which allegedly
reflects the deficiencies of law enforcement and negligence by local and central
institutions. Of the 382 residential houses registered in 2006, only 155 reportedly
remain intact. In addition, protected cultural heritage sites were reportedly
converted into hotels and illegal car parks.

VI. Human rights and the rule of law
28. On 26 May, my Spokesperson issued a statement reiterating the appreciation
of the United Nations for the valuable work of the Human Rights Advisory Panel,
which examined alleged violations of human rights by UNMIK. Among the cases
reviewed by the Panel was a complaint submitted by 138 individuals from the
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities that they had suffered from lead
poisoning and other serious health consequences as a result of their relocation to
camps for internally displaced persons in northern Kosovo. In this respect, in my
statement of 26 May, I expressed the Organization’s profound regret for the
suffering endured by all individuals living in the camps and announced my decision
to establish, as an exceptional measure, a trust fund that will implement community based assistance projects, primarily in North and South Mitrovica and
Leposavić/Leposaviq, which will benefit the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities. The assistance projects will focus on the most pressing needs of the
vulnerable, with an emphasis on health services, economic development and
infrastructure.
29. Supporting the search for missing persons remains a core priority in the work
of UNMIK. During the reporting period, UNMIK supported the establishment of a
missing persons resource centre in Pristina, an initiative that brings together
Albanian and Serb associations of the families of missing persons in an effort to
find those who remain missing and to call for better performance by politicians,
institutions and the international community in this regard. In addition, on 29 and
30 June, UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, in consultation with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
6/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

organized a round table on missing persons at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
The round table, which was opened with remarks by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and my Special Representative, brought together members of the
Belgrade and Pristina delegations to the Working Group on Missing Persons,
representatives of missing persons’ families associations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, members of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances, and the United Nations member of the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus to call for decisive action to determine the fate of the
1,658 persons who are still missing following the conflict in Kosovo. Members of
the round table discussed specific issues, and participants identified key challenges
to be addressed in order to re-energize the Working Group on Missing Persons,
increase collaboration and improve results.
30. In the course of the Mission’s engagement with municipal authorities,
including municipal mechanisms with responsibility for the protection of
non-majority communities and vulnerable groups, attention was drawn to a
systematic lack of compliance with the Law on the Use of Languages. Several
Kosovo institutions — at the central and local levels — provide services in only one
language, whether Albanian or Serbian. The main challenge derives from a shortage
of qualified translators, resulting in official documents being issued without legally
required translations. This not only causes practical difficulties, but undermines
efforts to build trust between communities and between individuals and institutions.
31. On 21 and 22 June, UNMIK, in cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, organized a knowledge exchange event in Pristina
to promote the protection of human rights while countering terrorism and preventing
violent extremism. The event contributed to enhancing the knowledge and
operational capacity of partners from civil society, Kosovo institutions and
international organizations, to ensure respect for human rights in the course of
preventing terrorism.
32. On 14 June, the Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor’s Office indicted nine
individuals for terrorism-related offences in connection with attacks planned on the
occasion of an international football match between Israel and Albania in November
2016. Separately, it was reported that a commander of Kosovo Albanians fighting
for Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was killed on 8 June, during combat
operations in the Syrian Arab Republic.
33. On 27 June, four persons from Kosovo were arrested in Klinë/Klina and
charged with the illegal trafficking of weapons. In addition, an employee of the
Kosovo office in New York was arrested and charged with arms trafficking, drug
trafficking and money-laundering in connection with the arrests in Klinë/Klina.
34. As part of a continuing criminal investigation by the Kosovo Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, on 5 July, in a joint operation by the Kosovo police and
EULEX, two suspects were apprehended in connection with the murder in 2004 of
one UNMIK police officer and one Kosovo police officer and the attempted murder
of two other law enforcement officers. One additional suspect was extradited from
Germany.
35. On 3 July, the Supreme Court of Kosovo acquitted a former senior member of
the so-called Drenica Group of the Kosovo Liberation Army, a prominent member
of the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica, Sami
Lushtaku, of charges of war crimes. The ruling of the Supreme Court is final and
cannot be appealed.
36. On 28 June, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo confirmed that the revised
rules of procedure and evidence of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, located in The
17-12547

7/17

S/2017/640

Hague, are in compliance with the Constitution of Kosovo. As a result of this ruling,
on 5 July, the Chambers became operational and in a position to receive any filing
or indictment from the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
37. The Executive Committee of the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) has included the existing application of Kosovo for membership in the
organization on the provisional agenda of the 86th session o f the INTERPOL
General Assembly, to be held in September 2017. The Assembly will decide whether
to accept the provisional agenda, and vote on the application.

VII. Partnerships and cooperation
38. UNMIK continued to facilitate liaison between the Kosovo authorities and
INTERPOL. Institutions in Kosovo complied fully with agreed procedures for
liaison with INTERPOL through UNMIK. During the reporting period, UNMIK
received 28 requests for the issuance of international wanted notices and 13 Red
Notices were published. UNMIK also continued to provide document certi fication
services. A total of 398 documents were processed, comprising 243 relating to
pensions, for the Republic of Serbia, and 155 relating to civil status, such as high
school documents, university diplomas and marriage, birth and death certificates.
39. My Special Representative maintained close coordination with international
partners in Kosovo, including the KFOR Commander, the European Union Special
Representative, the Head of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo, the Head of EULEX and
the Head of the Council of Europe office in Kosovo.
40. In May, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women, together with the Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, organized an
expert meeting on conflict-related sexual violence and provided case-based
mentoring for local prosecutors and investigators of war crimes. The United Nations
Children’s Fund supported the Office of the Ombudsperson to establish an online
platform entitled “Know Your Rights”, a facility for schools, communities, young
people and families to report cases of violations of human rights. On 28 June, the
United Nations Development Programme and the United States Agency for
International Development released a special edition of their “Public Pulse”
perceptions survey, with a focus on the rise of violent extremism in Kosovo. The
survey highlights a weak education system, an identity crisis and a general sense of
isolation as drivers of violent extremism in Kosovo.

VIII. Observations
41. I commend the efforts of the Kosovo institutions, local and international
observers, security providers and voters on the successful conduct of early
legislative elections in Kosovo. I call upon those who will form the new government
of Kosovo to govern responsibly, and upon the future oppositi on to work
constructively to promote transparency and accountability. It is vitally important for
the new administration to find agreement to permit the implementation of
outstanding policy priorities, and to work together responsibly to meet the
considerable challenges that lie ahead and take advantage of the many opportunities
that exist in Kosovo.
42. The dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade faces serious challenges. I
encourage commitment to the principle that disagreements must be resolved by
peaceful means exclusively. I urge both parties to re-engage in the dialogue and
bring new vitality to the process. I note with appreciation the efforts of the
8/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

European Union to keep Belgrade and Pristina engaged during the reporting period,
during which there were interruptions to the administrations of both Serbia and
Kosovo.
43. The beginning of the reporting period was marked by incidents of bellicose
and inflammatory rhetoric. I call upon political leaders in Kosovo and the region to
refrain from statements and actions that fuel ethnic nationalism and discord. I
encourage the new governments in Belgrade and Pristina to provide an impetus for
constructive engagement in order to address outstanding issues in a positive
atmosphere.
44. The rule of law, and its impartial application, is a cornerstone in the
foundation of any democratic society. I encourage greater efforts to consolidate the
rule of law in Kosovo, in particular in relation to the protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms, of vulnerable groups and of cultural heritage. The operational
readiness of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers is a positive development for justice
and reconciliation. It is critical that the institution receive full cooperation from all
parties and not be hindered in the effective discharge of its duties.
45. I welcome the joint event organized by UNMIK and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to raise awareness of and help to address the issue
of missing persons. I call upon the political leaders, institutions and international
community to demonstrate their commitment to pursuing this priority and bringing
peace to those who have suffered.
46. I appreciate the engagement of the Mission with the local government and
communities, in particular my Special Representative’s constructive cooperation
with municipal administrations, including with respect to the protection and well being of non-majority communities and vulnerable groups. I note with appreciation
the first Kosovo Youth Assembly, which brought together young people from all of
Kosovo’s communities to jointly plan a brighter future and demonstrate that the
desire for reconciliation is present within Kosovo society. The initiatives
highlighted in the present report are part of a strategy by UNMIK to foster socie tal
reconciliation, which I fully support as essential to the implementation of the
Mission’s mandate to promote peace and stability.
47. I call upon Member States to support the trust fund established in follow -up to
the recommendations of the Human Rights Advisory Panel. Their generous support
will go a long way towards addressing the most pressing needs of the affected
communities.
48. I thank my Special Representative for his engagement with leaders in Pristina
and Belgrade, local leaders and communities, representatives of civil society and
partners in the international community. The capacities of UNMIK are at the service
of all parties seeking to make a positive contribution to peace and security in
Kosovo.
49. I conclude by reiterating my gratitude to the long-standing partners of the
United Nations in Kosovo, including KFOR, the European Union and OSCE, and to
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on the ground for their
outstanding teamwork and collaboration with UNMIK.

17-12547

9/17

S/2017/640

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo from 16 April to 15 July 2017
1.

Summary
The Kosovo police have seen further improvements in their technical
capabilities, operating increasingly independently and without the need for advice
and requiring mainly strategic support in selective areas, as can be seen in the
continuous, year-on-year, operational improvements of the Kosovo police during the
annual Vidovdan Day/Saint Vitus Day celebration and culminating in this year’s
professional performance.
The preferential treatment of high-profile prisoners in relation to the
determination of their detention conditions re mains an issue of concern.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) made progress
in its investigations of a number of cases and continued its efforts to bring the cases,
which are at various stages of trial, to conclusion.

2.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

2.1

Executive
War crimes
During the reporting period, three indictments were filed at the Mitrovica
Basic Court against a defendant extradited from Montenegro and suspected of
committing war crimes against the civilian population.
On 26 April, the trial proceedings of a war crimes case against a defendant at
the Mitrovica Basic Court were postponed, following a request for the protection of
legality against the judgment of the Court of Appeals, which had ordered the retrial.
On 21 April, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court released the
defendant from house detention but requested him to report to the police station in
North Mitrovica twice a week.
On 12 May, in the Klecka case, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX
judges at the Supreme Court rejected the request of EULEX prosecutors for
protection of legality as ungrounded, which effectively means that all indicted
individuals in this high-profile war crimes case have been acquitted.
On 3 July, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Supreme
Court granted one defendant’s appeal in the Drenica I war crimes case and released
him from detention on remand.
Organized crime and corruption
On 5 May, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court pronounced
a judgment against a defendant in a case relating to a shooting incident at a bar in
North Mitrovica in 2015, which left three persons injured. The defendant was
acquitted of the charges of light bodily injury and causing general danger, but
convicted of unauthorized ownership, control and possession of weapons. The panel

10/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

gave the defendant a suspended sentence of one year’s imprisonment, with a
verification period of three years.
On 1 June, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Pristina
Basic Court issued a ruling extending, for a period of two months, detention on
remand against a defendant who is accused of, inter alia, organized crime and
aggravated murder. On 9 June, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at
the Court of Appeals passed a ruling ordering that the defendant be released on
condition of bail of €2 million being provided, either in cash to the account of the
court or in the form of a mortgage on real estate, for the amount of the bail. On
28 June, the defendant was released on bail.
Other serious crimes
On 5 July, some 100 Kosovo police officers, along with 35 EULEX police
officers, carried out a search and arrest operation in a continuing investigation
relating to the aggravated murder of one UNMIK officer and one Kosovo police
officer and to the attempted aggravated murder of two other UNMIK officers in
2004. Four persons were arrested during the operation.
Capacity-building
On 20 April, EULEX hosted a conference, organized with the European Police
Office (Europol), that was aimed at identifying opportunities for cooperation in the
fight against arms trafficking. The conference was attended by senior members of
the Kosovo police and other international organizations. It was the first executive level police seminar held in Kosovo on the illegal manufacturing of, possession of
and trafficking in small arms.
On 2 and 3 June, a two-day EULEX conference and training session were held
to enhance the capacity of 37 Kosovo prosecutors in the areas of corruption and
asset confiscation.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts at the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine
continued their work in clearing the backlog of autopsy and clinical ex amination
reports. They also provided support and assistance to local institutions in relation to
the secondary legislation to the Law on Forensic Medicine. On 20 June, EULEX
forensic experts concluded the site assessment at Kiževak, in the Rudnica mining
complex in Serbia, which had lasted 140 days and resulted in no findings. Two local
doctors successfully completed an online course in forensic anthropology, organized
by EULEX.
Property rights
The Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel received 4 new appeals and
adjudicated 45 appeals, while 281 appeals are pending a decision of the Panel.
The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization matters rendered
402 decisions in first-instance trial panel cases and finalized 73 cases at the
appellate panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
EULEX continued to monitor hearings in several cases transferred to local
authorities. It conducted an assessment of court registries on the basis of the
applicable rules and standards. In addition, interviews with the heads of case
management offices of the six Basic Courts and visits to the facilities were

17-12547

11/17

S/2017/640

conducted. Coherent case management is a precondition for an efficient and
effective justice system. The most pressing issues found were a shortage of staff, a
lack of space for archiving and a lack of compliance with existent regulations and
directives. While, in some cases, such non-compliance is a result of the absence of
minimum preconditions (staff, office and archives space, etc.), in others it is a result
of a lack of awareness, leading to deviation from the implementation of the
sufficiently detailed regulations by the different case management offices.
The merit-based selection of judges, court presidents and chief prosecutors
continues to be a challenge. On 22 and 23 April, the Kosovo Judicial Council
repeated the written test for the selection of 61 Basic Court judges, this time strictly
adhering to the rules and regulations. The test was organized for only the 75
candidates who had initially passed the qualification test before the Kosovo Judi cial
Council decided to lower the threshold in the middle of the recruitment process, in
October 2016. In response to heavy criticism by the international community,
including EULEX, the Council had decided to revert the recruitment process to the
stage at which the qualifying test was conducted. In May, 78 candidates were
interviewed, and on 6 June, the Council published the results of the competition.
Fifty-five candidates reached the required number of points and 54 are awaiting
appointment by the President of Kosovo (one candidate withdrew owing to health
reasons).
On 12 June, the Constitutional Court declared the decision of the Kosovo
Judicial Council on the selection of the President of the Supreme Court invalid
following an appeal by one of the non-selected candidates, and ordered the Council
to conduct a new voting process in accordance with its findings. In response, the
Normative Committee of the Kosovo Judicial Council drafted amendments to the
Regulation on the Selection of Court Presidents. In support of the view that the
selection of the highest judicial positions should be based on the principles of
equality, merit and transparency so as to ensure public trust in the judiciary and the
prosecution, two joint letters were sent by the European Union Special
Representative in Kosovo, the EULEX Head of Mission and the Ambassadors of the
United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the Chair of the Judicial Council, before and after the Constitutional
Court decision. In this context, EULEX recommended the inclusion of more
extensive amendments and the postponement of the adoption of any amendment
until the Constitutional Court renders a judgment in the pending case against the
selection of the President of the Court of Appeals. The Council agreed to postpone
any further decision accordingly.
The preferential treatment of high-profile prisoners in the determination of the
detention conditions of a select group of inmates remains an issue of concern. This
is displayed in the suspension of sentences for medical reasons, frequent hospital
visits and the downgrading of “high-risk” inmates to “medium-risk”, which
excludes extra security measures, against the explicit advice of EULEX.
On 16 May, the Minister of Justice extended the suspension of sentence of a
high-profile prisoner who had been sentenced to serve 15 years for war crimes, for
medical reasons, until amendments to the new Law on the Execution of Penal
Sanctions entered into force on 26 May. That prisoner failed to return to prison,
however. EULEX held several meetings with the Kosovo Correctional Service,
including one with the President of the Mitrovica Basic Court — the competent court,
according to the new Law on the Execution of Penal Sanctions — urging the Service
to take action. On 15 June, the Service issued an arrest warrant, resulting in the
prisoner’s return to Dubrava Prison on the same day. On 3 July, upon invitation by the
President of the Basic Court in Vushtrri/Vučitrn, which currently substitutes for the
Mitrovica Basic Court, EULEX began to monitor the court session on the case.
12/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

The establishment of the Kosovo Correctional Service Assessment Centre,
which is responsible for the proper categorization and sentence planning of inmates,
is advancing steadily with the support of a project funded by EULEX. In May and
June, training sessions were focused on general assessment concepts and risk
assessments were delivered, including study trips for Kosovo Correctional Service
assessment staff and senior managers to assessment centres in Finland and Sweden.
Nevertheless, a lack of rehabilitation programmes continues to create a challenge
for proper sentence planning and implementation.
On 13 June, the committee charged with the selection of a ne w Director
General of the Kosovo Correctional Service shortlisted four candidates for
interviews. Interviews were conducted on 27 and 28 June, but resulted in a
non-transparent process owing to the fact that fewer than three candidates
participated in the interviews. Later, however, a third candidate, who had announced
that he would not participate, was interviewed. None of the candidates reached the
necessary threshold for selection. On 3 July, the Ministry of Justice officially
cancelled the process. EULEX has serious concerns about the selection process. It
strongly recommends a review of the selection criteria before the vacancy is
re-advertised owing to concerns about the qualification requirements.
On 19 April, the Kosovo authorities launched a strategy and action plan for
protection from domestic violence, covering the period 2016 -2020, whose drafting
process EULEX contributed to. At the launch event, the Minister of Justice
presented the strategy and announced that a new national coordinator for dom estic
violence had been appointed. This is an important step in combating domestic and
gender-based violence.
In May, EULEX finalized its assessment of a strategic development plan of the
Kosovo police, covering the period 2016-2020. It shared the plan with the General
Director of the police, who will use it to drive further improvements in appropriate
areas. EULEX analysed the annual plans of the regional directorate of police for
2016 and 2017 for quality and compliance with the strategic development pla n and
the annual plans of the Kosovo police at the central level for 2016 and 2017. While
the plans of the police at the central level represent appropriate instruments for
improving police work, an assessment of the annual plans of the regional directorat e
of police demonstrated that implementation at the regional level is often inadequate,
lacking depth and a common standard approach.
In response to the repeated attacks and potentially ethnically motivated
incidents in North Mitrovica since the beginning of the year, EULEX mentored the
Kosovo police regional directorate in North Mitrovica on the current investigations
and advised it on proactive investigative options and preventive activities. It also
facilitated operational coordination and cooperation b etween the police in North and
South Mitrovica. On both sides, EULEX observed a tangible interest in working
together effectively.
Together with the Kosovo police, which, as the first security responder,
deployed approximately 6,000 people on the day of the election for the
parliamentary elections on 11 June, EULEX and KFOR fulfilled their respective
roles as second and third security responders. Upon the request by the Kosovo
police to ensure high visibility and act as a second security responder in
Leposavić/Leposaviq in case of need, EULEX deployed one platoon of the formed
police unit in that area, while two additional platoons remained on standby at the
Mitrovica logistics base. In the framework of elections, EULEX provided security,
including close protection in the north, and security situation awareness; logistical
and administrative support to the European Union election observation mission. The
observation mission also provided logistical support, such as equipment and
vehicles, and limited situation awareness to OSCE staff deployed in the north.
17-12547

13/17

S/2017/640

The Mission advised Kosovo authorities on policing matters at the strategic
level before, during and after the day of the election. During the pre -election phase,
EULEX intensified its monitoring, mentoring and advising of the Kosovo police and
held daily meetings with the station command teams at the Graçanica/Gračanica and
Leposavić/Leposaviq police stations, assessing the security situation and potential
election-related incidents. In addition, it engaged in an initial assessment of 33
election-related incidents recorded by the Kosovo police and conducted monitoring,
mentoring and advising activities in 21 of those.
On 28 June, 1,500 participants, including Serbian politicians, gathered at the
Gračanica/Graçanicë monastery and the Gazimestan site for the annual Vidovdan
Day/Saint Vitus Day celebration. EULEX provided advice to the Kosovo police
during the development and execution of its operational plan, assessing the
performance of the police as professional and well planned. The celebration was
held without any security incidents. As a result of the clashes and security incidents
in connection with the Vidovdan Day/Saint Vitus Day celebration in 2012, the
Kosovo police have improved their operations continuously year-on-year,
culminating in their professional performance in 2017.
As a follow-up to a study visit to the United Kingdom by a senior delegation
from Kosovo in March — organized by EULEX in partnership with an international
customs liaison office in the United Kingdom and the United States Department of
State — the Kosovo authorities set up a working group to review the National Centre
for Border Management. The goal of the Centre is to provide Kosovo with the
technical capacity for collating, analysing and disseminating information and to assist
the border agencies in fighting corruption and cross-border and organized crime.
The annual review of the integrated border management plan was completed
and finalized in June, at a workshop in Tirana, with funding from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, before its presentation to the
integrated border management executive board for approval. As an official member
of the working group tasked with updating the plan, EULEX submitted comments
on its final draft.
Following the decisions reached within the framework of the European Union facilitated dialogue regarding the implementation of the freedom of movement
agreement of 2011, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo, in consultation with
the Minister for Dialogue, has drafted two administrative instructions, one concerning
the extension of KS licence plates and the other on the specific documentation and
evidence needed for citizens to prove their identity. Both have be en presented to and
are currently awaiting signature by the Minister of the Interior.
On 21 April, a major step forward was taken when, based on the
recommendations of EULEX, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo decided to
allow the 1,239 vehicles that have had temporary registration plates since October
2012 to be registered with RKS and KS licence plates issued by the authorities of
Kosovo without a requirement for the owners to pay a customs fee.
Some progress was also made with regard to the implementation of the sticker
regime that had been agreed in September 2016 to cover the acronyms “RKS” and
“SRB” and the coat of arms on those licence plates with white stickers. Owing to
the prolonged tender procedure for the supplier of the stickers, howe ver, there are
still delays.

3.

Other key issues
Nothing significant to report.

14/17

17-12547

S/2017/640

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
Following the referral of the rules of procedure and evidence of the Chambers
to the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court on 27 March, the Specialist
Chamber issued its first judgment, on 26 April, and then, after a revision of some
provisions by the Plenary of Judges, a final judgment was delivered on 28 June,
holding, unanimously, that the revised rules are not inconsistent with chapter II of
the Constitution with respect to fundamental rights and freedoms. The President of
the Specialist Chambers highlighted that the decision of the Specialist Chamber of
the Constitutional Court guarantees that the rules embrace the highest human rights
standards and that the rules ensure a robust system for the protection of individuals
who may be at risk on account of their participation in the proceedings before the
Specialist Chambers. On 5 July, the rules of procedure and evidence entered into
force. The Specialist Chambers are now fully judicially operational and there are no
legal impediments to receiving any filings or indictments.

17-12547

15/17

S/2017/640

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 July 2017)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Finland

1

Germany

1

Hungary

2

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 July 2017)

16/17

Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

17-12547

S/2017/640

17-12547

17/17
