TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 14 AUGUST 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1500)

,........,....................

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1500

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDREDTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).

MEETING
14 August 1969, at 4 p.m.

adopted. I should also like to point out that, in my capacity
as President of this body, I definitely cannot allow direct or
indirect attacks to be levelled against its authority and
dignity. This is one of the principal organs of the United
Nations, on which Member States have conferred primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; moreover, they have agreed that in carrying
out its duties, the Security Council acts on their behalf,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
AIgeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and ‘Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 500)

3. The Council will now continue its consideration of the
item on the agenda.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated I2 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9385).

4. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Once again, in a
pattern that is now tragically familiar, this Council has met
to consider charges of acts of violence and counter-violence
in the Middle East-this time along the frontier between
Israel and Lebanon.

3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9387).

5. I am sure that every member of the Council regrets, as
my Government does, the events that have led to the
convening of this meeting. It is not alone the death and
suffering inflicted in such incidents that must arouse our
concern, but the far greater tragedy that they portend-if,
as we have reason to fear, the accumulation of them should
gradually undermine the hope we all cherish for a lasting
peace in the Middle East.

Adoption of the agenda
i’%e agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

6. As members of the Council well know, my Government
has been engagedfor many months, both here in the United
Nations four-Power talks and elsewhere, in strenuous
diplomatic efforts to support Ambassador Jarring in his
task of promoting agreement on a peaceful settlement in,
accordance with the Council’s unanimous resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. These efforts are
continuing and will continue. We look forward hopefully in
this connexion to the expected presence here at the United
Nations in September of the Foreign Ministers of the
parties and of the four Powers.

Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Repre’ sentative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9387)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the previous decision of the Council, $ shall now
invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take
places at the Council table.

7. I need hardly stress how important it is that a
favourable atmosphere be created and maintained as an
integral part of this crucial diplomatic effort for peace in
the Middle East, To such an atmosphere we, the Security
Council, must make our essential contribution; and above
all, the parties must make theirs.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the Council
table.

8. It is in the light of that overriding necessity that mY
delegation views the specific incidents on the IsraelLebanon border which it is now the Council’s task to
consider.

2. The PRESIDENT (transtated from Spanish): Before the
Council begins its discussion on the item before US this
afternoon, I should like, as President, to appeal to the
members of the Council and the representatives who have
been invited to participate in our deliberations to try to
adhere as closely as possible to the agenda which has been

9. Our task is, unfortunately, not made easier by the fact
that we have no impartial report on the facts of the events
1

complained of. No United Nations observers watch the
Israel-Lebanon border, and thus the reports on which we
must rely are primarily those of the parties themselveswhich, as is common in such cases, do not agree in all
particulars.

15. Let me emphasize once again that this general deterio.
ration of the cease-fire cannot fail to make still more
difficult the supreme objective which this Council has long
since proclaimed for the Middle East: a just and lasting
peace. In responsible realism the fact must be faced thal
these recurrent incidents of violence not only inflict death
and suffering on many people, but also further darken th’a
atmosphere in which the diplomacy of peace, pursuant to
this Council’s unanimous mandate, must be pursued.

10. To supply this deficiency, I would venture to suggest
that the Governments of Israel and Lebanon consider the
possibility of stationing United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization Observers along the Israel-Lebanon border.
This step would not only provide a means of obtaining
impartial reports on events in that area; it might also help
to prevent some of the incidents and misunderstandings
that have led to the present situation. In this way it would,
I believe, serve the interests of the parties as well as of this
Council.

16. The overriding question, therefore, is: How can this
ominous trend be reversed? How can the atmosphere he
improved? Clearly, as I said at the outset, it can be done
only by a process to which both the Security Council and.
above all, the parties themselves must contribute.
17. The Security Council’s contribution can best be made
not by attempting the inevitably contentious business of
apportioning degrees of guilt or of responsibility among the
parties, but rather by resolutely insisting on the main
necessity: that the integrity ‘of the cease-fire be restored.
that all violence in the area be stopped, and that all
concerned carry out their obligations to that end.

11. Even in the absence of such impartial reports, however, it is clear from the statements of the parties
themselves that violence has been resorted to in recent days
from both sides of the Israel-Lebanon cease-tire line. From
the Lebanese side a series of cross-border raids, mining
incidents, and other commando-type attacks has been
carried out, apparently by irregular forces. These have been
answered from Israel’s side by an air attack in considerable
strength, presumably planned by the Government and
executed by the regular armed forces of Israel. There have
been civilian casualties on both sides, including several
civilian fatalities in the Lebanese area attacked by Israel.

18. And the essential contribution of the parties on both
sides is clearly and simply, in the spirit of their Charter
obligations and their own highest interests, to heed and
comply promptly with such a call from this Council,
19. In this way all concerned can and must establish the
indispensable atmosphere in which the search for peace,
which is the supreme need for all the nations and peoples of
the Middle East, can go forward with new hope of success.

12. This is by now a familiar story-tragically
familiar. The
dangerous spiral of violence and counter-violence in the
Middle East has gone through one more cycle, leaving
behind it new death and suffering, new bitterness and
disillusion, new burdens on those whose task is to make
peace.

20. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from Retrlrl:
We have already had more than one occasion here to
condemn the bombing of civilian population centres. Toda!,
we are again meeting to consider the situation created as a
result of the air attack launched on 11 August by the Isracii
air force against civilian villages in southern Lebanon.
According to the information supplied by the Lebanese
authorities, that attack left four dead and three wounded
among the civilian population,

13. The attitude of my Government in this situation is
well known. As representatives of the United States have
stated in the Security Council and elsewhere on so many
occasions, we oppose all resort to violence, from whatever
source, contrary to the cease-fire resolutions of this Council,
In the present instance, whatever the precise facts and
whatever justification is advanced for Israel’s assault upon
the territory and people of Lebanon, we cannot condone
this act which flagrantly violates the cease-fire and which,
in addition, has struck both the armed and the unarmed,
the guilty and the innocent alike. Similarly, while acknowledging Lebanon’s difficulties in controlling the actions of
irregular forces within its boundaries, we cannot condone
the attacks from that side of the line, nor can we
completely exonerate the Lebanese Government from
responsibility for them. In our view, this incident cannot
fairly be compared to the Beirut Airport incident of
December 1968, when Lebanon was attacked in response to
an earlier incident which had taken place outside the area
and for which no responsibility could be attached to the
Lebanese Government.

!

21. My delegation cannot but deplore most strongly this
action committed at the very time when efforts are being
made to try to reduce the tension in the Middle East and al
last achieve a final solution of this painful problem.
22. We know that Lebanon is a country firmly attached to
peace and one which has always shown moderation in this
conflict rending the Middle East. I must state here that my
Government is opposed to any use of violence for the
settlement of international problems and particularly t*
any acts of reprisal. It has always asked and still asks with
the same insistence that weapons be set aside SO that Ihe
efforts currently under way may be successful. My Government considers that this is in the interests of all the parties
involved in the Middle East. We particularly condemn Ihe
bombing of civilian populations. We have already said this
here and we say it again.

14. On a larger scale, our attitude towards this incident is
applicable to the situation now prevailing along the entire
cease-fire line from Lebanon to Suez. As we ail know, acts
of violence, of attack and retaliation, have by now become
a common occurrence in every sector of the cease-fire line.

23. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Again we have Witnessed
another act of aggression committed by Israeli armed forces
2

against.the civilian population of Arab territories under the
well-known slogans of “self-defence”, “retaliation”, “deterrence”. This latest attack, on villages in southern Lebanon,
by the Israeli Air Force, using napalm bombs, rockets and
machine-guns, claimed innocent lives and caused considerable damage.

Pure and simple aggression and has lost all the noble
meaning it used to have. My delegation is of the firm
opinion that the right of self-defence belongs solely to
those who are fighting for their freedom and independence,
who sacrifice their homes, their welfare, and even their
lives, for the liberation’ of their fatherland from foreign
occupation and oppression.

24, Not long ago members of the Council were engagedin
examining another unprovoked attack by Israel on the
International Airport at Beirut, which resulted in a multimillion-dollar !oss in, and damage to, civilian properties and
installations. There is no need to repeat that there have
been more than numerous attacks by Israeli forces against
Arab territories since the cease-fire. The Council is well
aware of them, and it has adopted several resolutions
condemning those aggressive actions.

28. In Hungary many people of the Jewish belief have
ranked among the heroes of the resistance against nazi
barbarism; but they are among the first to dissociate
themselves from the aggressive and belligerent policy
Of the
present Israeli ruling circles. The representative of Israel
cannot avoid condemnation of this policy by any dramatic
and sinister reference to them.

25. It is surprising, even ironic, however, that in spite of
those facts and because of Israel’s stubborn defiance of
resolutions of the Security Council, Israel never fails to
emphasize the responsibilities of the Arab countries to
comply with the provisions of the cease-fire. Such an
argument can be seen again in document S/9387, as well as
in the dramatic statement made yesterday [1499th meetijtg/ by the representative of Israel.

29. AS has been stated several times by my delegation in
this Council, the Government of the Hungarian People’s
Republic stands for a political solution of the Middle East
problem, including withdrawal of Israeli military forces
from the occupied Arab territories. We are convinced, and
history proves it, that the policy of force does not pay in
the long run. The policy of force and deterrence which
Israel applies in the Middle East will only lead to
disaster-above all, for Israel itself-and at the same time it
seriously endangers world peace and security.

26. But questions do arise, as usual. Whose actions may be
said to have been taken in self-defence: those of the
oppressed, or those of the oppressor? Who is keeping
foreign territories occupied, forcing the indigenous population to flee or surrender? Who has been rejecting even the
idea of a political solution of the Middle East problem and,
at the same time, demanding the rights of the conqueror in
the area? And, finally, a very important question: does
Israel consider itself committed to the same cease-fire to
which it says Lebanon is committed?

30. Therefore, my delegation calls upon the Security
Council unanimously to condemn Israel for its continuous
aggressive policy and practice, the latest example of which
is the present premeditated military attack on Lebanese
civilian targets, The Council is expected to force the
Government of Israel by effective measures to abide
without delay by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967, and 262(1968) or 31 December
1968, as well as other relevant resolutions in this regard.

27. Just a few weeks ago, the Council examined the
complaint of Zambia concerning the Portuguese military
intrusion into Zambian territory. Among the arguments of
the reuresentative of the intruder was also a reference to
“self-defence”. We can only regretfully notice that for
certain Powers this expression has become a cover-up for

31. The PRESIDENT (,translated j?‘om Spanish): If I10
other representative wishes to speak at this time, I shall
adjourn
this meeting and reconvene the Council tomorrow,
Friday, at 10.30 a.m.

A

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNtTED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

be obtoined

may
bookslore

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

or write

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT
Les

SE PROCURER

publications

des

dlporitoirer
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

KAK

IlOnYYMTb

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions

Unier

CONSEGUIR

Los publicacioner
en todos porter
Ventor,
Nuevo

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

$U.S.

dons

les

de votre

libroiries

libroirie

et

les

q gences

ou odresrez-vou.s

06bEAHHEHHblX

b:

HAuHfi

JIOilillO liyIlllT6
II IillII;lilll~IX
3I&l'a31tliIiX
II
CllpIillliII
06 Il:l~t3llIlllX
ll IIRIIIC~I I~lIII;I~1IOY
OprannnaqaH
~~~~I~II~II~II~X
IIalyii.
Cel;irm
no
&NeB%

DE LAS NACIONES

los Nocioner
mundo.
Consulte
o Ginebra.

Price:

vente

ouprks
ou Get&e.

UNIES

Ih[llii
hlO~tlTC

PUBLICACIONES
de

del
York

en

OPi-AHM3A~MM

~h,JillllllI
O~trallll:lal~Illl
&hC,V(IIllClllll~lS
:II‘C'IITI'TII;IS
I10 Ill'cS
~l"lhIIIIX
,llIlW.
WLXl:tllllC
ll.lIl
UlIIUllTC
110 il;ll)CCJ':
lIpOJa;liC
II:l~~IlIljl,
IIbIO-nOl)Ii
Ii.lII

COMO

sent

entier.
Informer’aous
des venter,
New York

C13AAHklR

DES NATIONS

Unidar
estcin
a su librero

0.50

UNIDAS

en vento en librerior
o dirijose
o: Nocioner

(or equivalent

in other

y cosas distribuidoros
Unidas,
Secciirn

currencies)

de

82185-December

i972-2,050
