144

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
4. Strongly urges ali Governments to make special
efforts to increase the resources of the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, including voluntary contributions through the United Nations Pledging Conference
for Development Activities, so as to enable it to respond
more fully to the ptiority requirements of the Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel;
5. Endorses the urgent request addressed by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1980/51
of 23 J uly I 980 to ali U nited N ations organs, agencies
and programmes to increase their assistance through
joint undertakings with the United N ations SudanoSahelian Office, in response to requests from the
Governments of the Sudano-Sahelian countries, for the
implementation of their recovery, rehabilitation and development programmes;
6. Ca/Is upon ali Governments, agencies of the
United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations,
prívate organizations and individuals to continue to respond favourably, either bilaterally or through the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to requests for assistance from the Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel and
from the Committee itself;
7. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office to continue to strengthen its close co-operation with
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel with a view to the implementation of
the recovery and rehabilitation programme and of
priority projects;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme and the Economic and Social Council, on the
implementation of the medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region.

84th p/enary meeting
5 December 1980

35/87.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of the Central African Republic

The General Assembly,
Deep/y concerned about the serious damage suffered
by the economic and social infrastructure of the Central
African Republic,
Affirming the urgent need for international action to
assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its efforts for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development of the country,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member
States about the situation in the Central African Republic and their interest in the expeditious return of the
country to normal conditions of tife and in its reconstruction and development,
Noting the statements made by the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Central

African Republic to the General Assembly on 12 October 1979 174 and 9 October 1980, 175
l. Notes with satisfaction the efforts exerted by the
Government and people of the Central A frican Republic for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
2. Urgently appea/s to ali Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and international economic and financia!
institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of the Central African Republic;
3. Requests Member States and the organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to grant
special treatment to the Central African Republic;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an international programme of financia!, technical and
material assistance to the Central African Republic to
enable it to meet its long-term and short-term needs with
respect to reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular
the United Nations Development Programme, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Fund for Agricultura! Development,
the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund-to increase their current and
future programmes of assistance to the Central African
Republic, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they havc
made available to assist that country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to open a special
account for the Central African Republic, within the
framework of the United Nations Trust Fund for Special Economic Assistance Programmes, for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the
Central African Republic and urges Member States and
international financia) institutions to contribute generously to that account;
7. A/so requests the Secretary-General to dispatch a
mission to the Central African Republic with a view to
holding consultations with the Government on the additional assistance which it needs for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country and
to communicate the report of the mission to the international community;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that adequate financia! arrangements are made for the
organization of an effective international programme of
assistance to the Central African Republic and for the
mobilization of international assistance;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultura! Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of the Central A frican Repub1" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session.
Plenary Meetings, 32nd meeting, paras. 40-129.
111
/bid.. Thirty-fijih Session. Plenary Meetings. J 1st meeting.
paras. 49-66.

V.

- -

-

lic and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 August 1981;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the assistance granted to the Central
African Republic;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
situation in the Central African Republic under review
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/88.

145

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-

-----------

-

- --

(b) To mob1lize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financia!, technical and material
assistance to Benin;
(e) To ensure that adequate financia! and budgetary
arrangements are made to organize an international
programme of assistance to Benin to mobilize that
assistance;
(d) To report to the Economic and Social Council at
its second regular session of 1981 on the progress
achieved in the mobilization of assistance to Benin and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

Special economic assistance to Benin
35/89.

The General Assembly,
Having considered, under the item entitled "Special
economic and disaster relief assistance", the request of
13 October 1980 of the Government of Benin, 17 '
Recalling the provisions of Security Council resolutions 404 (1977) of 8 February 1977, 405 ( 1977) of
14 April 1977 and 419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, and
in particular paragraph 5 of resolution 419 ( 1977) in which
the Council appealed to ali States and all appropriate international organizations, including the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, to assist Benin to repair the
damage caused by the act of aggression,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General of
29 September 1978 on assistance to Benin, 177
Noting that, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 419
( 1977), the Security Council decided to rema in seized of
the question,
Having heard the statement made by the representative of Benin before the Second Committee on
4 November 1980, on the serious economic problems of
that country, 17 "
Taking note of the special situation of Benin, which is
among the least developed countries,
1. Appeals to Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financia!,
material and technical assistance to Benin so as to help
that country overcome its financia) and economic difficulties;

2. Requests the competent organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Benin, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to assist that country;
3.

Requests the Secretary-General:
To take steps to re-evaluate the specific economic problems encountered by Benin and, in consultation with the Government, to establish an international programme of assistance to meet the specific
economic and development needs of the country;
(a)

'" A/35/538-S/14219 ..
177
Ofjicial Records of the Securily Council, Thirty-third Year. Supplement for Ju/y, August and September /978, document S/12873.
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-Jifth Session.
Second Committee, 37th meeting, paras. 48-59.

Assistance to Djibouti 17 "

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/124 of 14 December 1979,
in which it called upan the international community to
provide Djibouti with ample and· appropriate assistance
to enable it to cope with its special economic hardship,
Reca/ling a/so its resolutions 32/93 of 13 December
1977 and 33/132 of 19 December 1978, in which it, inter
alia, expressed its deep concern at the situation prevailing in Djibouti and strongly appealed to Member
States and to the international institutions concerned to
give effective and sustained assistance to that country
and requested the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective
programme of financia!, technical and material assistance to Djibouti,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 12 September 1980, 18 º to which was annexed the report of the mission which he sent to Djibouti in response
to General Assembly resolution 34/124,
Noting with concern that the prolonged drought has
caused a heavy loss of livestock, depriving a large number of people of their livelihood, and that the influx of
refugees, together with the drought, has put serious
strains on the fragile economic, social and administrative infrastructure of the country,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to organize an international economic assistance programme for Djibouti;
2. Endorses ful/y the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General; 180
3. Notes with appreciation the assistance already
provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States and
organizations of the United Nations system;
4. Draws the attention of the international community to the critica( economic situation confronting
Djibouti, to the assistance immediately needed for the
victims of the drought and to the list of urgent shortterm and long-term projects submitted by the Government of Djibouti for financial assistance as described in
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
N ations system and international economic and financia) institutions to provide Djibouti with ample and
appropriate assistance, bilaterally and multilaterally,
1

"

1 11
'

See also sect. X. 8.3. decision 35/423.
AIJ5/415.
