UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1838th

MEETING:

18 AUGUST

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1838) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
applications of the Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of
Sao Tome and Principe and the People’s Republic of Mozambique for membership in the United Nations (S/11806). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1838

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
---- Documents.of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the. supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1838th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Mr. Shizuo SAITO

President:

(Japan).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
United Republic
of Cameroon,
United Repubiic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l838)

1.

Adoption

2.

Admission of neti Members:
- -~
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of
New Members concerning the applications of the
Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the People’s
Republic of Mozambique
for membership in the
United Nations (S/l 1806)
The meeting

of the agenda.

was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission
of New
Members concerning the applications of the Republic
of Cape Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao
Tome and Principe and the People’s Republic of
Mozambique to Membership
in the United Nations
(S/11806)

1. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of a nonmember of the Council, the representative
of Portugal, has addressed a letter to me requesting that
he be invited to participate in the Council’s debate
on the item on today’s agenda.
2. In conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, that is, Article 31, and in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure and
the usual practice of the Council, I propose, if. there
is no objection, to invite the representative of Portugal to participate in the Council’s discussion without
the right to vote.
It is so decided.

18 Angust~lWS,

at-3 p.m.

3. In accordance with the usual practice, I invite
the representative
of Portugal to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
He will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is his turn to address the Council.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr.
Paixao (Portugal),
took the place reserved
at the side of the Council chamber.

Quintela
for him

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now consider the report of the Committee
on the
Admission of New Members, which is contained in
document S/11806. In paragraph 3 of that report the
Committee
recommends
to the Security Council -the adoption of-three--draft-resolutions.
In accordance
with the procedure agreed upon in the course of
prior consultations among all members of the Council, I propose, as the first order of business, to put
these three draft resolutions to the vote. If I hear
no objection I shall consider this procedure acceptable to the members of the Council.
5. Accordingly, I shall ask members of the Council
to vote first on draft resolution
A contained in
paragraph 3 of document S/11806, which relates to
the application of the Republic of Cape Verde for
admission to membership in the United Nations.
A vote was taken by show

of hands.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously’.

6. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now ask members to
vote on draft resolution B contained in paragraph 3
of document S/11806, which relates to the application
of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
for admission to membership in the United Nations.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously2.

7. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now proceed
to vote on draft resolution C, contained in paragraph 3
of document S/11806, which relates to the application
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique
for admission to membership.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was.adopted unanimously3.

8. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the provisions of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council, I shall immediately
request
the Secretary-General
to forward these recommendations to the General Assembly.

of racist oppression. It is an emphatic reminder to
the forces of colonialism
and racism in southern
Africa refusing to recognize the ultimate futility of
their oppressive policies that no force is strong
enough to overcome the determination
of colonial
peoples to gain their freedom and independence.

9. A number of members of the Security Council
have asked to be allowed to speak following the
voting, and I shall now call on them.

15. More than a warning to the colonial oppressors in southern Africa, the entry into the United
Nations of these new States will serve as a symbol
of eventual victory and as an incentive to the valiant
fighters in Zimbabwe,
Namibia,
and South Africa
who are so bravely struggling to free their countries
of the brutalities
of racial domination,
oppression
and exploitation.

10. Mr. SANDERS (Guyana): It is a great pleasure
for me, on behalf of the people, the Government
and the delegation of Guyana to welcome into membership of the United Nations the three States of the
Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People’s Republic
of Mozambique.
To us, the accession by these three
States to membership of this Organization is another
step forward towards the achievement
of the goal
of universality
of membership.
We are satisfied,
after examining the applications, that the three States
fulfil the conditions
for membership
required by
Article 4 of the Charter, which states that:

16. In this context, Guyana notes with great satisfaction the prospect that the independence of Mozambique will mean stronger sanctions against the racist
regime in Zimbabwe. Such action would be all the
more commendable,
given the likely impact that it
would have on the economy of the fledgling nation
of Mozambique.
The international
community
can
do no less than take appropriate measures to assist
in alleviating the burden of this principled sacrifice.

“Membership...
is open to all... peace-loving
States which accept the obligations contained in
the... Charter and, in the judgement
of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.”

17. So not only does my Government see the accession to membership
of these three new States as
another step towards universality of membership
of
the United Nations, but we see it also as a victory
for the struggle for human dignity and a struggle
which is far from over.

We take note of the solemn declarations which the
three applicant States have made to the effect that
they accept the obligations of the Charter and that
they undertake to carry out those obligations.

18. My Government
supports the struggle against
colonialism
and racism wherever in the world it is
taking place. We believe that the people in any
State have the right to govern themselves and to be
the masters of their own destiny.

11. My Government
believes
that the United
Nations can function well only if its Members are
guided in their conduct by the principles of the Charter,
respect the resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council, and fulfil their basic obligations as Members.

19. But while we welcome these three new States
into our membership, we should pause to reflect that
the struggle for human dignity and independence continues in the remaining enclaves of racism and colonialism. It is a struggle in which all mankind must
be involved, and therefore it is a struggle which
must rightly concern this Organization.
It is to us a
source of gratification
that the majority
of the
Members
of the United
Nations
have pledged
themselves to full support -for and solidarity with the
oppressed peoples of South Africa, of Namibia,
of Zimbabwe and of the territories which were under
the domination
of Portugal.
Some, including
my
own Government
provide
moral
and material
assistance to these oppressed peoples, and we should
not rest until the evils of colonialism
and racism
have been tracked down like beasts to their lairs,
utterly destroyed and buried so that they no longer
haunt us on the face of this earth.

12. We have followed the heroic struggle of the
peoples of Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe
and Mozambique
to achieve their independence
from the colonialist yoke, and we are satisfied that
they are fully qualified for membership of this Organization.
13. That colonialist
yoke harnessed the people of
Cape Verde for over 500 years, and the peoples of
Sao Tome and Principe and Mozambique
for nearly
500 years. It was half a millenium
of colonialism,
which saw the worst excesses of the evil of man’s
domination by man.
14. The triumphant struggle of the peoples of Cape
Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and Mozambique
for their independence is yet another warning to the
white minority
regimes of southern Africa of the
inevitability
of the victory of the oppressed peoples
still under colonial domination
over the brutal forces

20. Our own freedom to rule ourselves without
interference is meaningless while there are peoples
that continue to live in colonial bondage and suffer
2

the brutality and inhumanity
of racism. I therefore
take this opportunity,
in welcoming these three new
States into membership
of the United Nations, to
call on all Governments
to join in the struggle for
putting an end to human degradation in the remaining
colonial Territories.
We cannot afford to be complacent.

is not far off when all of Africa, from the Cape of
Good Hope to the western Sahara, will be free”.
26. The problem
of the final abolition
of the
last bastions of colonialism
and racism throughout
the world is one of the most important
and most
acute problems of the present day which requires
an immediate solution. Only the complete eradication
of the vestiges of colonialism
and racism can put
an end to the sufferings experienced
by tens of
millions of people who are still living in the grip of
colonial enslavement and bring about the possibility
of creating the necessary conditions for successful
social, economic and cultural development
of the
presently oppressed peoples and increasing their
well-being.

21. As I said, it is my great pleasure to welcome
into our midst these three States and to pledge to
them the support of my Government
as they play
their part in the councils of the United Nations.
22. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from
Russian):
The delegation of the Soviet Union voted in favour of, the
admission
to United
Nations membership
of the
young African States of the Republic of Cape Verde,
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique.
The delegation of the Soviet Union upheld the requests of the
Governments
of those countries, since their applications were in full accord with the requirements
laid down by the United Nations Charter. In the
applications
of these countries it is emphasized
that the People’s
Republic
of Mozambique,
the
Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe have assumed the obligations incumbent upon them under the Charter and
have solemnly pledged to fulfil them.

27. The completion
of the decolonization
process,
is at the same time, fully in accord with the interests
of all mankind,
since, as the shameful colonialist
and racist blots disappear from our planet, the number
of potential hotspots which are so explosive and so
fraught with threat to international
security will
equally diminish.
The resolute struggle for the
liquidation
of colonialism,
the cessation of colonial
oppression and the granting of comprehensive
support and aid to those peoples that are struggling
for their national independence
and liberation
and
political and economic independence have been the
focus of attention of the foreign policies and actions
of the Soviet Union from the very days when it was
first founded. This derives from the very nature of
the Soviet socialist system and Leninist
foreign
policy principles and, finally, is part and parcel of
our communist philosophy, which rejects any forms
of social and national repression and inequality.

23. These three fledgling African States were born
as a result of a lengthy and heroic struggle on the
part of their peoples for their national liberation.
Many years of selfless struggle on the part of the
patriots of those countries for their freedom and
independence
and also the downfall of the fascist
regime in Portugal led to the destruction of the last
colonial empire. Its downfall dealt a trangible blow
to imperialism
and colonialism
in Africa and qualitatively changed the situation in that continent and
provided fresh opportunities
for those forces that are
struggling for liberty and progress for the African
peoples.

28. In pursuit of its policy of comprehensive
support for national liberation movements, the Soviet
Union in 1960, in the United Nations took the
initiative of promoting the adoption’ by the General
Assembly of the Declaration
on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
[resolution
15/4 (XV)] and was an active participant
in the elaboration
of a number of other decisions
of the United Nations which were aimed at the
eradication of colonialism.
In United Nations bodies
and in many other international
forums representatives of the Soviet Union have supported and continue to support the adoption of effective steps to
remove the vestiges of colonialism,
racism and

24. A major contribution
to the cause of national
liberation of African peoples was the victory of the
Mozambique
people in a selfless anti-colonial
struggle, a victory they won under the leadership of the
Mozambique Liberation Front, with the support of the
democratic
and anti-fascist movement
in Portugal
and progressive forces throughout the world.

apartheid.

25. “The downfall of Portuguese colonialism
is a
major landmark in the struggle for the complete and
final abolition of colonial slavery on the African continent”. This was stated in a speech made in Berlin
to celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary
of the
formation of the German Democratic
Republic by
the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L.I. Brezhnev, who said: “We are convinced that the day

29. The delegation
of the Soviet Union would
express its profound conviction
that the People’s
Republic
of Mozambique,
the Republic
of Cape
Verde and the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe will not only become firmly entrenched
in the family of independent African States but also
become full-fledged and active Members of the United
Nations, and that they will make their worthy contribution
to the activities
of the United Nations
3

as far as concerns
of colonialism.

_

the cause of the final liquidation

it and exchange diplomatic
level.”

missions at the embassy

30. In the congratulations
expressed
by the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union
to the Heads of African States on the occasion of
African Liberation Day it was stated:

35. Mr. Podgomy’s
message -to the SecretaryGeneral of the PAIGC (Partido Africano da Independencia de Guine e Cape Verde), Aristedes Pereira,
President of the Republic of Cape Verde, stated

“An important factor in contemporary
international developments
is the ever-growing participation of African countries in the struggle for the
consolidation
of peace and for sound security.
The serious changes which have occurred in the
world arena towards detente are helping to provide
effective and equal participation
of all countries
and peoples in world politics.”

“The gaining of independence
by the people
of your country is a tremendous political victory
which has been won under the leadership of the
African Independence
Party of Guinea and Cape
Verde, with the support of progressive forces
throughout the world. It marks a successful struggle by the African peoples to eliminate the final
bastions of colonialism
and racism on the African
continent.”

31. The fact that today we are considering
the
applications
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of Cape-Verde-.anddthe
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to be
admitted, to United Nations membership
is a clear
indication that this process is gathering momentum
and that liberation
from colonialism,
racism and
apartheid
will triumph in the end.

The Soviet Union declared also its recognition
of
the Republic .of Cape Verde as a sovereign, independent State and expressed its readiness to establish
diplomatic relations with it.
36. On the occasion of the proclamation
of independence by the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe, Mr. ,N.V. Podgomy,
sent a message
to President Pinto da Costa which said in particular:

32. The Soviet Union has always been on the side
of those peoples that have struggled against colonialism and neocolonialism
and has been in favour
of the equal participation
of all countries in world
politics, for sound and durable peace and security
for peoples. This is the aim pursued by the struggle of the Soviet State for international
detente,
in order to give this process an irreversible character,
in order to create favourable conditions for the free
and independent
development
of all peoples, conditions which are not darkened by any. military
threat.

“In accordance ‘with its unswerving policy of
equality and friendship among States, and also
guided by the principle of’ self-determination
of
peoples, the Soviet Union declares its recognition
of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe as a sovereign State and its readiness to
establish diplomatic relations with it.”
37. It is with a feeling of profound satisfaction that
the Soviet delegation supported the decision of the
Security Council to recommend
that the General
Assembly
admit
the new independent
African
States, namely, the People’s Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, to membership
of the United Nations. We express our conviction
that these countries will occupy a worthy place
in the ranks of the full-fledged
Members
of our
Organization and we shall be very pleased to welcome
them to these halls.

33. The Soviet delegation would once again like
to take this opportunity
to congratulate the peoples
and Governments
of the People’s
Republic
of
Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde and the
Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe
on gaining their independence.
34. As stated in the congratulations
of the President
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet
Union, by Mr. N.V. Podgorny,
to the President
of the Liberation Front of Mozambique and President
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
Mr. Samora
Machel:

38. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretcrtion
from French):
In unreservedly
supporting the draft resolutions in,document
S/11806,
whereby the Security Council has just recommended
that the General Assembly admit the Republic of
Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe -and the People’sRepublic
of Mozambique to membership
in the United Nations,
my
delegation wishes to indicate that we are devoted to
the principle
of universality
of our Organization,
for which we have always worked in this Council.

“The Soviet Union, faithful to its international
duty, has consistently-come
out-on the--side-of--the struggling people of Mozambique
and has given
them comprehensive
assitance and support. In
accordance with Lenin’s peace-loving policies and
the foreign policies of the Soviet Union, we have
declared our willingness to recognize the People’s
Republic of Mozambique
as a sovereign State and
our readiness to establish diplomatic relations with

39. We furthermore
wish to recognize unequivocally the peaceful character of the three new States
4

_.

/.

and their complete ability to assume the obligations
of membership
in the United Nations as provided
in the United Nations Charter. The important decision which the Council has just taken is in perfect
accord with the profound aspirations of the peoples
concerned and with their faith in the principles and
ideals contained in the Charter of our Organization
which are recognized by all. Internationally,
this is the
climax of their just struggle for freedom and justice.

frank and sincere co-ooeration that the Government
of the new regime of Portugal has so far maintained
with the leaders of the African liberation movements
so as to accelerate orderly accession to independence
for the Territories
which were under its administration.
46. In recalling this fortunate evolution
of Portugal’s African policy, my Chief of State, El Hadj
Ahmadou Ahidjo, indicated at the time that he congratulated
the new Portugal for the faith, speed,
scrupulous co-operation and realism that it had brought
to the decolonization
of Africa, an attitude which
enabled it to regain a full measure of esteem and
consideration in the concert of nations.

40. By voting in favour of these resolutions
my
delegation
wished to give concrete embodiment
to the natural friendship and solidarity that characterize relations between the Government
and the
people of the Cameroons and the Governments and
peoples of the States of Cape Verde, Sao Tome
and Principe, and Mozambique.

47. It is with these words of friendship and encouragement that my delegation expresses the hope that
the new regime of Portugal will be able to continue
unflaggingly
to assume its responsibilities
in the
decolonization
process which is under way so as to
maintain -intact the growing prestige’ which it at
present enjoys in our Organization.

41. It should be pointed out that these excellent
relations are drawn not only from obvious geographical factors and historical factors which are centuries
old but, above all, from our common aspirations for.
peace, our unconditional
devotion to the cause of
African unity, for the liberation
of our continent
from the yoke of colonialism,
neocolonialism
and
racism, and the will of our Governments to develop
their co-operation
on the basis of the principles of
sovereign
equality,
non-interference
in internal
affairs and mutual advantages.

48. Mr. HUANG
(China) (frunslatian
from Chinese): The Republic of Cape Verde, the People’s
Republic of Mozambique and the Democratic Republic
of Sao ‘Tome and Principe submitted
their applications for admission to membership
in the United
Nations on 21 July, 31 July and 13 August 1975,
respectively.
The Chinese delegation holds that in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter the People’s Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe are all
qualified for membership
in the United Nations.
We have therefore supported their applications.

42. It was in that brotherly spirit that the President
of the United
Republic
of Cameroon
recently
addressed
messages of congratulations
to his
colleagues of Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe,
and Mozambique
on the occasion of the accession
of their respective countries to independence.
We
shall reserve for the Minister for Foreign Relations
of Cameroon the privilege of reiterating those congratulations
when the three States are admitted to
membership
of the United Nations by the General
Assembly.

49. The people of Mozambique
are a people with a
glorious tradition of struggle. Over the past five centuries, they have never ceased their just struggles
against the Portuguese colonialist
domination
and
for national liberation.
In 1964, the Mozambican
people’s struggle for national liberation entered a new
stage of people’s armed struggle. Under the, leadership of FRELIMO
(Frente de LibertaGao de Mqambique) the heroic Mozambican
people went through
arduous and valiant armed struggles over a long
period, finally won the great victory of national
independence and solemnly proclaimed the establishment of the People’s Republic of Mozambique.

43. It is the firm hope of my delegation that, now
that they have become masters of their destiny, the
peoples of the three new republics will-be true partners
in the United Nations family and that their contribution to the solution of the grave challenges that
mankind faces will be appreciated by all States.
44. Furthermore,
assessing the vastness of the
urgent and crucial problems resulting from the devastations of war, prolonged
colonial exploitation
and
unfavourable
climatic conditions which the leaders
of the new countries must face at present, my
delegation sincerely hopes that the assistance which
our Organization already provides in this field will be
continued more vigorously than in the past in order
effectively to second the reconstruction efforts of the
Governments of the three new States.

50. Dealing a heavy blow at imperialism,
colonialism and racism, this victory has set an example
for the people in the non-independent
regions in
southern
Africa
to achieve
national
liberation
through people’s armed struggles. No doubt, it will
greatly encourage and push forward the struggles of
the peoples in those regions for national liberation.

45. My delegation
could
without justly expressing

51. The peoples of China and Mozambique
forged a profound militant friendship through

not end this statement
its appreciation
of the
5

have
their

-

prolonged common struggles. The Chinese people
sincerely rejoice at the victory and achievement
of
the Mozambican
people in realizing their national
independence.
We are deeply convinced that the
Government
and people of Mozambique,
under the
leadership of President Samora Machel, will win
new and greater victories in their struggle to consolidate their national independence
and build their
country.

uphold the applications
of the Republic
of Cape
Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and
Principe and the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
the Council has equally recognized the fitness of
these three States entering the international
community. The French delegation is gratified that this
is so, as we are equally gratified by the unanimity
with which the ‘Council took this decision.
57. We voted in favour of these three applications
for admission for reasons which have to do both
with the application
of international
law and the
friendship which we have for the peoples of Africa.

52. Following the independence
of Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde was officially proclaimed
on 5 July this year; shortly thereafter, on 12 July,
Sao Tome and Principe solemnly proclaimed its independence and established the Democratic Republic,
thereby terminating
the 5 century-old
Portuguese
colonialist domination in these regions. The independence of Cape Verde islands and of Sao Tome and
Principe is the result of the prolonged heroic struggles carried out wave upon wave by the peoples
there as well as a new victory of the hundreds of
millions
of African peoples in their unity against
imperialism
and colonialism.

58. The independence
of the Cape Verde islands,
as provided for by the agreements signed in Lisbon
on 18 December 1974, became effective on 5 July
1975. An identical process, following on the negotiations of 26 November
last, was initiated
in Sao
Tome and Principe on 12 July. The authorities of
both these States, henceforth endowed with interna-.
tional personality,
stated in the letter which they
addressed to the Secretary-General
that they would
assume the obligations
contained
in the United
Nations Charter and that they solemnly pledged to
fulfil these obligations. We have taken note of these
declarations and we are convinced that the Republic
of Cape Verde and that of Sao Tome and Principe
will scrupulously
honour the commitments
they
have thus undertaken;
we are no less convinced
that, apart from certain structural modifications
which
might be made necessary by certain
affinities
between Cape Verde and a neighbouring
country,
which would necessarily involve changes in the
representation
of one of them in New York, these
States will wish to a&m
the personality
which is
conferred upon them by the status of Member State
and which is defined by the Charter.

53. Since the beginning of this year, one African
state after another has become independent, and flags
of national independence have been hoisted one after
another on the militant land of Africa. This shows
that the African
people are marching
forward
victoriously
on the road of anti-imperialism
and
anti-colonialism
and that the African people’s unity
and struggle are growing daily in strength. The
situation in Africa is getting better and better. No
amount of plots and intrigues on the part of imperialism, colonialism
and hegemonism can hold back
the advance of the wheel of history in Africa.
54. The Chinese Government
and people will, as
always, firmly support the governments and peoples
of Mozambique,
Cape Verde and Sao Tome and
Principe in their just cause of eliminating
the colonialist forces, consolidating
their national independence and building their countries, and we sincerely
wish them new successes.

59. Mozambique,
for its part, became an independent and sovereign State on 25 June 1975. The
new Kamphumo
authorities
have also solemnly
asseverated their intention to discharge the obligations incumbent
upon all States seeking admission
to the United Nations. We have no doubt that this
country, endowed as it is with quite a considerable
economic and human potential,
will, after having
acquired its independence as a result of a loengthy
struggle, occupy in southern Africa a place which is
commensurate with its importance.

55. We believe that upon admission to membership in the United Nations, the People’s Republic
of Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde and
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
will make positive contributions
to the realization
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter together with all the other justice-upholding
Member States.
56.

60. Once all the conditions
prescribed
by the
Charter had been met for the admission of these
three States, the French delegation, faithful to the
principle of universality,
to which we should once
again like to reaffirm our devotion, could not but
vote in favour of the three applications
before the
Council. But other reasons also militated in favour
of our decision. The French Government,
which for
a number of years now has forged bounds of friendship with most of the countries of Africa, will be
pleased during our next session of the General

Mr.

LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
At this time last year the Security Council
decided in favour of the entry into the United
Nations of Guinea Bissau [resolution
356 (1974)],
the first country to accede to independence among
a group of Territories which for some time had been
claiming the right to choose their own destiny. In
today recommending
that the General Assembly

French):

6

Assembly to welcome the entry into the United
Nations of these three new States, two of which
are undoubtedly
modest in so far as their size and
population are concerned but which will, we are quite
certain, contribute to our Organization
in the same
noble and dynamic way as that to which the representatives of the African continent have accustomed us.

concerning the applications of the Republic of Cape
Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and
Principe, and the People’s Republic of Mozambique.
My delegation has found the. applications
in full
accordance with the requirements of the Charter and
has therefore joined in the Council’s recommendations to the General Assembly to admit them as
Members of the United Nations.

61. The French authorities have already marked the
value which they attach to entertaining
friendly
relations with those countries. On 9 July President
Giscard d’Estaing sent a message to the Head of
State of Sao Tome and Principe,
and we have
expressed the hope that diplomatic
relations will
be extablished with that country, towards which a
number of factors make us particularly sympathetic.
We have also informed the highest authorities
of
Cape Verde that we recognize the new State and that
the establishment
of diplomatic
relations
would
become the concrete embodiment of this recognition.

67. I should like to use this occasion to express
the special satisfaction of my Government
at now
seeing Mozambique
joining the United Nations, the
determination
of its people to shape its own destiny
having been crowned with success. Beginning in the
early sixties, Sweden co-operated with the liberation
movement
of Mozambique,
FRELIMO,
especially
in the field of education and health. Therefore, for a
number of years past, a solid basis has been laid for
the friendship between our peoples.
68. We take this opportunity
to welcome all the
three applicant
States
and look
forward
to
co-operating
with them in the future, convinced
that they will make essential contributions
to the
work of the United Nations.

62. Aware as we are of the economic difftculties
that these two countries will have to confront-I
am particularly
thinking of the drought which has
been affecting Cape Verde for a number of years
now-the
French Government
is prepared, as far as
it is concerned, and if it is their desire, to establish
co-operation
with them in order to promote satisfactory economic development to meet the needs of
the populations concerned. In view of the urgency of
the matter, food assistance is already under way in
order to supply Cape Verde.

69. Mr. CAVAGLIERI
(Italy):
My delegation
has welcomed the applications
presented by the
Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
for admission to membership
of the United Nations. We have found those applications to be in conformity
with the relevant paragraphs of the Charter and the rules of procedure
and we have been glad to vote in favour of the
admission to the United Nations of these three new
States.

63. We need hardly add that France is also ready
to forge diplomatic relations with Mozambique.
This
might make it possible for the sort of co-operation
to grow between the two States which could particularly affect the cultural, technical and economic
areas.

70. Italy
has already
recognized
these three
Republics, which have so recently proclaimed their
independence,
and has expressed its readiness to
establish friendly relations with each of them. I have
had several occasions to reaffirm the faith of my
country in the universality
of the United Nations.
The admission of these three States is therefore a
welcome addition to the present membership,
an
addition
aimed at maintaining
a close adherence
of our Organization
to the existing reality of the
international
community.

64. The French delegation would not wish to conclude its remarks without extending its warmest
congratulations
to the young States, to their leaders,
Mr. Aristides Pereira, President of the Republic
of Cape Verde, Mr. Manuel Costa Pinto, President
of the Republic of Sao Tome and Principe,
and
Mr. Samora Moises Machel, President of the Republic of Mozambique,
as well as to the peoples of
these three countries. We address to them our best
wishes for felicitous development.

71. My delegation trusts that the General Assembly
will confirm the recommendations
of this Council
so as to enable the representatives
of my country
to welcome these three new Member States very
soon in this forum.

65. Mr. HAMMARSKJGLD
(Sweden): My country
has always considered
universality
one of the
essential
cornerstones
of an effective
United
Nations. Thus it is with great satisfaction that we
note that another three States-all
of which Sweden
has recognized-have
applied for membership of this
Organization.
Their admission would mark a further
step towards the realization of the desired universality of the United Nations.
66. We have on our agenda
Committee
on the Admission

72. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): The delegation of
Iraq is extremely pleased to have voted in favour of
the draft resolutions which have just been adopted
and to associate itself with the Council’s unanimous
decision to recommend
to the General Assembly
the admission of the People’s Republic of Mozam-

the report of the
of New Members
7

bique, the Republic of Cape Verde, and the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe
to
membership
of the United Nations. Their presence
among the international
community
is but a natural
culmination
of a long and bitter struggle waged
against the forces of imperialism,
colonialism
and
alien rule, a struggle whose victorious result has
made the three States fully qualified and deserving
to take their place among us in this Organization.

77.

Mr. de1 CASTILLO
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
Spanish):
My delegation, in voting in favour
of the resolutions which this Council has just adopted,
did so with full awareness that the admission of new
members is one of the most important acts. within
the United Nations since it strengthens the principle
of universality,
which is one of the main aspirations
of the international
community
and a cornerstone
for the maintenance
of peace and harmony among
the peoples of the world.

from

73. The Government and the people of the Republic of Iraq had lent their unwavering support to the
struggle which the freedom-fighters
of these three
States had to undergo for many years, and today the
victories of the people of these countries, in spite
of the insurmountable
odds and setbacks, constitute
an encouragement
to all the other peoples of the
African continent who are being subjected to the
rule of racism, apartheid
and foreign occupation
and whose freedom-fighters,
even at this moment,
are striving by all possible means to liberate their
people and lands.

78. My delegation now greets, as future Members
of the United Nations, the Republic of Cape Verde,
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe,
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
whose
entry, like that of any people having achieved independence, represents a milestone in the history of
their peoples as well as in the history of this Organization, which becomes stronger as the will for
dialogue increases and there is a united effort for
a better world, because faithful compliance with the
commitments
and obligations
of the Charter and
the political will of nations, which unite us in the
efforts for peace and justice, cannot fail to render
positive results for the benefit of all mankind.

74. The admission of the States of Mozambique,
Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe to membership of the United Nations, while giving credence,
we are happy to say, to the principle of universality,
at the same time gives hope and adds impetus to
all those people in Africa, Asia and Latin America
who continue to struggle valiantly to liberate their
lands and achieve their independence. The presence
of Mozambique,
Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe
in the United Nations will reinforce the ranks of
all peace-loving
Member States in upholding
the
principles of the Charter. We look forward to their
participation
in the efforts which the international
community,
in particular
the non-aligned
States,
is attempting
to exert, both in the political
and
economic
fields, to terminate
and eliminate
the
existence of the abhorrent
presence of colonial
rule, foreign occupation,
racism and opnrtheid
in
Africa, Asia and Latin America.

79. The satisfaction of my delegation
in casting
a positive vote is furthermore based on the fact that
we consider that resolutions concerning the admission of new Members and those intended to preserve
peace and assist peoples are those which best justify
the existence of the United Nations. Moreover, the
votes of my delegation accord with the anti-colonialist tradition
of my Government
and the antidiscriminatory
tradition
of our country,
which
throughout
history has considered colonialism
and
discrimination,
whatever their expression,
unjust
and a threat to human dignity. Hence our attitude
must be understood
as a reaffirmation
of these
commitments
to freedom of which we are so proud.
We shall maintain these commitments
unalterably
in the hope the final vestiges of dependence in the
world will disappear so that the world may take
action that will. lead to a mature and dignified
globality.

75. The Government
of Iraq looks forward to a
fruitful and positive co-operation and relations with
the States of Mozambique,
Cape Verde, and Sao
Tome and Principe.
We recognize the difficulties
which the three new independent States are facing in
all spheres. We therefore urge the international
community
represented in the United Nations to
undertake
the necessary steps and measures to
render all assistance possible to alleviate some of
these hardships and difficulties,
so as to make
economic and social progress possible and viable.

80. We wish to hail the courage of these peoples,
which have achieved
independence
by fighting
against and resisting the adverse past with the sole
strength of their dignity and their profound desire for
self-affirmation,
a desire which finally found a
response in the decision in.favour of independence,
of the Government
of Portugal, to which my delegation also wishes to pay a tribute.

76. My delegation,
in supporting the recommendation for the admission of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde and the
Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to
membership
of the United Nations, looks forward
to co-operating and working closely with their delegations in the United Nations.

81. .We feel sure that the Democratic Republic of
Sao Tome and Principe; the .Republic of Cape Verde and the People’s Republic of Mozambique
will join
the United Nations as peoples desiring to make a
positive contribution
to the bringing about of a better
world of justice and peace with a plurality
of
economic and social and political systems, where,
8

’

on the basis of its culture and tradition, each community will be able to develop ‘while respecting the
individuality
and sovereignty of other peoples.

mission of furthering international peace, co-operation
and development.
In this spirit of co-operation the
United States has responded to an appeal from the
Republic of Cape Verde for assistance in alleviating
the effects of a serious eight-year drought.
My
Government
is providing the islands with $5 million
in food and technical assistance.

82. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
The United States delegation welcomes the prospect
that this year there will be three new African Members of the United Nations: the Republic of Cape
Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and
Principe and the People’s Republic of Mozambique.

89. The United States also supported the application of the Government of Sao Tome and Principe
for membership in the United Nations. The islands
of Sao Tome and Principe have a long historical
tradition and a rich cultural heritage. My Government was pleased to have been represented at the
independence ceremonies of Sao Tome and Principe
on 12 July. The American delegation at the ceremonies
was greatly impressed by the beauty of the islands
and the warmth of their people. We are sympathetic
to the aspirations of the Government
of Sao Tome
and Principe for progress. To assist in the islands’
economic development, -the United States has made
available scholarships in this country to help develop
skilled resources for the islands.

83. The United States is particularly
pleased to
support the membership application of the Republic
of Cape Verde because of the very long ties of
friendship between our two countries. In his letter
of 5 July, the day of Cape Verde’s independence,
President Ford stated to the President of the Republic
of Cape Verde, Mr. Aristides Pereira, how much
we as a nation look forward “to the opportunity
for our two nations to work together in the cause
of peace, freedom and the welfare of mankind”.
84. There is a long history of friendship
and
co-operation between the peoples of our two States,
and indeed the close bond of kinship. These ties
go back to the early days of our own national independence. The first American
consulate in Cape
Verde was established in 1816. Over these many
decades a large number of Cape Verdeans have
emigrated to the United States. Leaders of the Cape
Verdean community
in the United States estimate
that between 200,000 and 300,000 American citizens
are of Cape Verdean descent. They have added their
language, their culture and their fine traits of energy
and self-reliance to the American scene.

90. We look forward to co-operating closely with
the representatives
of the Democratic
Republic of
Sao Tome and Principe in pursuing the lofty goals
of the United Nations, to which we are dedicated.
91. The United States has also voted in favour
of the admission of the People’s Republic of Mozambique to the United Nations. Together with GuineaBissau, for whose membership
we voted at the
twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly4,
Mozambique,
the Republic of Cape Verde and the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, all
of which this Council has just recommended
be
admitted, constitute an important addition of African
States to the United Nations. Their admission is
another step toward the development
of a worldwide Organization.
in which we hope all those
nations that desire membership
and are willing and
able to carry out their obligations will be represented.

85. I am especially glad to welcome to the Security
Council chamber this afternoon three distinguished
Americans of Cape Verdean descent: Mr. Raymond
Almeida, Mr. Anthony Ramos and Mr. Salah Matteos. They are present in the gallery.
86. I must at the same time express regret that the
Council has acted so hastily in the case of Cape
Verdean membership as not to make it possible for a
representative of the new Government of the Republic of Cape Verde also to be present on this occasion,
as I understand was requested.

92. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
My delegation was glad to vote today for the admission
of three new Members to this Organization.
Their
application
for membership
as independent
and
sovereign States is a reminder
of the immense
changes that have taken place in Africa since
25 April of last year.

87. Perhaps not many around this table have ‘had
the privilege,
which was mine, of having visited
personally the Cape Verde islands. I well remember
from that visit the busy activity in the streets of
Praia, the capital, the beautiful and active harbour
of Mindelo and the verdant agricultural
valleys of
Sao Antao. The stalwart qualities of the people of
this new republic are a vivid memory for me and a
source of strength for the new State.

93. British
Governments
have often expressed
their view that Portugal’s former territories in Africa
should proceed to independence.
I should like to
take this opportunity
to pay a tribute to the policy
of decolonization
which
successive Portuguese
Governments
have pursued since April 1974. Members of the Council will be aware of the difficulties
that still have to be resolved. It is, nevertheless,
a pleasure to greet today the achievement
of
independence
by the Republic of Cape Verde, the

88. The United States welcomes the Republic of Cape
Verde to the United Nations, and we look forward
to working with its representatives
in our common
9

Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and
the People’s Republic
of Mozambique.
The new
Governments
of these countries
face immense
problems. We are sure that this Organization and its
specialized agencies will do all that lies in their
power to assist in the work of reconstruction,
and
we wish all three Governments
every success in
the tasks that lie before them.

98. Our delegation would like to take this opportunity to convey on behalf of the Byelorussian
SSR to the peoples of those countries our sincere
congratulations
on this important event and to wish
them success in building a new life in conditions
of freedom and independence,
success in carrying
out socio-economic
transformations
in achieving
progress and the well-being of their countries.
99. As is shown by experience, positive changes in
the international
arena create more favourable conditions for the struggle of the democratic and progressive forces for social and national liberation. Therefore, it is quite logical that it is precisely in a
condition of detente that the forces of the national
liberation
movements
were able to score tangible
successes in their struggle for independence and to
consolidate national sovereignty and abolish the final
bastions of colonialism
and racism. The victorious
culmination
of the struggle of the patriotic forces
for national liberation and independence is one of the
concrete and material results of detente. The fall
of the fascist rkgime in Portugal and the destruction
of the last imperialist
empire, which is the result
of the heroic struggle waged by the peoples of the
Portuguese
colonies
and the democratic
forces
inside Portugal,
have created new possibilities
for those forces which are struggling for freedom and
progress of the peoples of Africa. The birth of these
new free States is of great historical import not only
for the peoples of those States but also for the entire
African continent.

94. My Government is already in close contact with
the Government of Mozambique,
and we look forward
to developing links with the Governments
of Cape
Verde and Sao Tome and Principe as well. We have
already told the Mozambique
authorities
that we
are very ready to engage in discussions on assistance
to Mozambique
at an appropriate
time, when the
new Government
has taken stock of the country’s
economic situation.
95. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express my Government’s
appreciation
of the
patient and constructive
work of the President of
Mozambique,
in company with his colleagues in the
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Botswana,
in bringing forward the prospect at last of change in
Rhodesia.
96. In the light of our debate last week there is
perhaps one point of organization
which I should
make at this meeting. We have voted here on the
admission of independent and sovereign States, and
on this understanding
we have supported the three
applications
before us. My Government
wishes to
reiterate, however, with regard to the application
from Cape Verde, that it would obviously be out of
the question for one State to exercise the rights
of another in this world body. Any such arrangement would create most undesirable
precedents.
At the same time, however, we are very conscious
of the burden which membership
of the United
Nations imposes upon small States, and we naturally understand the wish of such States to seek the
co-operation
and assistance of those neighbours of
theirs that are already members of this Organization.

100. In the years of armed struggle against the
colonizers, a friendship developed which has bound
the Soviet people with the people of Mozambique.
True to their international
duty the countries of the
Socialist community
have unswervingly
supported
FRELIMO
and hzve given it comprehensive
and
selfless assistance. The socialist countries are the
natural allies of free Mozambique.
This was stated
by the President of FRELIMO
and of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique,
Samora Machel. He stated:
“From
the very outset of our struggle the
socialist countries were with us. We can say that
the victory of Mozambique is the victory of genuine
internationalism
on the part of the socialist countries.”

97. Mr. KUDRYAVTSEV
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist Republic) (interpretation
from Russian):
The
delegation of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic is very gratified to have voted in favour of the
Security Council resolution which recommends the
admission of the new sovereign States of the Republic
of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the People’s Republic of Mozambique to membership
of the United Nations. The
applications of these sovereign States for admission to
membership of the United Nations are completely in
accord with the requirements laid down by the United
Nations Charter incumbent upon those seeking membership. These States have declared that they are
prepared to assume the obligations contained in the
United Nations Charter and have pledged to fulfil
them.

101. Following
Lenin’s behests, our country has
unswervingly supported, and will continue to support,
the liberation struggle of peoples. At the beginning
of this century, Vladimir
I. Lenin welcomed the
awakening of those peoples that had been enslaved
by colonialism.
He foresaw that the time would
come when those peoples would actively participate
in deciding the fate of all mankind. We are living
precisely in that time.
102. The growth of the influence of young independent States, the strengthening
of their activity
in international
atfairs is one of the characteristic
features of present international
relations.
This
10

process in the situation of detente is obviously
gaining ground. These events are convincing proof
of the fact that international
detente is becoming
more and more filled with actual concrete significance.

Verde and of Sao Tome and Principe.
Numerous
resolutions in support of this struggle have been
adopted by the General Assembly. It is therefore most
gratifying that we should now welcome these gallant
freedom fighters into the United Nations. We in Africa
have special reason to rejoice; we have already
demonstrated
our happiness by welcoming them as
full members of the Organization
of African Unity.
My country believes that their contribution
in the
OUA will enable that organization
to increase its
determination
in the struggle against the last remnants
of colonialism.
Similarly,
their membership
of the
United Nations, and the active role that they are
expected to play in it, will be a singular contribution
to the work of this Organization.

103. In welcoming the admission to membership
in the United Nations of these new States, the
People’s Republic of Mozambique,
the Republic of
Cape Verde Islands and the Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe, it must be emphasized
that the United Nations has made its own signal
contribution
to the cause of decolonization.
The
entire world is aware of the effective struggle which
has been waged by the countries of the socialist
community
and other peace-loving
States in the
United Nations for the speedy and final elimination
of colonialism
and the complete liberation
of the
oppressed colonial
peoples,
which is strikingly
borne out by the successful implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, which was adopted
by the General Assembly on the initiative
of the
Soviet Union 15 years ago. The admission of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique,
the Republic of
Cape Verde and the Democratic
Republic of Sao
Tome and Principe to membership
of the United
Nations will foster the achievement of genuine universality in the United Nations.

108. It is therefore most appropriate at this juncture
to pay a special tribute to the militant fighters and
leaders of FRELIMO,
PAIGC and MLSTP (Movimento de Libertacao de $50 Tome e Principe) for
the final successfully laid struggle in their respective
countries. During the course of their struggle the
United Nations played an important supportive role
to the efforts of the liberation movements. The United
Nations Special Committee
on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on
the granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries
and peoples had on a number of occasions reported
on the progress of independence in those territories.
Some of their leaders have appeared before this Council and other organs of the General Assembly to plead
the case of the people. In response to those pleas
the General Assembly adopted resolutions calling on
Member States and the specialized agencies to render
the necessary assistance to these countries. Thus the
United Nations has every reason to be particularly
satisfied with the impending
membership
of these
three sovereign African States in the United Nations.

104. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would
like to express its conviction
that these young
sovereign States will make their useful contribution
to solving the tasks which are facing the United
Nations,
to strengthening
international
peace and
security, to developing fruitful and mutually beneficial
co-operation in order finally to remove colonialism,
racism and apartheid.
105. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Today will go down as one of those happy and
memorable
occasions in the history of the United
Nations.
The Security Council has just made an
important recommendation
to the General Assembly
concerning
the admission
to membership
in the
United Nations of the Republic of Cape Verde, the
Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique.
We are
looking forward to the day when the Governments
of these three countries will assume their rightful
place in the United Nations.

109. The United Republic of Tanzania welcomes
these sister republics, and in doing so would like
to pay special tribute to their militants and leaders,
the militants
of FRELIMO,
PAIGC and MLSTP,
whose valiant struggle made today’s Security Council
recommendation
possible. Members of this Council
are fully aware of the gigantic efforts made by the
people of these three countries to achieve their
legitimate
rights; we do not need to recite their
untold sacrifices. While expressing our happiness
and sense of jubilation
at the victory of our brothers
of these three countries, we must single out the
particular significance for the struggle in southern
Africa which the liberation of Mozambique,
under
the leadership of FRELIMO,
implies. .As for its
significance
to the United Republic of Tanzania,
I need hardly emphasize that the militant friendship
and solidarity that bind the people of Mozambique
and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania
are a solidarity and friendship which are sealed in
blood.

106. The history of the former Portuguese territories is well known to this Council; the Council’s
recommendation
today is a logical culmination of the
victorious struggle of the people of those countries
for freedom, independence and human dignity. It has
not been an easy struggle: but one full of sacrifices,
both human and material.
107. Both the General Assembly and the Security
Council have followed with interest and sympathy
the struggle of the people of Mozambique,
of Cape

110. It is only fitting that on occasions
we should pay homage to those gallant
11

like this
freedom

fighters who have died in defence of freedom and
independence.
In particular,
we must recall the
memory of Mr. Eduardo Mondlane, the first President
of FRELIMO,
and Mr. Amilcar Cabral, the founder
and first Secretary-General
of PAIGC. Their brutal
and barbaric assassinations were designed to frustrate
the liberation struggle, thus ensuring the continuation
of colonialism.
So, in paying this homage to those
true sons of Africa today and to all those who have
died on the battlefield,
we note with pride and
satisfaction that their sacrifices have not been in
vain, for nothing could more eloquently testify to
this than the recommendation
which has just been
adopted by the Security Council to the General
Assembly for the admission of Cape Verde and
Mozambique
as Members of the United Nations.
111. As we look forward to the membership in our
Organization
of the Republic of Cape Verde, the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and
the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
we must also
bear in mind that the Governments
of these countries have inherited, problems that are the result of
the obnoxious system of colonialism-indeed,
the
colonialism
which has survived for 500 years.
Poverty, ignorance and disease must be eradicated.
It is the responsibility
of the United Nations to
continue to render all the assistance that these countries require, with the minimum delay.
112. The three Governments,
under the able leadership of their liberation movements, have all accepted
the obligations contained in the Charter of the United
Nations and have solemnly undertaken to fulfil them.
The United Republic of Tanzania, for its modest
part, has declared its preparedness to support Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe
in their struggle for the national reconstruction
of
their respective countries. Africa too, through ,the
Organization of African Unity, has expressed its readiness to support the new nations in their battle for
economic reconstruction
and for the consolidation
of their hard won independence.
I am sure that the
United Nations will live up to its responsibilities
and whole-heartedly
support the people of Mozambique, of Cape Verde and of Sao Tome and Principe as they assume their new obligations.
113. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next
speaker, I should like to take this opportunity
to
speak in my capacity as representative
of JAPAN
on the subject under discussion.
114. It is indeed a source of great joy to me that
I am privileged to preside over this meeting at a
time when we are considering these felicitous items
on the admission of three African States, each of
which has acceded this year to full independence.
The pleasure of my delegation
became all the
greater at the moment when I declared that the Security Council has unanimously resolved to recommend
to the General Assembly that the three African

States-the
Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People’s Republic
of Mozambique-be
admitted
to
membership in the United Nations.
115. My delegation wholeheartedly
supported the
applications of the three States and voted in favour
of the three resolutions which have just been adopted
by the Security Council. The unanimity of the Council in recommending
the membership
of the three
States in the United
Nations is clear testimony
that these three States are fully qualified for membership under Article 4 of the Charter.
116. In examining
the applications
before us my
delegation took note with satisfaction of the declarations of the three applicant States that each of
them accepts the obligations incumbent upon Member States under the Charter and that each solemnly
undertakes to carry out these obligations.
The delegation of Japan has confidence in their ability and
willingness to do so.
117. On the occasion of the unanimous adoption
of tlie three resolutions I wish to express, in the
name of the delegation of Japan, our sincere congratulations to the Governments and peoples of the
three countries for the confidence and assurance
accorded by the Council.
118. In supporting
these three applications,
mv
delegation has taken note with satisfaction that the
agreements signed last year between the Government
of Portugal and the leaders of the liberation movements of the three States have been fully implemented
and that these former Portuguese
Non-Self-Governing Territories have peacefully and in an orderly
manner acceded to complete independence
on the
dates mutually agreed upon.
119. We join with the peoples of the three applicant States in rejoicing with them on their independence. Their full independence now enables them to
occupy their rightful places among the family of
nations and to assume the corresponding responsibilities in the international
community.
We are
firmly confident that the new States will soon overcome the many difficulties
that lie ahead of them
in accomplishing
the enormous tasks of building their
nations and that they will actively participate
in
the collective efforts of the United Nations to build
a world order in which equality, justice and human
dignity will prevail among all peoples.
120. The Government
of Japan recognized
the
People’s Republic of Mozambique
on 25 June 1975,
the Republic of Cape Verde on 11 July 1975, and
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
on 22 July 1975. In its congratulatory
messages on
their independence, the Government of Japan stated
that the Government
and people of Japan ardently
desired to promote friendship and co-operation and

expressed the hope of establishing,
as soon as
possible, diplomatic
relations with them. We look
forward to increasing close and friendly relations
with the Governments
and peoples of these three
new States both bilaterally and multilaterally.

125. Last August the Portuguese
Government
solemnly reaffirmed to the Secretary-General
that it
upheld the right of all peoples to self-determination
and independence.
It therefore was ready to apply
the United Nations decisions to that effect as well
as to fulfil its obligations
arising from Chapter XI
of the United
Nations
Charter, from resolution
1514 (XV) of the General Assembly and from resolutions referring to the Territories under Portuguese
administration.

121. My delegation
believes that the Council’s
decision today will bring this Organization
another
significant step closer towards universality in membership and will further strengthen its functions in the
fields of decolonization
and international
peace and
security.

126. The admission of the Republic of Cape Verde,
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique
invites
us to reflect once again on the course of the Portuguese decolonization
process. In doing se we do
not want to be judged as conspicuous and repetitive.
We would like to call the attention of this Council
to the firm and steady pace with which this decolonization process is being carried out. After the
recognition
“de jure” by Portugal of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau
as an independent and sovereign
State, the Portuguese Government,
in a series of
measures adopted, has respected its commitments
to
transfer powers in accordance with the established
time schedules. Consequently
Mozambique
attained
independence
on 25 June, Cape Verde on 5 July
and Sao Tome and Principe on 12 July 1975. Angola
will attain independence on 11 November, and Timor,
if its decolonization
process is not hindered, will
accede to full sovereignty in 1978. Thus, in a few
months, Portugal has given to the world irrefutable
proof of its intentions.

122. In accordance with the decision taken earlier
at this meeting the representative
of Portugal has
been invited to participate in the discussion and he
has expressed the wish to address the Council at
this stage. I now, .in my capacity as President,
invite the representative
of Portugal
to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
QUINTELA
PAIXAO
(Portugal):
123. Mr.
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to thank
you and the other members of the Security Council
for allowing me to participate in the work of this
body concerning the applications of the Republic of
Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the People’s Republic of Mozambique for admission to membership
in the United
Nations. Allow me also to say how pleased my
delegation is to see this meeting presided over by
the representative
of Japan, a great country with
which Portugal for many centuries has maintained
the most friendly and fruitful relations. Allow me
also to express our deepest appreciation
for the
kind words some’ of the speakers here have said
about Portugal.

127. It is especially
rewarding for my country
to see this fact acknowledged
by our SecretaryGeneral in the introduction
to his report on the work
of the Organization. Allow me to quote the SecretaryGeneral:

124. Portugal today sits before the highest organ
of the United Nations for the second time since the
revolution
of 25 April 1974 and the subsequent
initiation of the process of decolonization
which has
led, after approximately
one year, to the independence of four African countries. As in August 1974,
when the Security Council met to consider the
application
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
for
admission to membership
in the United Nations,
we sit here again in a spirit of co-operation
and
gratification at the unanimous decision taken by this
Council in favour of the admission of the Republic
of Cape Verde, the Democratic
Republic of Sao
Tome and Principe and the People’s Republic of
Mozambique.
.We are, gratified for two reasons:
first, because we -are deeply convinced that the
membership -of, these. three nations will represent a
valuable contribution
to the universality
that characterizes the United Nations itself and thus allows
the Organization
to pursue with increased strength
its quest for freedom, justice, peace and international
co-operation; and, second, because the admission of
those three States constitutes
a recognition
that
Portugal has kept its word.

“In the past year there have been a number of
welcome
developments
in the decolonization
process in Africa. With the exception of Angola,
all the former Portuguese colonial Territories
on
the continent have achieved independence by an
orderly
and peaceful transition
of power in
accordance with the agreements reached between
the liberation
movements
concerned
and the
Government of Portugal.“s
128. The independence of those territories, achieved
in an orderly and peaceful transition in keeping with
the previously
established
time-table,
was only
possible through the true co-operation,
friendship
and mutual understanding
existing between those
States and Portugal. Their application for membership and expected admission during the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly is regarded by my
Government
as the culmination
of the process of
their decolonization.
129. I should like, on behalf of my Government,
warmly to salute the Governments
and peoples of
13

Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique. I would like also to express, on behalf of my
Government,
the ardent and sincere hope that our
countries may pursue within the United Nations a
policy of true friendship and co-operation.
Portugal
hopes and believes
that this friendship
and
co-operation with the Republic of Cape Verde, the
Democratic
Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe,
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique
will further
reinforce its ties with all the developing countries.
Portugal is determined to spare no effort to implement
this policy.
130. Before I conclude, Sir, allow me to thank
the Special Committee
for the understanding
and

assistance it has given in respect of our process of
decolonization.
Portugal hopes that, in pursuing this
policy of decolonization,
it will be recognized as
having made a solid contribution
to .the strengthening
of international peace and security.
The meeting

rose at 5.15 p.m.
NUWS

1 See resolution
z See resolution
3 See resolution

372 (1975).
373 (1975).
374 (1975).

4 See Officiul Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Plenary Meetings, 2248th meeting.
lr See OfJicjal Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. IA. sect. XIII.

14
Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

82-6 1202-November

1983-2.200
