S/PRST/2005/10*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 February 2006
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5133rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 March 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns with the utmost firmness the attack
against a patrol of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) by the Front des Nationalistes et Intégrationnistes in
Ituri (FNI), which occurred on 25 February 2005 near the town of Kafé,
resulting in the murder of nine Bangladeshi peacekeepers. It offers its
condolences to the victims’ families and to the authorities of Bangladesh. It
commends the dedication of MONUC’s personnel, who operate in particularly
hazardous conditions. It welcomes the action of MONUC against the militia
groups responsible for these killings and MONUC’s continued robust action in
pursuit of its mandate.
“The Security Council considers this aggression, by its intentional and
well-planned nature, to be an unacceptable outrage. It calls upon the
Government of National Unity and Transition immediately to take all
necessary measures to bring to justice the perpetrators, sponsors and authors of
this attack and welcomes the first arrests undertaken by the Government. It
endorses in this regard the serious concern expressed in Kinshasa on
28 February 2005 by the International Committee in Support of the Transition
over the illegal and criminal activities of militia in Ituri and their military and
political leaders, in particular Floribert Ndjabu, Goda Sukpa, Étienne Lona,
Thomas Lubanga, Bosco Tanganda and Germain Katanga. It expresses its
concern that the integration of Ituri militia officers into the Congolese Armed
Forces has failed to lead to the disarmament of their troops which should
proceed without delay.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government of National Unity and
Transition to strengthen its support for the implementation of the disarmament
and community reintegration programme for Ituri militiamen. It considers
those who try to impede this programme as a threat to the political process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also calls upon the Government of
National Unity and Transition urgently to deploy additional integrated troops
* Reissued for technical reasons.

05-25310* (E) 170206

*0525310*

S/PRST/2005/10

and police units to Ituri, and invites donors to provide support for this vital
undertaking.
“The Security Council reminds all States in the region of their
responsibility to ensure compliance for the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 1493 (2003) and is considering additional measures it might take to
reinforce implementation and monitoring of the embargo. It further urges those
States to ensure that their territories cannot be used by any Congolese armed
group, notably the Ituri militia, whose activities perpetuate a climate of
insecurity that affects the whole region.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for MONUC, and urges
MONUC to continue to fulfil its mandate with determination. It notes the
importance for MONUC to continue to strengthen its action in Ituri and in
North and South Kivu.”

2
