General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

206

United Nations system in working out appropriate measures
for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies,
with the assistance of those agencies and organizations, a
report on the action taken since the circulation of his previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions.
including the present resolution;
24. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of the
policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in implementing
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
25. Requests the Special Committee to continue to consider this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 198/

36/53.

United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, in particular resolution 35/30 of 11 November 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the Programme for 1980/81, 45 containing an account of the
work of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and of the operation of the Programme during the year.
Noting with grave concern the significant decline in the
level of contributions received in 1981 and the consequent
sharp decrease in the number of new awards granted and
the total number of scholarship holders,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion
of the Programme is essential in order to assist the peoples
of South Africa and Namibia,
Recognizing that supplementary contributions are urgently required in order to enable the Programme to meet
its current level of obligations and that increased contributions for the coming fiscal year are required to meet the
growing needs for assistance,
Taking account of the desirability of providing educational opportunities and counselling to student refugees in
a broad spectrum of professional, cultural, technical and
linguistic disciplines suitable for their future functions, notably, in the fields of development and international cooperation,
l. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Takes note with grave concern of the deficit facing
the Programme in the current financial year because of escalating costs and a decrease in contributions in both ahsolute and real terms;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have supported the Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their educational institutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa to take all possible measures
for the promotion of generous contributions to the Programme;

5. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals, in view of the increasing demand for educational opportunities by the people of South Africa and
Namibia and the rapidly increasing costs of higher education
and training, to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to ensure its continuation, effectiveness and expansion.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/54.

Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/31 of 11 November 1980,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on
offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 46 prepared
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
in all parts of the world and that steps should be taken to
encourage applications from students in those Territories,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained selfgovernment or independence and, whenever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities
made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities
to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November /98/
36/62.

Question of Bermuda, the British Virgin
Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 47
46

A/36/580 and Add. I.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I), chaps. III-V and XVIII-XXII.
47

45

A/36/147.

VIJ.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territories
listed above,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to the Territories listed above, 48
Noting that the administering Power has expressed its
willingness to respect the wishes of the peoples of the Territories under its administration regarding their future constitutional status and reiterating that it is the obligation of
the administering Power to create such conditions in those
Territories as will enable the peoples thereof to exercise
freely and without interference their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) as well as other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly.
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territories
concerned,
Bearing in mind that United Nations visiting missions
provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in
the Territories, acquiring adequate first-hand information
on the situation prevailing in those Territories and ascertaining the views of the peoples concerning their future
political status,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying
and strengthening further their economies as a matter of
priority in order to promote economic stability.
I. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands. Montserrat and
the Turks and Caicos Islands; 49
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of those
Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. as the administering
Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to continue
to take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy
attainment of the goals set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration in respect of the Territories;
5. Recognizes that the presence of military bases and
other installations could constitute an impediment to the
implementation of the Declaration and reaffirms its conviction that the presence of foreign military bases and installations in Bermuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands should
not prevent the peoples of those Territories from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and principles of the Charter;
6. Calls upon the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the
48
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Fourth Commillee, 15th meeting, paras.
28-31; and ibid., Fourth Commillee, Se.nimwl Fascicle. corrigendum.
49
Ibid .. Thirty-sixth S,·ssion, Supplemn11 No. ~3 1An61231Rev. l I.
chaps. XVIII-XXII.

207

Territories concerned, to take all possible steps to diversify
and strengthen further the economies of those Territories
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development;
7. Further calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the freely elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures which
ensure the right of the peoples to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in accelerating
progress in all sectors of the social and economic life of the
Territories concerned;
9. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering
Power with regard to the receiving of United Nations visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue
his consultations with a view to dispatching such missions,
as appropriate;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1981

36/63.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 50
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating lo Guam,
Noting that the administering Power continues to maintain
military installations in the Territory,
Considering that the policy of maintaining military bases
and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories which
inhibit the right of self-determination of peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Having heard the statement of the administering Power, 51
Welcoming the active participation of the administering
Power in the work of the Special Committee and expressing
the hope that this co-operation will be strengthened further
so as to accelerate progress towards the full implementation
of the Declaration in respect of Guam,
Bearing in mind the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam and
the necessity of diversifying the economy of the Territory
as a matter of priority.
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen-

'" Ibid., chaps. Ill, IV and XVI.
" Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras.
1-8.
