S/2018/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2018
Original: English

Assessment by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of phase one of the reconfiguration of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2363 (2017), supported a two-phase
reconfiguration of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) in line with the special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General (S/2017/437), and requested us to provide, in
consultation with UNAMID, a written assessment by 1 January 2018 of phase one of
the reconfiguration (1 July-31 December 2017). In line with paragraph 6 of the
resolution, the assessment includes an account of the progress in implementing phase
one, the impact of reductions in the mission’s presence on the areas from which
UNAMID has withdrawn, of the cooperation of the Government of the Sudan with
UNAMID in ensuring unfettered freedom of movement and removing bureaucratic
hindrances, and finally, of whether conditions on the ground remain conducive to
further reductions in phase two (31 January-30 June 2018).
2.
A joint African Union-United Nations assessment team visited Khartoum and
Darfur from 7 to 17 November 2017. It was co-led by the African Union Liaison
Office in the Sudan and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and comprised
representatives of the African Union Commission, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, as well as of the United Nati ons
Development Programme and the Deputy Humanitarian Coordinator for Darfur,
representing, respectively, the United Nations country team and the humanitarian
country team. The assessment team held consultations with Government of the Sudan
officials and the United Nations country team, visited four Darfur states and the
majority of the closed team sites, and met state and local authorities, representatives
of the communities of internally displaced persons, and the native administration.
3.
The assessment report covers the period from 1 July to 22 December 2017 and
provides a conflict analysis, which depicts the current conflict dynamics and drivers
in Darfur, as well as the political and humanitarian situation. It assesses the situation
in line with the requirements of paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 2363
(2017) and makes recommendations for phase two of the mission’s reconfiguration.

17-23457 (E)

090118

*1723457*

S/2018/12

II. Conflict analysis
4.
The trends indicated in the special report (S/2017/437) continue as, following
its military victory against the rebel movements, the Government of the Sudan is
firmly consolidating its control and State authority across Darfur, except for small
pockets in the Jebel Marra area. Notably, the deployment of the Rapid Support Forces
(RSF) in Darfur in the context of the weapons collection campaign has increased the
Government’s capability to respond swiftly to security challenges, while creating new
dynamics. On the political front, the constitutional review process continues in a
measured way on the basis of the outcome of the national dialogue. However, the
people of Darfur have not yet fully benefited from the political and the legislative
provisions stipulated in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as its implementation
remains lacking, despite the inclusion of the Doha Document in the Constitution.

A.

Conflict dynamics
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
5.
No major confrontations have been reported between the Government of the
Sudan and Darfur rebel groups since 1 July. The incursion of Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional
Council (SLM/TC), a splinter faction of Sudan Liber ation Army/Abdul Wahid
(SLA/AW), from Libya and South Sudan into North and East Darfur, in late May and
early June 2017, did not result in any sustained presence in Darfur. According to
UNAMID, reported clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces/Rapid Suppo rt
Forces (RSF) and a suspected dormant cell of the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) in Birkat Saira area, 25 km east of Saraf Omra, on 22 November in the context
of the weapons collection campaign, resulted in the capture of 16 rebels and the
disbanding of some 130 JEM elements. Clashes were also reported at Mijelid village,
46 km north-east of Shaeria, on 29 November between Government armed forces and
an unidentified armed group suspected of coming from South Sudan, without any
reported casualties. Neither SLA/MM nor the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM/Gibril) have a significant armed presence in Darfur or
the Sudan.
6.
The area of operations of SLA/AW in Darfur continues to be limited to pockets
of Jebel Marra and its effectiveness is reduced by further fragmentations, infighting
or involvement in acts of banditry. The areas under the control of SLA/AW and
Government armed forces have not changed since the special report was published.
No engagement has been reported between Government armed forces and SLA/AW
since the clashes of 10 June in the village of Thur, 15 km south of Nertiti, triggered
by an alleged theft of livestock belonging to the Nawaybah clan of Northern Rizeigat
by SLA/AW. On 21 October, clashes were recorded between SLA/AW elements loyal
to the movement and a splinter group, in Feina village, northeast of Kass, which was
the fifth incident of this nature since April 2017. Furthermore, in early November,
SLA/AW elements stole Ereigat/Rizeigat cattle, creating tensions in the area around
Thur, and on 22 November, suspected SLA/AW elements fired at a commercial truck
near Golo, Central Darfur, killing one civilian and injuring six civilians.
7.
While there is no agreement on a permanent ceasefire, the Govern ment and the
armed groups continue to extend temporary cessations of hostilities. In October, the
Government extended its unilateral cessation of hostilities until 31 December 2017.
In a joint declaration on 30 November, SLA/MM, JEM/Gibril and SLM/TC exten ded
their unilateral cessation of hostilities for two months, from 30 November 2017 to
31 January 2018.

2/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

8.
Conflicts in the neighbouring countries continue to provide an opportunity for
some of the rebel groups that have lost their foothold in Darfur to retreat, resupply
and train. SLA/MM is currently estimated to maintain several hundred fighters, with
some 150 vehicles, in Libya, where they are engaged in mercenary activities, while a
few hundred JEM fighters with some 60 to 80 vehicles are still locate d in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, South Sudan. In the incursion during May and June 2017, the rebel
groups who infiltrated from Libya used heavy weapons, including armoured vehicles,
for the first time.
9.
Rapid Support Force units continue to monitor the nort hern borders of Darfur,
while the joint Sudan-Chad border monitoring force has been effective in creating
stability in the western border areas. No progress has been made to date towards
establishing similar arrangements to cover the Darfur-Central African Republic
border. However, following a meeting in Khartoum on 1 and 2 November 2017, the
President of the Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir and the President of South Sudan,
Salva Kiir, undertook not to harbour or to provide support to their respective
countries’ rebel movements, and decided to reactivate the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and its associated sub-mechanisms, including the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which is part of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
Militia groups, weapons collection campaign and impact on security
10. In the Government’s efforts to consolidate control and to expand its authority
across Darfur, two factors are playing a key role, both contributing to new dynamics
as regards security, namely, the deployment of a sizeable contingent of RSF and the
conduct of a weapons collection campaign. The former has de facto put in motion a
consolidation process of the militia groups under the umbrella of RSF, while the latter
is reportedly creating conditions to further improve security in Darfur beyond the
state capitals, while reshaping the political landscape. Despite the overall decrease in
the number of acts of banditry and criminality, the police force and the rule of law
institutions have limited capacity in remote locations and areas of return for the
internally displaced communities.
11. The recent deployment of RSF to Darfur in the context of the weapons collection
campaign has initiated a process of bringing the different militia groups under its
effective control and authority. Although total figures of deployment are not made
public, except for the announced arrival of 10,000 RSF in North Darfur, UNAMID
estimates that some 18,000 RSF have been deployed across the five Da rfur states.
Given past RSF involvement in counter-insurgency operations and reports of arbitrary
arrests, harassment and rape associated with its elements, as well as the fact that most
of its units are recruited from the Arab Rizeigat tribe, several comm unities of
internally displaced persons remain apprehensive regarding its presence and
intentions.
12. In the past three months, RSF has increasingly asserted itself as an undisputed
security force in Darfur, particularly through its central role in the we apons collection
campaign. On 23 October, RSF pursued the Savanna militia group out of Kutum town
in North Darfur, and on 30 October, clashed with them in Shaeria in East Darfur. On
10 November, after clashes in the west of Korma town, they captured the le ader of
the group, Abdallah Rizkallah, along with nine other members. Likewise, following
the public refusal of Musa Hilal to integrate his border guard units with RSF in
August, clashes took place on 21 September on the Sudan-Egypt-Libya border
between RSF and the border guards, which resulted in the killing of 17 of the border
guard elements, who were accused of human trafficking and illegal migration, as well
as two RSF troops. On 26 November, RSF units were reportedly ambushed by Musa
Hilal border guards while transporting some criminal elements from Saraf Omra to
17-23457

3/16

S/2018/12

Kabkabiyah, North Darfur. In response to the ensuing fighting, which resulted in the
killing of 14 RSF, including one of their senior commanders, and nine militia, RSF
arrested Musa Hilal, his three sons and members of his militia in his stronghold of
Misteriya (30 km south-west of Kabkabiyah) and transported them to Khartoum.
Given Hilal’s profile as tribal leader of the Mahamid clan of the Northern Rizeigat,
head of the Sudanese Revolutionary Awakening Council (SRAC) and former
Janjaweed leader, the event has sent a strong message to other militia groups in
Darfur.
13. The response of other tribal militias to RSF deployment and the weapons
collection campaign in all the other Darfur states is observed as being muted.
Incorporated into different auxiliary units of the Government forces, such as the
border guards, Popular Defence Forces and Central Reserve Police, they have, in the
main, complied with the campaign or joined RSF. As many of them were involved in
the past in fighting against the rebel groups, the positive impact on security is widely
appreciated by the local authorities and the tribal leaders. In this context, the weapons
collection campaign has taken centre stage in all five Darfur states.
14. The weapons collection campaign has not only changed the balance of forces in
Darfur’s security environment by solidifying the position of RSF, it is also gradually
creating the conditions for new political realities to take shape, amid mixed reactions
from the local communities and communities of internally displaced persons. Set in
motion by a presidential decree in early 2017, and initiated on 6 August by the Second
Vice-President of the Sudan and chair of the High Committee for the Collection of
Weapons, Hassabo Mohamed Abdul-Rahman, the Government’s national plan on
disarmament is underpinned by two pillars: tightening border control points with the
neighbouring countries and undertaking the weapons collection in two phases,
namely, a voluntary stage, followed by a “search and confiscate” (mandatory) phase.
The campaign was launched simultaneously throughout five Darfur states and three
Kordofan states, which in the Government’s assessment have the highest level of
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. Those in possession of weapons,
ammunition, explosives or unregistered vehicles have been requested to hand them
over to government security institutions, with immediate effect. Any resistance will
be treated as a violation of the law and dealt with in accordance with the Sudan’s
criminal law, the Public Safety Act and the Arms, Ammunition and Explosives Act of
1986.
15. Although the conclusions of the national dialogue and the recommendations of
the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation process call for the implementation of
a civilian disarmament campaign, the Darfur rebel movements and their former foes
expressed strong opposition to the collection of weapons from the very beginning.
Musa Hilal denounced the campaign while rejecting the incorp oration of his border
guards into RSF. SLA/MM and JEM/Gibril did the same within days, by calling for a
comprehensive security sector reform and for putting the process on hold until a
comprehensive peace agreement was reached. SLA/AW, welcoming the positi on of
Hilal, offered to work with him in rejecting the process.
16. While there are no consolidated figures on its outcome, to date, no significant
issues have been recorded during the weapons collection in West, Central, South and
East Darfur states, which entered the second phase, mandatory collection, in the first
half of November. The campaign is conducted by a joint force composed mainly of
the national armed forces and RSF, assisted by Government of the Sudan police and
the Central Reserve Police. The reported numbers of collected weapons vary between
3,200 during the voluntary phase in South Darfur, to about 4,700 in East Darfur, while
expectations in West Darfur are to reach some 14,000 items. Overall, while the
initiation of the campaign was received with mixed reactions and scepticism, the local
authorities and tribal leaders consider that it has increased security among the
4/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

communities. UNAMID welcomed it as a positive step by the Government to
consolidate the prevailing relative peace and stabilit y in Darfur, while engaging the
authorities on reported concerns over non-respect for the rule of law and violations
of human rights associated with the conduct of the campaign. On 1 December, the
President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno commended the ongoing c ampaign in the Sudan
as having boosted security in neighbouring Chad.
17. Some communities of internally displaced persons are apprehensive that the
campaign might trigger a deterioration of their security conditions and have requested
the mission to monitor the process. Although there have been reports of joint
government forces entering the camps for internally displaced persons during the
mandatory stage, such as in Kalma camp in South Darfur on 2 November, Hamidiya
camp in Zalingei, Central Darfur, on 16 November, and Abu Zar camp in West Darfur
on 20 November, the collection process went without incident in the last two camps
and a UNAMID team observed the process. In Nyala, South Darfur, given the
complex nature of the settlement, the Government requested that UNAMID undertake
the weapons collections inside Kalma camp. Following two meetings held by the Joint
Special Representative, Jeremiah Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo, with the Second
Vice-President of the Sudan and the Governor of South Darfur, on 9 an d
14 November, an agreement was reached to establish a trilateral committee, with the
participation of UNAMID, the Government and the representatives of internally
displaced persons, to conduct the collection of weapons in the camp. On
22 November, the mission’s team in South Darfur reached an agreement whereby the
voluntary collection of weapons in Kalma camp would be undertaken under the
supervision of state authorities and the leadership of internally displaced persons in
Kalma, with UNAMID monitoring the process, which started on 10 December
without incident.
Intercommunal conflicts
18. Intercommunal conflicts over land and natural resources remain one of the main
sources of violence in Darfur, but since mid-2015, the number of such conflicts has
continued to decrease significantly. There were three intercommunal clashes,
resulting in 45 fatalities, for the period from 15 October to 15 December, compared
to eight clashes, resulting in 19 fatalities, reported between 15 August and 15 O ctober,
and 10 clashes, with 74 fatalities, for the period from 6 June to 15 August 2017. The
overall decline is attributed to the joint efforts of the state governments, Government
armed forces and the Sudanese police forces at the local level, as well as UNAMID
support for the mediation efforts and, more recently, to the weapons collection
campaign, which has visibly limited access to small arms among civilians.
19. A number of conflicts persist, as the issues at their origin remain unaddressed
in a sustainable manner. The conflict between the Zaghawa and the Rizeigat in West
Darfur over cattle and camels flared up again between 16 and 19 October, resulting
in the killing of 16 Zaghawa and 11 Rizeigat. It was brought under control with the
intervention of the Sudan-Chad joint border forces and the state government with the
assistance of UNAMID. Intercommunal tensions over natural resources in the areas
of Buram and Graida, South Darfur, continue between the Salamat, Habbaniya and
Fallata communities. On 20 July, armed Fallata killed five Salamat, 16 km south-west
of Graida, while they were moving with their livestock towards Nyala. In East Darfur,
the conflict between the Rizeigat and the Maʽaliya over land ownership and natural
resources resulted in the death of 39 Rizeigat and 2 Maʽaliya, after a series of clashes
between 21 and 24 July. The state government deployed security forces on 24 July
and days later, Government armed forces disarmed and arrested several civilians and
traditional leaders, which was followed by the dismissal of the native administration
of both communities for their failure to contain the conflict. In North Darfur, tensions
17-23457

5/16

S/2018/12

between the Northern Rizeigat and Beni Hussein over the control of the Jebel Amir
goldmines remain latent, as the grievances of the latter have not been addressed.
Conflict trends in the areas from which the mission has withdrawn
20. The security situation in the area of the Muhajiriyah team site, in East Darfur,
has remained calm, mainly as a result of the measures taken by the Government
security institutions, including the deployment of troops in the buffer zone to curb the
protracted intercommunal clashes between the Southern Rizeigat and the Ma ʻaliya.
The mediation efforts of native administrations, with t he support of UNAMID, have
also contributed to the reduction of tensions. From being a mobility corridor for the
armed movements in the past, Muhajiriyah is currently under the tight control of
Government forces. The deployment of Sudanese police in remote locations has
contributed to a 60 per cent reduction in criminality in the state. East Darfur currently
provides shelter to more than 80,000 South Sudanese refugees, who are assisted by
humanitarian actors.
21. The areas around the Edd al-Fursan and Tulus team sites, in South Darfur, have
not been prone to armed conflict or intercommunal violence, except for the seasonal
clashes between the Fallata and the nomad communities during the migration/farming
season. The Government has launched several reconciliation initiatives between the
tribes in the area, including in Shataya, where the conflict started in 2003. The
departure of the mission from those areas, however, poses challenges for the
monitoring of cross-border activities along the borders with the Central African
Republic and South Sudan.
22. No reports of belligerent activities or intercommunal clashes have been received
from the areas around the Foro Burunga and Habila team sites, in West Darfur. While
in the past, insecurity in those areas was related to the proliferation of small arms and
criminal activities, the recent weapons collection campaign and the robust
deployment of the Government forces have resulted in improved security. The joint
Sudan-Chad patrols along the border have had a visible deterrent effect on criminal
activities and the circulation of small weapons in the area.
23. The situation around the Al-Malihah, Mellit, Tine, Abu Shuk, Zamzam and Um
Kaddadah team sites is relatively calm and there are currently no records of any armed
conflict and/or intercommunal conflict-related incidents. The case involving the
killing of an African Medob Central Reserve Police officer by a member of RSF on
28 August 2017 was described as an isolated incident, which was followed by the
subsequent arrest of the perpetrator and mediation by the Government. Following the
signing of a tripartite agreement between the governments of Chad and the Sudan and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in May
2017, Sudanese refugees currently residing in Chad are expected to return to North,
Central and West Darfur, starting in 2018. The deployment of Sudanese police in all
15 localities of North Darfur and the ongoing weapons collection campaign have
reportedly decreased the levels of criminality. The borders with neighbouring
countries are controlled by the Government armed forces and RSF, whose tasks
include stopping illegal migration and smuggling.

B.

Political developments
Darfur peace process
24. Progress towards achieving a negotiated political settlement to the conflict
remains elusive. While the parties proclaim their intention to continue negotiations,
preconditions, a lack of vision and further fragmentation of the movements mar any
tangible outcomes. On 20 August, informal consultations with SLA/MM and

6/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

JEM/Gibril in Berlin on ways to revive the peace process resulted in both groups
maintaining their rejection of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as the basis for
political negotiations, reiterating its shortcomings in relation to security
arrangements, the protection of civilians, compensation, land ownership and justice.
On 27 August, a breakaway faction of JEM, led by Abubakar Hamid and Souleyman
Jamous, accepted the disarmament proposal made by the Government. On 13 October,
the leadership council of one of the factions of the Sudanese Revolutionary Front
(SRF) elected Minni Minawi as its new chairman, during its general conference in
Paris. On 16 October, it was reported that the Sudan Liberation Army led by Nour
al-Din Zurg (SLA/Zurg) had suspended the peace agreement it signed with the
Government in 2016, over accusations of slow implementation.
25. In Darfur, new cabinet posts were announced by state governors between 9 June
and 16 July, in order to accommodate some signatories to the National Dialogue
document. Preference in the distribution of posts in Darfur state parliaments and
cabinets was given to the smaller movements and factions of the non -signatory
movements as compared to traditional opposition parties. Those changes
notwithstanding, the National Congress Party remains the dominant force in the
political landscape and some of the signatory movements have openly expressed
dissatisfaction with the implementation of agreements that they had signed and have
threatened to withdraw their support.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
26. There has been limited tangible progress since the letter dated 30 August 2017
from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council on the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur ( S/2017/747). On
11 September, in a meeting with the head of the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office,
Magdi Khalafalla, the President of the Sudan gave assurances regarding the speedy
structuring and revitalization of the commissions tasked with implementing the
provisions of the Doha Document. On 25 October, the Second Vice -President
organized a follow-up meeting on the implementation of the Document, the status of
the Darfur Commissions and the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund, and
Government support to the Sudanese refugees who have returned from Chad to
Darfur. According to Government sources, the staffing needs of the Commissions
have recently been addressed, and the Commissioners have been appointed at the
ministerial level, under the Presidency. The Darfur Fund has completed 650 of 1,070
projects, and the Government is approaching the donor community for additional
funding.
27. The Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation continues to draw the support of
most stakeholders in Darfur, as it aims to provide space for ordinary citizens to
discuss an inclusive political process in Darfur. Although the non -signatory
movements have not made any public pronouncements against the process, they have
not yet publicly endorsed it. To date, consultations have been completed in all 68
localities in Darfur, with the support of UNAMID, and a review conference took place
on 30 October to take stock of the process and share the outcomes. Preparations for
Darfur state-level consultations with refugees and the diaspora are under way.
Channels need to be identified for including the outcomes of the Consultation in the
constitutional review process.
Impact of the lifting of sanctions by the United States of America
28. The revocation by the United States of America of economic sanctions against
the Sudan and the Government of the Sudan as of 12 October created a new impetus
and space for political engagement, in recognition of the Government’s sustained
positive actions towards maintaining a cessation of hostilities in conflict areas in the
17-23457

7/16

S/2018/12

Sudan and improving humanitarian access throughout the Sudan. Tangible economic
dividends, however, may take time to materialize. The lifting of the sanctions has
visibly improved the engagement of the state actors in Darfur with the international
community, while generating a sense of optimism among the local communities.
However, JEM/Gibril and SLA/MM were of the view that the lifting of sanctions
should have been conditioned on tangible progress in the peace process. Sanctions
relating to blocking the property of persons in connection with the conflict in Darfur
have not been lifted and the Sudan remains on the United States list of State sponsors
of terrorism. Those sanctions continue to have an impact on the ability of the
Government of the Sudan to benefit from debt relief and other international
development assistance.

III. Progress in implementing phase one
A.

Peacebuilding
29. The Darfur state governments and UNAMID are working to achieve the
peacebuilding component of the two-pronged approach, adopted by the Security
Council in its resolution 2363 (2017). Nearly all the government officials whom the
assessment team met requested development projects to support the fledgling peace
in Darfur, even as they welcomed the closure of the mission’s sites. To date, however,
only the state governments of North and South Darfur have submitted their
stabilization plans for support by UNAMID and the international community, while
discussions are at an advanced stage in East Darfur State. In addition, the assessment
team noticed that the activities of the Commissions of the Darfur Peace Follow-up
Office (residual commissions of the former Darfur Regional Authority) at the state
level were limited, owing to shortage of funding and staffing.
30. At the mission level, a framework of engagement with state authorities , based
on national ownership and rooted in the Doha Document and the findings of the
Dialogue and Consultation, was recently prepared in line with the mission ’s mandate,
with specific attention to the immediate need to support the police and help to build
the rule of law institutions, while continuing to protect civilians and mediate
intercommunal conflict. The next steps include a dialogue to identify specific areas
of intervention in each state in order to reach agreement with the Darfur state
authorities. The mission needs to finalize the state-specific stabilization plans in
cooperation with the country team and state authorities by 31 January 2018, which
requires, at the same time, the strengthening of the mission ’s offices in the states of
Darfur. A major challenge remains the financing of United Nations country team
activities on peacebuilding in support of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding.
31. With the objective of addressing medium to longer-term needs related to land
tenure and land use in particular, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) focuses on the implementation of the Darfur Development Strategy through
12 foundational activities and short-term activities projects co-implemented by
United Nations entities in collaboration with line ministries.

B.

Peacekeeping and the Jebel Marra task force
32. The peacekeeping aspect of the two-pronged approach is based on the
establishment of the Jebel Marra task force, in line with paragraph 53 of the special
report (S/2017/437), to include nine existing team sites and a temporary operating
base to be established in Golo. The task force is to be established during phase one

8/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

and operationalized in phase two of the reconfiguration. UNAMID formalized the
task force concept of operations on 7 December 2017, by defining its organizational
and operational structure, with headquarters in Zalingei. As its area of operations will
cover team sites in three Darfur states, a coordination mechanism has been established
to facilitate political and military activities and liaise with respective state authorities.
33. UNAMID has not yet received official notification of permission to establish a
temporary operating base in Golo, as requested in paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 2363 (2017). The mission sent a note verbale to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs on 20 July 2017, followed by a detailed concept of operations for the site,
which was transmitted on 22 August 2017. The Joint Special Representative also
raised the matter with the First Vice-President and Prime Minister of the Sudan, Bakri
Hassan Salih, on 30 August 2017, and followed up with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs on 10 October. The issue was discussed during the African Union-United
Nations-Government of the Sudan tripartite meeting held in New York on
22 September 2017. On 13 December, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the
mission that it had identified the land for the site and that an official communication
on its allocation would follow.

C.

Reconfiguration of the military component
34. The mission’s military component currently stands at 11,461 personnel,
(reduced from the previous level of 15,845) against an authorized strength of 11,395
at the end of phase one. This includes a rear party of 109 and 454 military staff officers
and military experts on mission out of an authorized 520. As the reconfiguration
process is still under way, the force is operating from five sectors, namely Sector
North with two infantry battalions, Sector West with one infantry battalion, Sector
Central, including the Jebel Marra task force, with four infantry battalions, Sector
South with two infantry battalions and Sector East with one infantry battalion. In
total, the force is operating from 24 team sites and two temporary operating bases.
Ten military team sites have already been handed over to the respective state
governments. It is foreseen that the area of operation will be converted into a two sector set-up by the end of phase two, namely Sector 1 covering the Jebel Marra area
and Sector 2 covering the rest of Darfur, with the mission’s main effort remaining on
its peacekeeping posture in the Jebel Marra Sector.
35. The implementation of phase one of the reconfiguration entailed the repatriation
of three infantry battalions from Burkina Faso, Nigeria and Pa kistan, along with a
level II hospital from Mongolia, and the non-deployment of one infantry battalion
each from Pakistan and the United Republic of Tanzania, which had previously been
expected to deploy to the mission. This reduced the total number of infantry battalions
to 11 from the 16 previously mandated, of which 14 were deployed. The
reconfiguration process of the military component was completed by the end of
October 2017.
36. The process was undertaken within a much shorter period than anticipated ,
which had a negative effect on the further planning and execution of the
reconfiguration. The assessment team noted that some unplanned repatriations were
executed, including that of the level II hospital, which also affected the morale of
troops and affected operations within the mission. The issue of repatriation of
enablers was also considered during the assessment, and it was concluded that owing
to operational requirements, all current enablers, namely, aviation, medical and
engineering enablers, should be retained, the latter in view of their continued
requirement for development projects in both future sectors (heavy component with
explosive ordnance disposal capability for the Jebel Marra task force and lighter
component for stabilization tasks).

17-23457

9/16

S/2018/12

37. Kalma is one of the seven team sites that will be required to be handed over to
formed police units during phase two. As a result of the disarmament campaign, the
security situation in Kalma camp, a highly politicized stronghold of SLA/AW, has
again deteriorated, after a couple of years of relative calm. As noted above, the
Government approached UNAMID for support with the disarmament of the camp. It
is therefore recommended that the handover of the site to the formed police units be
completed towards the end of phase two of the reconfiguration, by which time the
weapons collection campaign would have been completed.

D.

Reconfiguration of the police component
38. The mission’s police component currently stands at 2,666 United Nations police
against an authorized strength of 2,888 at the end of phase one (reduced from the
previous level of 3,403, which comprised 1,583 individual police officers and 13
formed police units). It consists of 1,118 individual police officers and 1,548 formed
police unit elements deployed in mission headquarters and five sector headquarters,
as well as at 24 team sites. In line with the reconfiguration plan, UNAMID police
ceased operations at 11 team sites.
39. The repatriation of two formed police units from Bangladesh and Senegal was
completed in September, at the end of their rotation cycle, while one formed police
unit was redeployed from El Fasher to Umm Barru and another from Ed Daein to
Shaeria to provide security to team sites vacated by the military component. There
were concerns among UNAMID staff in the sectors about the capacity of the formed
police units to fully take over from the departing military in some locations.
40. The Sudanese police have re-established its presence in all 11 locations where
UNAMID has closed team sites. The security situation in the state capitals is currently
assessed as being stable, owing to the increased presence of the Sudanese police, as
well as the Government’s operations against the rebel movements and its ongoing
weapons collection campaign. Of note is the fact that the Sudanese police is also
required to keep its firearms in armouries during the weapons collection campaign.
41. The operational activities of the police component, in particular patrolling, have
decreased by an average of 25 to 30 per cent, and is currently at between 70 and 75
patrols per day, which also reflects the patrols conducted from the closed team sites.
In order to allow for the future increased involvement of individual police officers in
capacity-building activities and the involvement of formed police units in static
security-related activities at the team sites, the mission is planning to merge some
sectors in order to decrease the number of officers deployed in support functions,
while redeploying them to patrolling in camps for internally displaced persons.

E.

Closure of team sites
42. A total of 11 team sites were closed and handed over to the Government of the
Sudan between 8 August and 20 October 2017, namely El Fasher/Zamzam,
El Fasher/Abu Shuk, Al-Malihah, Um Kaddadah, Tine and Mellit (Sector North);
Habila and Foro Burunga (Sector West); Edd al-Fursan and Tulus (Sector South); and
Muhajiriyah (Sector East). The assessment team visited nine locations, including
Golo. The state authorities confirmed that the sites will be used for public services
and to the benefit of local communities, with Mellit, Um Kaddadah and Habila having
been allocated to the College of Agriculture, while Al-Malihah and Tulus, which are
currently used by the security forces, to be converted into a school and a local
community centre. The assessment team witnessed that all but one of the team sites

10/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

(Um Kaddadah) are presently occupied by the joint forces for the weapons collection
campaign.
43. The state governments cooperated in the smooth handover of the sites through
establishing joint committees. While the state authorities have been supportive of the
drawdown process, they have high expectations and have formulated additional
demands towards the mission and the United Nations country team related to
development activities, especially in the areas of health and education.

F.

Civilian staffing review
44. The special report (S/2017/437) called for a civilian staffing review of
UNAMID, which was endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2363 (2017),
with a view to ensuring that staffing levels are adjusted to implement the revised
mandate. Given the magnitude of the change in the number of uniformed personnel
and the revised substantive focus of the mission, the staffing review concentrated on
commensurate reductions in civilian personnel and the alignment of structures to the
mission mandate. A reduction of 558 positions has been included in the revised
2017/18 budget submission that is under consideration by the Fifth Committee, and a
further reduction of 302 positions is being considered for the 2018/19 budget cycle.
45. The mission should find ways to address the needs of staff in the team sites,
since most of the support services are already concentrated at the level of mission
headquarters and the sector field offices, leaving the team sites dependent on short
missions from technical experts to resolve maintenance and repair issues for critical
services. Further staff reductions need to be implemented primarily at mission
headquarters and then in the sector field offices. In addition, in view of the low
percentage of women in the mission (29 per cent among staff in the international
category, and 13 per cent among staff in the national category), the forthcoming
comparative review process methodology and criteria should ensure that women
encumbering positions in sections and/or units with low representation leve ls of
women are not adversely affected through the streamlining exercise.

IV. Impact of the reconfiguration
46. The assessment in Darfur was undertaken within a few weeks of the closure of
team sites, which only allowed for a preliminary analysis of t he impact of UNAMID
reconfiguration. While no serious adverse impact was noted during the field mission
and during the subsequent weeks, it is clear that it is too early to make a definite
determination of the impact of the closure of team sites on the pop ulation. The
analysis below gives a general assessment of the situation, pointing to possible risks
as they were conveyed to the assessment team.

A.

Humanitarian and protection challenges
Communities of internally displaced persons and humanitarian assistance
47. While the security situation has visibly improved, the humanitarian indicators
illustrate a continuing emergency situation, with 2.7 million people displaced, of
whom 2.1 million are in need of assistance across Darfur, and more than half a million
children face severe acute malnutrition. Approximately 1.6 million displaced people
live in a range of camps and settlements in close proximity to urban or peri -urban
centres, with many of them displaced since 2003 and, for multiple reasons, unabl e or
unwilling to return to their places of origin. Approximately 533,000 persons have

17-23457

11/16

S/2018/12

returned voluntarily to their places of origin across the Sudan since 2003, and
UNHCR began the repatriation of Sudanese refugees from the Central African
Republic on 12 December. Nevertheless, the lack of security, basic services and
sustainable livelihoods in return areas, as well as issues related to land ownership
have become major impediments to return, as stressed in meetings the assessment
team had with representatives of internally displaced persons.
48. Overall, no additional displacements have taken place during the period of the
assessment in the vicinity of the closed team sites and their closure to date has not
resulted in the slowdown of humanitarian or development programme delivery. The
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service has weekly flights to Golo and Rockero,
the main challenge being the poor road conditions. The delivery of humanitarian and
recovery projects/programming is continuing, without hindran ce and without access
challenges.
49. In the above context, the humanitarian community is facing two main
challenges. The first concerns the large proportions of people affected by
displacement and other vulnerable residents who are facing a situation whe re
humanitarian assistance cannot meet their chronic and long-term needs, which remain
largely unaddressed owing to limited investment in human resources and physical
infrastructure. As part of a broader durable solutions strategy for Darfur,
consideration needs to be given to a pragmatic, longer-term approach that provides
assistance to those long-term displaced persons located in urban or peri-urban areas
in Darfur. The second challenge relates to the depletion of natural resources in the
context of desertification and continued population growth, paired with persistent
pockets of insecurity and weak institutions, which are unable to change the status quo.
The situation calls for appropriate interventions so as to break the cycle of poverty
and instability and offer the population longer-term, pragmatic solutions.
Protective environment
50. The improvement in the overall security situation has not translated into a
commensurate improvement in the situation of human rights, which is further
exacerbated by the continued state of emergency. Violations and abuses such as sexual
and gender-based violence, arbitrary arrests and detentions and the denial of free
expression and association persist with impunity. There were 149 cases of human
rights violations, involving 385 victims, documented between July and October 2017,
compared to 168 cases, involving 343 victims, during the same period in 2016. In
addition, 13 incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence were verified
between July and September 2017. Although, over the course of the assessment
period, there was a fluctuation and, to a certain extent, a decrease in the number of
human rights violations reported, the number of cases of sexual and gender-based
violence in the form of rape and attempted rape is consistent. There has been,
however, a gradual increase in the number of investigations initiated by the judicial
institutions.
51. During the period between 15 June and 15 August, there were 94 cases of human
rights violations, involving 204 victims, including 22 children, and 27 cases of rape;
investigations were initiated in 14 cases. During the period between 15 August and
15 October there were 72 cases of human rights violations, involving 253 victims,
including 16 children, and 27 cases of rape; investigations were initiated in 17 cases.
Over the past two months, there were 56 cases of human rights violations and abuses,
involving 123 victims, including 18 children, and seven cases of rape; investigations
were initiated in 26 cases. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified
43 incidents of grave violations, involving 57 children, between July and September
2017, compared to 48 incidents in the first quarter and 33 incidents in the second
quarter of 2017. In this context, police in West Darfur State have stepped up
12/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

investigations, leading to several arrests, and have given human rights teams access
to prisons; in Central Darfur State, investigations began on a case of sexual and
gender-based violence in September and the perpetrators were arrested; in North
Darfur State, the Government deployed the military to protect civilians against militia
groups and deployed prosecutors and judges to the Fato Barno area to facilitate land
returns and the resolution of land ownership disputes; and in South Darfur State, with
the support of UNAMID, the Government has re-established rule of law and security
institutions in Shataya locality, creating a positive impact in terms of stabilization and
an increase in the number of internally displaced persons returning to the area.
52. The closure of team sites across Darfur has created a gap in early warning
mechanisms, and access of human rights teams to those locations and their capacity
to verify human rights violations continue to be limited. Thi s is expected to result in
the underreporting of incidents. Capacity-building and work for the promotion of
human rights is also affected by logistical constraints. UNAMID is looking into
alternative ways to address these issues, including the creation of mobile teams to
operate through several sectors. There has been no progress in the negotiations of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with the
Government of the Sudan on a possible technical cooperation programme. In the
meantime, the mission has finalized plans for the conduct of night patrols in the 47
camps for internally displaced persons, which were identified as a protection priority
during the mapping of settlements of internally displaced persons in Darfur. It is
crucial, however, to enhance the capacity of the state authorities and other local actors
to effectively carry out the functions relating to the protection of civilians, especially
internally displaced persons, and the promotion of human rights.
Challenges to the rule of law
53. Across Darfur, the presence and capacity of justice and corrections institutions
remains limited. While the Government’s efforts to restore the presence of the
criminal justice chain, through the deployment of judges, prosecutors a nd police
personnel, are to be commended, rural areas are severely affected by the absence of
institutions. In the above context, while it is observed that so far, the drawdown of
UNAMID from several team sites has had no adverse impact on the functioning of
the judicial and prison institutions, its impact is mostly evident in the area of
implementation and monitoring of rule of law projects, advisory support to prison
institutions in Mellit and Um Kaddadah, legal aid services and the provision of
logistical support to national counterparts. In the absence of reliable UNAMID air
transportation, access by land for mission staff remains challenging, owing to the
mission’s security posture and restrictions by government security institutions.
54. The joint programme for the rule of law and human rights in Darfur of
UNAMID, the United Nations country team and the Government of the Sudan is
funded at only 14 per cent of requirements, despite the recent contribution by the
Government of Canada of $961,391, in addition to initial funding at a similar level
provided by UNAMID and UNDP. The mission’s footprint in Darfur and its logistical
support are important to the success of the programme in remote areas of the region.
The mobilization of additional resources to increase the country team’s capacity in
Darfur remains critical for creating the necessary impact of the programme on the
ground.

B.

Capacities of the United Nations country team
55. As indicated in the special report (S/2017/437), the United Nations country team
continues to face the same financial and staffing resource challenges in Darfur. The
humanitarian needs are currently funded at 45 per cent for 2017, whereas

17-23457

13/16

S/2018/12

development activities are funded at a much lower level. Most members of the country
team were of the view that it was too early to draw a conclusion regarding the impact
of UNAMID drawdown and reconfiguration on its ability to assume a larger role in
Darfur. They proposed the finalization of a system-wide Darfur fundraising strategy
as an immediate measure to address funding gaps for development programmes. From
the security perspective, country team members are adopting alternative solutions to
UNAMID escorts, by calling upon the Sudanese police, mainly in areas not affected
by conflict, outside the Jebel Marra region.

V. Cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
56. During phase one of the drawdown and reconfiguration of UNAMID, the
Government of the Sudan has been very cooperative in facilitating the repatriation of
contingents and the timely closure and hand-over of the team sites. To this end,
committees were established at the state level to coordinate the work of the relevant
government agencies and engage with UNAMID and the concerned parties in the
process of handover of assets. While expressing appreciation for the work of
UNAMID in fostering security over the years, several local officials and tribal leaders
requested more development-oriented projects. In the same context, they were of the
view that a number of assets, in particular generators, should have been donated to
the communities.
57. The operating environment for the movement of humanitarian personnel across
Darfur has been reliable and open since the revised directives and procedures for
humanitarian action were outlined by the Humanitarian Aid Commission in December
2016. Humanitarian actors have scaled up operations in Golo and surrounding areas
since July 2016, by providing health, education, water, nutrition, food security and
protection assistance, with the participation of an increased number of
non-governmental organization partners. The United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service has weekly flights to Golo and Rockero in Central Darfur State, as well as to
Sortony, Tawilah, Shangil Tobaya and Kabkabiyah in North Darfur. In South Darfur ’s
eastern Jebel Marra, areas of Menawashei, Belle el-Sereif and Layba are easily
accessible by road, as is Kass locality.
58. However, on four occasions, UNAMID patrols were not allowed to visit areas
from which the mission had withdrawn during phase one. Most recently, they were
twice denied access for security reasons, before being allowed to proceed on
6 December to Misteriya, the location of clashes between RSF and armed elements
affiliated to Musa Hilal.
Bureaucratic hindrances
59. Despite improvements in the request-issuance ratio, the mission continues to
experience some difficulties in obtaining visas for international staff. During phase
one of the reconfiguration, the Government granted 1,466 visas for UNAMID, which
constituted 84 per cent of the requests. Those visas included 875 for military and
police personnel and 43 for international staff. The non-issuance of visas affects the
Human Rights Section of UNAMID in particular, where the vacancy rate remains at
44 per cent. A total of 42 visa requests for United Nations police remain pending with
the authorities, leading to an increased vacancy rate that is slowly affecting the
mission’s ability to undertake stabilization efforts.
60. While the Government is progressively releasing food ration containers from
Port Sudan, the release of 50 shipments of United Nations-owned equipment and
contingent-owned equipment remains pending between customs and the Ministry of
Finance, two of which have been pending since 2015.
14/16

17-23457

S/2018/12

VI. Conclusions
A.

Assessment of conditions for implementing phase two
61. While it is still early to reach conclusions on the full impact of the reduction
and reconfiguration in areas where UNAMID team sites have closed, it is important
to note that no adverse effects have been reported so far. Security, as reported by all
our interlocutors, has significantly improved, and the constitution of security
committees by the five state governors, with membership from across all security
services, has instituted effective coordination to ensure unity of purpose. In addition,
the weapons collection campaign is overall a positive development that should also
reduce the level of armed violence, if pursued to its logical conclusion. The campaign
should also contribute to the improvement of the conditions necessary for the return
of internally displaced persons to their original homes. The campaign will need to be
carefully undertaken in Kalma camp, pursuing the plan agreed by the trilateral
committee between the state government, internally displaced persons and UNAMID.

B.

Adjustments arising from issues emerging during phase one
62. Owing to the security situation in Kalma camp for internally displaced persons
and the resulting operational requirements, some adjustments in the reconfiguration
plan for phase two will be made to enable continued military coverage for Kalma
camp until the end of phase two. This would allow the formed police units to take full
control gradually, once conditions improve.
63. The redeployment of formed police units in phase two, from military to
police/civilian-only team sites, will require enhanced synchronization with the
repositioning of the military component of UNAMID, as well as coordination with
communities, government and other actors working in settings with formed police
units, so that their expectations are managed. Furthermore, in view of the reduction
in the number of individual police officers from mission and Sector headquarters, the
assessment team supports the merger for administrative purposes of Sector West with
Sector Centre, and Sector South with Sector East, while giving careful consideration
to the critical elements of command, control, coordination and communication
structures.
64. As the mission moves into phase two, there should be better coordination
between the mission headquarters in El Fasher and the Sectors, as well as proper
guidance to the state offices on the changing nature of the mission and the required
new thinking and approach. Insufficient coordination and guidance on the
operationalization of the two-pronged approach and the scope of stabilization was
evident in the Sectors and is a cause for concern with regard to the implementation of
the mission’s mandate.
65. As phase two proceeds, therefore, a greater focus must be placed on mandate
delivery in the current environment.
66. In line with paragraph 71 of the special report (S/2017/437), the mission should
step up the implementation of a new security posture. The mission ’s development of
an accessibility risk matrix is commendable but the review process should be more
comprehensive, to include all areas where security has improved, and more inclusive,
by taking into account the views and the needs of the United Nations country team
and humanitarian actors. The mission should also review the size of UNAMID camps
and compounds so as to ensure adequate security with reduced uniformed components.

17-23457

15/16

S/2018/12

C.

Way forward
67. Provided that the current trends continue and contingent on considerations by
the Security Council of further reductions in uniformed personnel, it is recommended
that a review take place before the renewal of the mission’s mandate in June 2018, in
order to consider a new mission concept with adjusted priorities. As it stands, at the
end of phase two, the mission would have reached its limits in the delivery of its
priorities in its current geographic scope.

D.

Fundraising for the United Nations country team
68. UNAMID and the United Nations country team are in the process of developing
a joint fundraising strategy for the implementation of the Integrated Strategic
Framework (2017-2019) that identified common priorities for sustainable peace in
Darfur. The strategy aims to scale up country team resources for peace consolidation
in the next two years, for a phased transition in Darfur, and will also include outreach
to non-conventional donors, engagement with international and regional financial
institutions and a wider scope of financial resources. Funding for the consolidation of
peacebuilding efforts in Darfur should be treated as a political issue of high priority
by Member States in order to protect the investments in peace and to avoid a relapse
into conflict.

16/16

17-23457
