S/PV.7264

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7264th meeting

Monday, 15 September 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2014/653)

14-53460 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1453460*

S/PV.7264

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2014/653)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Bernardino
León, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/653, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bernardino León and Mr. Olivier
Nduhungirehe, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Rwanda, in his capacity as representative of the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. León.
Mr. León: The Security Council has before it the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/653) on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
report provides details on the work of the Mission
over the past six months, and highlights some of the
critical political and security developments that have
taken place in Libya during that period. It provides a
sombre reading of the rapidly deteriorating political
and security landscape in the country.
Tomorrow will mark three years since the Council
established the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Despite the initial sense of optimism that accompanied
the Mission’s establishment, today we find ourselves at
a critical moment in Libya’s democratic transition — a
faltering political process that has brought the country
closer to the brink of protracted conflict and civil strife.
2/7

15/09/2014

Since assuming my duties just over two weeks ago,
I have been in contact with Libyans from across the
political spectrum. On 8 September, I undertook my
first official visit to Libya as Special Representative,
traveling to Tobruk, Al-Baida, Tripoli, Misrata and
Zintan. Following frank and open exchanges with
Libyan interlocutors, I am confident of the willingness
of all the parties to engage constructively with our
efforts to explore options for a peaceful way out of
the current crisis. All acknowledged the deep political
differences and profound sense of mistrust, yet all
underscored the need to overcome those differences and
to end armed hostilities, and for the political process to
resume as soon as possible in order to prevent further
polarization and division.
In my discussions with the elected House of
Representatives, currently seated in Tobruk, I reiterated
the international community’s unequivocal recognition
of it as the sole legislative authority in the country.
But I also impressed upon its members the need for
brave, responsible leadership. Given that a group of
parliamentarians continues to absent itself from the
House of Representatives’ proceedings, I underlined the
importance of active inclusiveness and for immediate
steps to be taken to address the concerns cited by these
parliamentarians. In this respect, I am encouraged by
the apparent willingness of the House to display the
necessary flexibility in pursuit of a mediated resolution
of the current crisis surrounding it. I have also received
positive signals from the other side that it intends to
move in a similar direction.
I also had the privilege of meeting with members
of the Constitution Drafting Assembly in the city of
Al-Baida. Despite the difficult political and security
challenges that confront its work, I was heartened by
the sense of perseverance and commitment conveyed by
members of the Assembly. At that meeting, UNSMIL
agreed to facilitate an event that will bring together the
various committees established by the Assembly with a
number of legal experts to provide technical assistance.
In Tripoli, Misrata and Zintan, I had the opportunity
to meet with various political leaders and other key
figures associated with the recent outbreak of military
conflict in Tripoli and its environs. I conveyed to all
the Council’s commitment to Libya, as made clear in
resolution 2174 (2014), to hold accountable anyone
actively undermining the country’s political process
or responsible for a continuation of armed conflict

14-53460

15/09/2014

The situation in Libya

or for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
I stressed that the solution to Libya’s current
crisis can be achieved not through military means, but
through political consensus based on key principles,
including respect for the Constitutional Declaration, the
democratic process, the 25 June legislative elections,
an end to incitement and provocation, the unequivocal
rejection of terrorism, and a meaningful and inclusive
political process. This would have to be accompanied
by steps on the security front to enable the State
to assert its control over vital installations, and for
Government to exercise its authority without the threat
of armed intimidation. There can be no compromise on
these principles.
In all my meetings, I warned of the dangers of
creating parallel political institutions and processes,
which can only contribute to further division and
polarization. I impressed upon my interlocutors the
need to refrain from taking any action that would
further exacerbate current divisions, and stressed that
any solution to the current crisis would have to be
negotiated within the framework of the current political
legitimacy emanating from the elections. While the
parties reiterated their willingness to engage according
to these principles, there remains a huge trust deficit.
The parties will need to move quickly to translate their
stated commitment into actions.
In the east, renewed military confrontations in
Benghazi threaten to exact an increasingly heavier toll
on the civilian population. In the west, an unrelenting
campaign of indiscriminate shelling continues to target
large sections of the Warshafana area near Tripoli,
causing untold suffering for the civilian population.
Tens of thousands of civilians are now known to have
fled their homes; many, including women and children,
have also lost their lives as a result of the shelling. We
also have credible reports — including one I received
just a few minutes ago from the local councils in
Warshafana — of severe shortages of medical supplies
and further suffering. Our appeals for an immediate
halt to military operations have gone unheeded, as have
our calls for urgent humanitarian access.
Efforts aimed at resolving the current crisis and
resuming the political process cannot make progress
against the backdrop of continued fighting. Despite
repeated calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
including from the Security Council, the situation on

S/PV.7264

the ground remains extremely volatile and precarious.
I continue to remind all concerned parties of the urgent
need to heed the Security Council’s call to bring an
immediate end to armed hostilities in the country.
In Tripoli, reports of retaliatory attacks against
individuals and property of those associated with the
Government of Prime Minister Al-Thinni, as well as
individuals hailing from Zintan, are a cause for concern.
Camps in Tripoli housing displaced members of the
Tawergha community, one of which was attacked on
30 August, have now been vacated for fear of shelling and
abductions. We have also received credible information
from eastern Libya about incidents of intimidation and
other retaliatory attacks targeting individuals hailing
from Misrata. The growing number of acts of human
rights violations and abuses has created a climate of
fear, and countless political and civil society activists,
including women, are known to have left the country
out of concern for their safety and security.
I have also reminded all parties of their obligation
not to take hostages and to treat humanely anyone
whom they have detained in the course of the recent
fighting. I urge all armed groups holding people to
release them or hand them over to the justice system.
Armed groups must also account for the fate of those
under their control who are presumed missing. In
thatregard, UNSMIL offered to assist in addressing the
issue of detainees. Both sides expressed their readiness
to cooperate.
Given the scale of the humanitarian situation
across Libya, the United Nations humanitarian country
team is urgently taking steps to mobilize additional
resources to cover the high demand for relief support.
Within the past month, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) dispatched
a humanitarian convoy to assist some 12,000 displaced
people in the western town of Zuwara. The World Food
Programme, which is already providing assistance
to some 50,000 internally displaced persons, will
participate alongside UNHCR to reach an additional
6,000. Separately, the International Organization for
Migration has taken steps to repatriate thousands of
stranded migrants to their countries of origin.
Within the past two weeks, United Nations teams
have carried out an initial assessment of contamination
by explosive remnants of war in Tripoli as a result
of the recent fighting. It is clear that the scale of the
contamination is significant and poses a threat to

14-534603/7

S/PV.7264

The situation in Libya

civilian lives. Plans to deploy risk-education and
explosive-ordnance disposal teams as immediate
priorities are under consideration.
Three years following the fall of the former regime,
the Libyan people find themselves nowhere closer to
realizing their hopes and aspirations for a better future
and for a State that safeguards their safety and security.
Accordingly, many Libyans are deeply disillusioned
with their country’s democratic transition.
The United Nations remains committed to its
mission in Libya and will continue to impress upon all
Libyans the urgent need for progress in overcoming
their differences through dialogue. I believe that is
the only way to spare the country further chaos and
violence, and to prevent it becoming a magnet for
extremist and terrorist groups.
I have no illusions regarding the difficulties and
challenges ahead. Political divisions are deep, the
sense of mistrust is almost overwhelming and, given
the proliferation of arms outside the effective control
of State authorities, the security situation remains
extremely fragile. But I nonetheless remain a fervent
supporter of the Libyan people’s desire to safeguard
their country’s national unity and social fabric.
The small window of opportunity before us for a
peaceful resolution to the current crisis should not be
missed. Libya’s leaders will have to act quickly and
seek a political solution through a meaningful and
inclusive dialogue. Given the urgency, I intend to follow
up shortly with further visits to Libya. Our engagement
and that of the international community — next week at
the General Assembly we will have new opportunities
for this, as well as next Wednesday at an international
conference of regional actors in Madrid — will
remain solidly anchored in the principles of unbiased
engagement with all parties, and that of non-intervention
in Libya’s internal affairs and respect for its national
sovereignty.
The President: I thank Mr. León for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nduhungirehe.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): In accordance
with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report to the
Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to the same resolution. The report
covers the period from 10 June to 15 September 2014,

4/7

15/09/2014

during which time the members of the Committee met
twice in informal consultations.
At the outset, I would like to recall that, by its
resolution 2174 (2014), of 27 August 2014, the Council
reinforced the arms embargo and expanded the criteria
for the designation of individuals or entities as subject
to the travel ban and assets freeze. On 2 September,
the Committee discussed the implementation of the
resolution and adopted a press release on the subject.
It also discussed, and intends to proceed with, the
dispatch of notes verbales to all Member States on arms
embargo-related matters and inviting the provision of
information in the light of the additional designation
criteria.
On 4 September, the Panel of Experts submitted its
interim report to the Council. I shall briefly recapitulate
the main points of that document. The Panel identified
the rapid decline in the security situation in Libya,
coupled with weak oversight over procurement of
military materiel and virtually no control over seaand airports by the Libyan Government, as a strong
indicator that large quantities of military materiel had
reached militias. The Panel presented evidence of two
diversions of military materiel that was previously
exempted by the Sanctions Committee. The Panel also
described a separate potential violation of the arms
embargo involving a militia. The Panel has received
several reports of external support to armed groups
through the provision of arms and financing, which it is
currently investigating. In addition, the Panel informed
about continued illicit arms transfers to the civilian
black market in Libya.
While the Panel noted an increase in leads related
to attempted and actual transfers of arms into Libya
since the beginning of 2014, it found, as in previous
mandates, that arms also continued to be trafficked
out of the country. Since, however, at the time of the
writing of the Panel’s report it had not yet been invited
by any Member State to inspect seized materiel, the
report contains no specific case studies in that regard.
The Panel reported a violation of the travel ban
by one of the listed individuals and is investigating a
possible further violation of the travel ban by another
listed individual. The Panel noted that large amounts of
assets that should be frozen are held under false names
and by front companies around the world. In follow-up
to its last report (S/2014/106, annex), the Panel presented
further evidence of the lack of implementation capacity

14-53460

15/09/2014

The situation in Libya

of States in relation to its assets-freeze measures.
The Panel reported on its ongoing efforts to trace the
potential hidden assets of a range of listed individuals
and expressed its intention to look into the financing of
armed groups in Libya, thereby gathering information
on individuals for possible designation under the new
designation criteria of resolution 2174 (2014). The Panel
presented a total of 19 recommendations, of which
four were directed at the Security Council, 14 at the
Committee and one to the Government of Libya.
On 12 September, the Committee discussed the
interim report and its recommendations. The Panel’s
report was generally well received. One member of the
Committee, while recognizing the value of the Panel’s
work, called for clear identification of the origins of
arms flows and regretted the lack of cooperation from
Member States in that regard.
The main points emerging from the discussion were
concerns about the security situation, arms flows into
and out of Libya and the operationalization of resolution
2174 (2014), including possible designations of spoilers,
in particular those violating the arms embargo. The
Committee agreed to follow up on 15 recommendations,
including through a note verbale to all Member States,
as well as a press release covering issues relating to the
arms embargo and by extending an invitation to Libya
and its neighbours to attend a Committee meeting to
discuss sanctions implementation challenges.
In that context, I would further like to note that
agreed follow-up action on the recommendations
numbers 7, 8 11 and 14 contained in the Panel’s final
report is still pending before the Committee. Taking into
account recent developments in Libya and the Council’s
response in resolution 2174 (2014), follow-up action
on those recommendations will be addressed together
with the additional recommendations contained in the
Panel’s interim report.
The reporting period was quite busy for the
Committee. Therefore, I will now simply touch on
those issues on which the Committee took action.
On 27 June, the Committee updated its list of
individuals and entities in follow-up to recommendations
10 and 13 contained in the final report of the Panel
of Experts and issued a corresponding note verbale
to all Member States, as well as a press release. On
23 July and 11 September, the Committee updated its
implementation assistance notice number 2, adding
two new procurement focal points — respectively,

S/PV.7264

in the Libyan Ministries of Justice and the
Interior — and introducing additional post-delivery
notification requirements, reflecting the provisions
of resolution 2174 (2014), and streamlining the notice
to make it more user-friendly. On 5 September, the
Committee approved a new regional expert for the Panel
of Experts following the resignation of his predecessor.
On 8 September, following the receipt of a request for
guidance from a Member State in relation to the scope
of the arms embargo ahead of deliveries of militaryrelated material to Libya by another member State
using its air space, the Committee dispatched letters to
both Member States on the matter.
Lastly, I turn to some updated statistics on the issues
dealt with by the Committee since the last periodic
report to the Council. In relation to the arms embargo,
the Committee approved one exemption request and
received outstanding documentation on three incomplete
notifications, which were subsequently considered by
the Committee and on which no negative decision was
taken. Moreover, in relation to the arms embargo, the
Committee responded in one case that did not require
notification, citing paragraph 10 of resolution 2095
(2013), and replied in three cases that the notifications
were incomplete. The Committee further received an
implementation report by a Member State and a followup to an inspection report from another Member State.
The President: I thank Mr. Nduhungirehe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Madam President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and your team
every possible success, and I am convinced that you
will achieve the best possible results. I would also like
to thank Mr. Bernardino León, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and to thank him for his
briefing, which was most interesting and instructive. I
would like to congratulate him on his recent assumption
of office as new Head of the United Nations Interim
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and wish him
every possible success. My gratitude also goes out to
the Chair of the Security Council Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) for his
briefing on the work of the Committee.
It is a great regret for me to have to say that the
fratricidal war that has continued in the city of Tripoli

14-534605/7

S/PV.7264

The situation in Libya

and its suburbs since 13 July has claimed more than
500 lives and injured more than 1,000 young people
and other civilians. This war has destroyed public and
private infrastructure whose value has been estimated
in the billions of dollars. Similarly, the Libyan social
fabric has been torn to shreds. Today kidnapping,
torture and assassinations, based merely on what is
written on one’s identity card, are all common place,
and strikes at all those who harbour different views and
who back the legal authorities. Nothing today indicates
that these practices are going to soon come to an end,
either in the capital or its suburbs, which are controlled
by armed groups in the absence of the Libyan State.
The Libyan Dawn Coalition is present there and they
use heavy weapons. The same is true of other armed
groups, which are all part of the Libyan Dawn Coalition
and responsible for an increasing number of civilian
victims in Tripoli and its suburbs.
Human rights today are no longer respected,
neither are fundamental freedoms. Unfortunately, the
various prisons and detention centres of the various
armed groups are filled with detainees who have been
arrested based on the information on their identity
cards, without any judicial justification.
What happened under the Al-Qadhafi regime is
happening again today. It takes different forms but it is
more violent and more widespread. Even Al-Qadhafi’s
hangings in public squares are back. Their aim is
to intimidate the average citizen. All this is being
encouraged by the Mufti of Libya and his gang.
Various public institutions and public building
have been seized, and civil servants can no longer enter
them. They can no longer enter even the temporary
ministries in the cities of Al-Baida because of
threats targeted against them if they were to back the
legitimate authorities, represented by the Government
and the recently elected House of Representatives. That
has deprived the Government of most of its staff and
personnel, and impedes the drawing up of an interim
Constitution and an interim Government in its interim
headquarters to allow it to discharge its work effectively.
Furthermore, we hope that the role of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya will be different
and will change according to the new priorities,
while remaining within the framework of its current
mandate. The Mission’s mandate is focused on
providing assistance and support to the legitimate
Libyan authorities in specific areas so as to ensure that
they can carry out their duties and serve as effective
6/7

15/09/2014

institutions during this transition period. The Mission
is also supposed to provide support to the House of
Representatives and the Government appointed by that
body, and to help them implement the decisions they
may take. In particular, it is supposed to help them put
an end to the clashes between the armed groups and to
protect civilians, to disarm every armed group, without
exception, and integrate their elements into State
institutions, to work to expel the armed groups from
the various cities and to liberate the State institutions in
order to enable them to function unaffected by threats
and arms, especially in the capital of Tripoli.
The House of Representatives and the Government,
as the legitimate authorities pursuant to the will of
the Libyan people, cannot accept any armed group,
whether the Libya Dawn coalition or any other armed
group, being treated as being on an equal footing
with them. The legitimate authorities wish to warn
against any alteration of the United Nations Mission
in that regard, because any treatment that equates the
various belligerent parties with the authorities would
be seen as a clear violation of the Mission’s mandate,
of the principles guiding its work and of resolution 2174
(2014). It would also create an obstacle to the political
process, go against the interests of the Libyan people
and encourage fighting between brothers in order to
achieve illegal material gains. I emphasize this because
such gains are the main cause of the clashes in and
around the capital.
The Parliament and the Government wish to send
the following clear message to the Security Council.
First, the Libyan people respect the Council’s role in
supporting their legitimate desires and aspirations,
and hope to see continued support for the legitimate
authorities in order to put an end to terrorism, promote
security and stability and enshrine the authority of the
legitimate Government throughout Libya’s territory.
Second, for three years now successive Libyan
Governments have attempted to promote dialogue
and show tolerance in the face of crimes committed
by armed groups. They have sometimes even turned
to those armed groups in efforts to maintain security,
but the fact is that our security is threatened by such
elements. These Governments have paid armed groups
for their services, and paid them far more than the
police and the armed services, but instead of obeying
the Government these groups now pose a genuine threat
to national security and stability. What we are seeing is
the complete destruction of the gains of the revolution

14-53460

15/09/2014

The situation in Libya

of 17 February and of the aspirations of the Libyan
people, thousands of whom have been martyred.
Third, the House of Representatives and the
Government will not engage in dialogue with the armed
groups on any political demands imposed by force.
The only acceptable dialogue is on how to implement
the resolutions of the House of Representatives on the
armed groups, on ending hostilities, on dismantling
and reintegrating the armed groups into civilian and
military institutions and above all, evicting them from
Government seats and infrastructure.
Fourth, the House of Representatives and the
Government reaffirm that it is the right of every
Libyan to participate in the decision-making process.
The Parliament represents all Libyans. It was created
through free and fair elections. For those who have
not been able to elect their preferred representatives
for security-related reasons, the legal authorities
must be able to ensure that the necessary procedures
will be in place in order to enable them to elect their
representatives to Parliament, and to do so as soon as
possible. The House of Representatives hopes that those
members who could not participate in the meetings in
its new headquarters will also be able to do as soon as
possible.
Fifth, all Libyans have the right to a Government
that represents them all and that runs the country
without discrimination and without marginalizing any
component of Libyan society.
Sixth, the judicial authorities will bring to justice
and prosecute all individuals, entities and groups that
have attacked institutions and civilians, occupied
public buildings or damaged public infrastructure and
resulted in sanctions. We will also cooperate with the
Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya in order to
provide information on individuals who should be on
the Committee’s list, in accordance with resolution
2174 (2014).
Seventh, if the armed groups do not withdraw from
the cities, if dialogue does result in the implementation
of Parliament’s resolutions, and if all possible efforts
have been made within the framework of the authority
of the State and the Government’s obligations, steps
will be taken to preserve the State’s unity and authority

S/PV.7264

over the whole of its territory, including through the
use of force, and with recourse to the international
community if necessary.
Eighth, any armed group reaching an agreement
with another armed group that does not support the
State’s authority and resorts to terrorism will also be
considered to be a terrorist group and will be firmly
dealt with by the State.
Lastly, all those who wish to help the Libyan
people emerge from the dark tunnel in which they find
themselves as a result of the proliferation of weapons
and the intransigence of the armed groups should
provide all possible support to the Libyan national
armed forces, and should do so immediately, before it
is too late.
Turning to the arms embargo, I should like to
reiterate that there is a need to provide military
equipment to the national army in order to ensure that
it is in a position to effectively confront terrorism and
to promote the State’s authority throughout Libyan
territory. The procedures adopted today concerning
the Sanctions Committee pose an obstacle along the
path to equipping and arming the national army in an
appropriate and adequate way — this at a time when the
army is at its weakest in terms of facing terrorists and
illegal groups. That is all the more so as such groups are
illegally, yet regularly obtaining weapons from at least
two States. Such groups are also making use of several
airports and air fields under their control, especially
the Misrata airport and Mitiga airport in Tripoli.
I should also mention that the occupation of the
headquarters of the Defence, Interior and Justice
Ministries in Tripoli poses an obstacle to the work of the
focal points. We will provide the Sanctions Committee
with information concerning Government procedures
pertaining to the focal points. The Libyan Government
will of course carefully study the report of the Panel of
Experts and its recommendations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

14-534607/7
