UNITED NATIONS

CORDS
THIRTY-NINTH

4 =’
I/_
7$-$y

Sî”,$
“.A’

YEAR

th
MEETING:

4 SEPTEMBE;
SEPTEMBE

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2555/Rev.l)

. . , . . . . . . , . . , . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President..

1

. . . , . . . . . . , , . , . , . , . . .,. . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda,. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , , . . , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(SA6713). . . . . , . . , . . , a.. . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . e. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV -2555

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents ofthe~Se,curity Council (symbol Y. . .) are normally published in
quarterly SupplenzentS of the Officiai Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicatés the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Comcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2555th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 4 September 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

MASHlNGAIDZE

present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1, Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2555/Rev. 1)

of the agenda

2, The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16713)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
At the very outset of this
meeting, 1 should like on behalf of the Council to pay
tribute to Mr. Léandre Bassole, Representative
of
3urkina Faso, for his service as President of the Council for the month of August. 1 am sure that 1 speak for a11
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to Mr, Bassole for the great diplomatie ski11 and
courtesy with which he conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(W16713)
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2552nd to
2554th meetings], 1 invite the representative of Lebanonand the representative of Israel to take places at
the Council table; 1 invite the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Qatar, the Sudan, the

Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon)
and Mr. Levin (Israel) took places ut the
Council table; Mr. Damavandi Kamali (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan
{Kuwait),
Mr. AlKawari
(Qatar),
Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattai
(Syrian Arab &Public),
Mr. Al-Mosfir
(United Arah
Emirates)
and Mr. Noman (Yemen) took the places
reserved for them ut the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform members
of the Council that 1 have received letters from the
representatives
of Cuba, Democratic
Yemen and
Turkey in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Orarnas Oliva
(Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen) and
Mr. Kirça (Turkey) took theplaces reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The fïrst speaker is the representative of Turkey, 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. KIRÇA (Turkey): First of all, we extend our
felicitations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
With your proved qualities and experience, we are
confident that your guidance Will again constitute an
important asset in the Council’s deliberations.
6. We also wish to pay tribute to Mr. Bassole, representative of Burkina Faso, who presided effectively
and with ski11 and wisdom over the Council’s work last
month.
7. Upon the request of the Government of Lebanon,
the Council is addressing itself to the situation in that
country . The very fact that this lofty body is once again
engaged in a discussion of this subject is proof of the
devastating impact and consequences of the invasion of

that small country by Israel more than two years ago.
Lebanon has a unique delicate mosaic as a society and
an intricate institutional fabric. The country has long
been experiencing problems, but it was the Israeli
onslaught that dynamited its very foundations. The
tragedy and suffering of the people of Lebanon are
unequalled, except for the plight of the Palestinians
who, by no accident, suffer at the hands of the same
oppressor-Israel.

12. A free, united and reconciled Lebanon is what the
people of Lebanon deserve. This is also indispensable
for the overall stability of the region. Israel’s withdrawal is one major prerequisite for that objective to be
a reality. In conditions acceptable to the Lebanese
Government, a11other foreign forces now in Lebanon
must also evacuate that country. The Lebanese people
know best how to put their society and their country
together again. They have done it in the past and have
succeeded in establishing a creative and prosperous
society. We are confident that, if left alone and free
from foreign interference from whatever quarter, the
Lebanese people Will again corne together. This time
the Lebanese people know the task is more diffîcuh, but
succeed they must, because if they do not they know
they Will perish. Al1 countries are under the obligation
to help the Lebanese Government in this monumental
national task.

8. We are speaking today in order to underline our
deep concern with the fate and future of Lebanon and to
reiterate our support for the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty over a11its territory within the internationally recognized boundaries. The re-establishment of Lebanese control over Lebanese territories is
an essential condition for the successful pursuit and
completion of the process of reconciliation
and reconstruction in that country. Turkey, with its long historical experience in the region and its close association
over many centuries with the evolution of the events
that shaped the area, is in a special position to understand and appreciate the meaning and importance of the
current state of affairs in Lebanon. This is why we
are deeply disturbed by what is happening in and to
Lebanon.

.

13. It is our ardent hope that the Council Will now
adopt a timely and judicious resolution to help Lebanon
move forward and more confidently in its quest for the
regaining of its sovereignty and complete independence
and for progress in the process of national reconciliation and reconstruction. The representative of Lebanon
has stated his Government’s expectations of the Council. We cal1 on the Council to meet those legitimate
demands.

9. The representative of Lebanon in his statement
[255Znd meetirzgl convincingly and in great detail depicted the policies and practices of the Israeli occupation authorities in southern Lebanon. We do not need to
recount them here. In southern Lebanon life has been
gravely disrupted for a people that has already endured
untold sorrows and suffering. Israel’s persistence in
this negative behaviour has been one of the leading
causes of tension and violence in the region and represents one of the main impediments to the emergence
of any reasonable prospect for a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East.

14. Miss MONCADA
(Nicaragua) [interpretation
from Spanish]: It is a pleasure for my delegation to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Council during the monthof
September, a month that represents the beginning of
important activities for the international community. In
spite of the geographical distance between our two
countries, we have close historical ties with your country, Sir, based on the struggle of our peoples to liberate
our countries from oppression and foreign exploitation,
As members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we share common goals and aspirations.
15. We have similar links with Burkina Faso, whose
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Bassole, intelligently
and objectively occupied the presidency
during the month of August.

10. We therefore cal1 on Israel to abide by its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law by respecting the rights of
the people in the occupied territories and the indigenous character of these lands.

16. In his appearance before the Council, the representative of Lebanon provided us with complete details concerning the cruel and inhuman treatment CO
which the inhabitants of southern Lebanon are being
subjected under Israel’s illegal occupation. That conduct, typical of Israel in a11occupied Arab territories.
cornes as no surprise. Just a few months ago, we also
heard the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) [2540th meeting] relate tbe latest
deaths and suffering of his people in the Palestinian
refugee camp of Ein El-Helweh. The fact that Israel bas
taken every measure to isolate southern Lebanon, the
western Bekaa and the Rashaya district is unknown
only to those who do not want to read the newspapers.

11. Lebanon cari and Will solve its problems only
when it is freed from the yoke of foreign domination and
occupation. That is why Israel’s prompt withdrawal
from Lebanon is essential for the salvation of Lebanon.
The continued occupation of southern Lebanon will
only retard the process of Lebanese rehabilitation and
enforce existing divisions in that country. The sooner
Israel recognizes that its invasion of Lebanon and the
continuation of its presence there have brought neither
peace nor security but only more suftering for everyone
and further instability and tension for a11 concerned,
the better. We have heard the representative of Israel
profess that Israel intends to withdraw from Lebanon
[ibid.]. We urge Israel to put that intention into effect
without further delay.

17. Al1 of this stems from Israel’s invasionof Lebanou
and its illegal occupation of that country which con2

this situation does not continue and to promote peace
and put an end to violence.

stitutes an important link in the expansionist plans of
Israel with the ultimate goal of displacing and annihilating the Arab and Palestinian people.

23, The specific problem we are now considering cari
at no time be separated from the overall situation of the
Middle East.

18. The invasion of Lebanon in itself and its harmful
effects constitute one more problem created by Israel
for the Arab nation, however the representative of the
occupying Power may attempt to convince us here that
it is the Palestinian people and the Lebanese themselves that are responsible for Lebanon’s problems. He
has even been SO brazen as to te11 us that occupied
southern Lebanon is a paradise, thanks to the generosity of the occupying Power.

24. The ruthless and inhuman Israeli practices carried
out against the population of southern Lebanon are a
result of Israel’s invasion and illegal occupation of that
territory two years ago, and that invasion and illegal
occupation are the result of a Zionist policy that attempts to deny the Palestinian people its right toexist as
a people and its right to self-determination and independence as a nation. Hence it is essential to find a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the problem of the
Middle East on the fundamental basis of the restoration
of the national rights of the Palestinian people.

19. It is clear that the policy practised daily by the
Zionist régime in that specific territory has as its objective the annihilation of the Palestinian people and the
destruction of the sovereignty, independence and unity
of Lebanon. In accordance with those objectives, Israel
has illegally built installations to divert the waters of the
Wazzani and Litani rivers towards its territory with a
view to isolating completely the western Bekaa and the
Rashaya district.

25. While it is a fact that there is already a framework
for a peaceful solution to the situation in the Middle
East, it is also true that we are still far from its implementation, and that is the task we must tackle. We must
demand the immediate implementation
of the relevant
General Assembly and Security CBuncil resolutions.

20. What is Israel attempting through these inhuman
actions? The Council cari accept no explanation, no
pretext, since any action of Israel in occupied Arab
territories cannot be legitimate or peaceful, in SOfar as
the occupation itself is illegal and illegitimate. We have
stated this on earlier occasions before the Council and
we repeat it now: as long as Israel continues to occupy
southern Lebanon, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank,
their inhabitants Will continue to suffer terror, oppression and the denial of their most fundamental rights.
Hence, it is essential that the Council use every means
within its reach to have Israel implement its resolutiens. In the case of Lebanon, in particular, there were
many resolutions adopted in 1982, including resolutions
508 (1982) and 509 (1982), the latter demanding that
Israel withdraw from Lebanon. The Council cannot
disregard the fact that, if Israel has not yet heeded any
of these resolutions and has, on the contrary, strengthened its inhuman and illegal policies day by day, it is not
doing this on its own, but rather supported by the
military and political might lent it by a permanent member of the Council which, like Israel, resorts to force
and intimidation to subjugate the peoples that valiantly
struggle to obtain or maintain their independence.

26. Furthermore, it is essential that the International
Peace Conference on the Middle East be convened as
soon as possible, with the participation of the main
protagonists to the conflict. If there are negative responses to that proposai, which was endorsed by the
International
Conference on the Question of Palestine,
by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/58 C of
13 December 1983 and by the overwhelming majority of
Council members, it is precisely because dialogue and
negotiated political solutions are of no interest to those
who resort solely to the strength of weapons to settle
situations unilaterally.
That cannot and must not be
accepted by the Council.
27. Mr. BASSOLE
(Burkina Faso) [interpretation
from ;Fre&]:
On behalf of my delegation, allow me
first of a11to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of September. You represent a country, Zimbabwe, with
which Burkina Faso has close relations of friendship
and brotherhood, and your capabilities as a wise and
experienced diplomat ensure the successful outcome of
the work of the Council under your guidance.

21. In spite of obstacles, the Council must continue to
demand that Israel adhere to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of international law and the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,’ requiring that the occupying Power
respect the basic human rights of the inhabitants of the
territories it occupies.

28. The facts reported to the Council by the representative of Lebanon in his statement at the beginning of
our debate constitute proof to my delegation that
Israel’s true intentions in its occupation of southern
Lebanon are far from those of guaranteeing the security
of the northern frontier of the Jewish State. Can the
security of a frontier be guaranteed by terrorizing the
inhabitants of southern Lebanon day and night? Can
this objective be attained by arresting civilians and
imprisoning them in camps? Can the security of Israel
be guaranteed by obstructing and working systematically to paralyse a11exchanges of goods between south-

22. It is precisely at this difficult time for mankind,
when weapons andforce are used against the peoples of
Africa, Latin America and the Middle East, that the
Council has the greatest responsibility to ensure that
3

em Lebanon and the rest of the country? And what is
one to say of other arbitrary and inhumane practices,
such as burning crops, preventing the harvesting of
to harvest crops
grains, obliging the inhabitants
prematurely and pillaging historical sites?
29, By committing these tragic acts in the occupied
regions of southern Lebanon, thus flagrantly violating
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
other international instruments-in
particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ The Hague
Conventions II of 1899 and IV of 1907 respecting the
Laws and Conventions of War on Land,2 and the Universa1 Declaration of Human Rights-the
Israeli authorities are clearly not seeking to attain that objective
their representative SO calmly and serenely outlined
before the Council.

34. Whatever the opinion of the representative of
Israel, and whatever the arguments he may advance,
my delegation is firmly convinced that the Lebanese
people is the sole master of its destiny. No reason and
no principle of international law cari or should justify
interference, from whatever source, in the interna1 affairs of a country.
35. It was on the basis of this firm conviction that the
Burkina Faso delegation joined the delegations of other
non-aligned countries in demanding the withdrawal of
the Multinational
Forces from Lebanon. The same conviction now leads it to urge Israel strictly to comply
with the relevant resolutions of the Council, particularly resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), and unconditionally
to withdraw its occupation armies from
southern Lebanon without further delay.
The next speaker is the rep36. The PRESIDENT:
resentative of Democratic Yemen. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

30. Far from it, these reprehensible acts of ;he Israeli
forces are designed artificially to inflame and sustain
tension in southern Lebanon in order to justify, in the
eyes of the public, the perpetuation of the military
occupation which the Tel Aviv authorities advocate as
the sole means of achieving a settlement in their conflict
with Lebanon and the other Arab States of the region.

(Democratic Yemen): It gives
37. Mr. AL-ASHTAL
me great pleasure to address the Council under your
eminent leadership, Sir. Hailing from Zimbabwe, you
bring with you the experience of a man who knows too
well the agony of foreign occupation, as well as the
determination
of a heroic people fîghting for independence and dignity. SO it is with Lebanon’s freedom
fîghters, who have transformed southern Lebanon into
a battlefield and a nightmare haunting the Israeli forces
of occupation. As an accomplished diplomat, you have
already manifested your wisdom and tact and, above
all, your profound sense of fairness.

31. As if the suffering and damage caused to the
peaceful inhabitants of southern Lebanon by the misdeeds of the occupyingforces were not sufficient, Israel
has now taken its ambitions SOfar as to seek to divert
the waters of the Litani and Wazzani Rivers and thereby deprive the population of the occupied area of a
precious natural resource,

38. TO your predecessor, Ambassador Bassole, under
whose stewardship the Council started this debate on
the situation in southern Lebanon, 1 offer my congratulations on his excellent performance as President
of the Security Council for the month of August.

32. Although this report remains yet to be confirmed,
it has caused my delegation deep disquiet. For more
than a decade my country has suffered from the ravages of a drought and is better placed than many to
appreciate the value of water. We fully understand the
apprehensions of Lebanon, given these reports of the
projected diversion of waters by the Israeli occupying
forces. Should these legitimate apprehensions be confïrmed, my delegation would associate itself with the
other members of the Council in resolutely condemning
what could only be described as an act of outright
piracy. Meanwhile, we trust that information reaching
us on this subject Will not go beyond the phase of a
mere rumour which Will be refuted by the results of
the investigations mentioned by the representative of
Lebanon.

39. 1 cannot even attempt to restate the well-documented complaint of the representative of Lebanon. He
was clear and lucid. He described, in plain language,
the tragedy of the Lebanese people, languishing under
the yoke of Israeli occupation, and the atrocities of an
occupying Power that violates international law, the
1949 Geneva Conventions,” and, indeed, resolutions of
the Council. His requests were equally candid: ending
Israel’s occupation of southern Lebanon, as set forth
in resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) unanimously
adopted by the Council; cessation of Israeli practices
against the inhabitants of the south, the western Bekaa
and the Rashaya district; lifting the Israeli siege of the
occupied territories; stressing Lebanon’s inalienable
right to its waters; and, finally, obliging Israel to respect the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights, norms of international
law, the 1949 Geneva Conventions, other international
conventions
and The Hague Conventions II of 1899
and IV of 1907 respecting the Laws and Conventions
of War on Land.*

33. In addressing the Council on 29 August last
K2552nd meeting1 the representative of Israel sought to
justify the occupation of part of Lebanese territory by
the armed forces of his country. He even went SOfar as
to describe certain benefits-hypothetical,
ofcoursewhich this occupation allegedly provides to the local
population. Al1 that remains, it would seem, is for the
Council to pay tribute to the Israeli army for its Lebanese enterprise.
4

40. But what was Israel’s response, as stated by
Mr. Blum? His main argument ran as follows: Why
worry about the situation in southern Lebanon, when
there are more serious problems elsewhere in the country? TO make his point he quoted extensively from news
reports highlighting
“the already shaky security situation in Lebanon arising out of the ongoing internecine
warfare in that country, in particular in and around
Beirut and in the north” [ibid., para. 601. He actually
tried to put the blame for Israel’s atrocities on
the Lebanese Government-more
SO, because it had
abrogated the Agreement, of 17 May 1983, which was
nothing less than an Israeli-American
diktat to the
Lebanese people. Not only that, but he went on to say
that Lebanon’s complaint was diversionary propagands. Such is the response and the attitude of an
aggressive Israel, whose raison d’être is forceful
expansion and territorial aggrandizement. Israel’s systematic plan of action is simple: justify, then invade;
occupy, then justify.

tinued Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon? Israel
is actually taking advantage of Lebanon’s problems,
many of which are of its ownmaking. The implication of
Israel’s response to Lebanon’s complaint is that the
occupation of southern Lebanon is a blessing. The fact
is that Israel’s occupation of southern Lebanon is the il1
of ills for Lebanon, that it is the most serious danger
facing the Lebanese people and its Government,
and
hence that it is the most urgent problem which the
Council has to deal with now. That is why this debate is
timely, if not belated, and that is why the Council is
called on to respond to the requests of the representative of Lebanon. If there is diversionary propaganda,
and there is one example, it cari be found in the Israeli
response in this debate. That is not new. Israel has, as a
matter of expediency, concocted flimsyjustifîcations
to
implement its policy of expansion. It is the same settler
mentality that attempts to create facts by sheer power
-the rest is propaganda.
44. Fortunately,
southern Lebanon proved to be one
place where the fact of military occupation faces the
fact of bitter heroic resistance. Two years later, Operation “Peace for Galilee” became operation hell for the
Israeli Armed Forces. Together with Israel’s atrocities,
history records daring operations against Israeli soldiers. The more barbarity by Israeli soldiers, the more
resistance by a people dedicated to freeing its land and
shaking the very foundation of Israeli arrogance. The
longer they stay the more they Will bleed. And when
theyfmally withdraw it Will be becauseof the wounds of
occupation.

41. Bolstered by generous American military, economic and political support, Israel does not even feel
that it owes the Council an explanation forits continued
occupation
of southern Lebanon, for its colonial
policies and malpractices, and for its utter disregard for
the Council as well as for international law. Only Israel,
which is daily nurtured by American assistance, and
which is now emboldened by a strategic alliance with
the United States, cari afford to flout the Council. And
why not? For Israel has been systematically shielded by
an American veto, a veto which has for a11 practical
purposes rendered the Council powerless and toothless. Only countervailing power is what Israel understands, and SO it is with the United States, which
brought back its Marines from Lebanon, leaving behind
its strategic ally well in control of southern Lebanon.

45. The United States has pitifully become hostage to
an expansionist Israel, It tango on sustaining Israel and
shielding it by its veto, its arms and its alms, but it
cannot stifle the will of a people determined to fight and
win. Our hearts go out ta the martyrs of resistance in
southern Lebanon and to every fighting Lebanese man,
woman and Child. We bow to them in admiration and
awe, for they, together with the Palestine resistance
movement,
represent the conscience of the Arab
masses in revolt, whose conflict with zionism and its
bankrollers is only beginning to unfold.

42, One wonders why it is that Lebanon’s complaint
is seen by Israel as diversionary propaganda. 1s it too
much for a suffering country to bring its case to the
Council, again and again, lest the world forget that its
territory is usurped by force of arms? And why should
not Lebanon unleash a political and media campaign to
alert world public opinion to the plight of its people and
to seek redress from the Council, whose obligation it is
to defend the Charter and to implement its own resolutions? Israel apparently needs more time to tighten its
grip on southern Lebanon and to transform it into a
permanent feature of its expansionist dreams. TO bring
to light the misery of the Lebanese under Israeli OCCUpation, to unmask the brutality of an invading army,
and to expose Israel’s designs on, and plunder of, Lebanon’s natural resources is no propaganda. Those are
established facts that no blanket denial cari caver UP.
But Lebanon is supposed to shelve not only the problems of occupation, but Israeli occupation itself, until
annexation becomes a fact of life. 1s not that what
happened to the Syrian Golan Heights and to JeruSalem?

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. ORAMAS
OLIVA
(Cuba) [interpretutian
from Spanish]: Sir, first of a111 wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of September. We are convinced that your
wisdom and diplomatie
skills Will be the complete
guarantee that the Council Will successfully conduct its
work this month.
48. We also wish to express our appreciation for the
skilful and just way in which your predecessor, the
representative
of Burkina Faso, Mr. Bassole, led the
work of the Council last month.

43, And what if Lebanon, unfortunately,
has problems elsewhere in the country? Does that justify con5

49. For more than two years the Council and other
United Nations bodies have been considering the situation created in the peaceful and non-aligned Republic of
Lebanon by the criminai invasion and acts of vandalism
that have been committed since then by the Israeli
occupation forces in that martyred country.

54. The cloquent statement by the representative of
Lebanon before the Council and his detailed description of the daily violations of international law by IsraeI
reveal the truc intentions of the Tel Aviv leaders. Not
satisfïed with the defeats suffered because of its senseless policy, Israel is attempting to carry out its former
plan of extending its borders with southern Lebanon
and of including that territory in the annexationist plans
it is carrying out in the West Bank, Jerusalem, the
Golan Heights and the Gaza Strip.

50. We a11recall the slogan that was then held high by
the Zionist aggressors-“Peace
for Galilee”-in
their
futile attempt to justify the unjustifiable and to divert
the attention of the international community from their
real objectives, which were none olher than to liquidate Palestinian resistance, deal blows to progressive
Lebanese forces, create the conditions that would enable them to set up a Government in Beirut subject to
Tel Aviv’s orders, help in the placement of United
States troops in Lebanon, implement Israel’s expansionist policy, lay the bases for further acts of aggression against other Arab States, especially against Syria,
and consolidate their presence in the Golan Heights,
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

55. It is no longer a secret to anyone that this constant
defiance by the Zionist authorities of the internationa1
community is only possible thanks to the unconditional
support that Israel receives from the United Statcs,
whose weapons, financing and political and diplomatie
support enable that country repeatedly to flout Council
resolutions and to implement its aggressive and expansionist policy against the Palestinian people and the
Arab countries, with a11the dangers that represents for
international peace and security.

51. Neither the resolutions of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly nor the decisions of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and other international forums have succeeded in thwarting the diabolical intentions of the Israeli leaders who, in their
desire to achieve their objectives, do not even hesitate to commit crimes as horrendous as the massacres
of Sabra and Shatila, to mention just those that have
aroused the greatest outcry and indignation in world
public opinion.

56. The international community cannot go on accepting the fact that a State Member of the Organization
continues with impunity to trample underfoot international law and the purposes ancl principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is time to put an end to
Zionist outrages. The security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon must be respected. Israel
must put an end to its criminal actions in southern
Lebanon and withdraw forthwith its invading forces
from that country.

52. Today we are witnessing the intensification of an
irrational policy that is totally doomed to failure.
It would seem as though the Israeli leaders were attempting to punish the Lebanese people for the humiliating outcome of the so-called international forces in
that small country, particularly the forces of their ally
and protector, the United States, as well as for the
abrogation of the ominous agreement imposed on them
by the force of the occupier and pressure from Washington.

57. We hope that the members of the Council Will be
able to respond to the appeal of the representative of
Lebanon and contribute to putting an end to the martyrdom of that long-suffering people by exercisingfully the
mandate entrusted to them.

5’3. None the less, my delegation does not believe that
these alone are the motives for the most recent Zionist
actions in southern Lebanon and for Israel’s reluctance
to heed Council resolutions 508 (1982) and SO9 (1982).

’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7.5, p. 973.
’ Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Cosventions
and Declnrutions
of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).
’ United Nations, Trmty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

NOTES

9C-6131%Febnuuy

1993~2,050
