S/2020/893

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 10 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie; Mr. Zohrab
Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie; as well as the statements delivered by
Mr. Rubén Sillié, Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs of the Dominican Republic,
and by the representatives of Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference regarding “Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations: Role of the International
Organization of la Francophonie”, convened on Wednesday, 8 September 2020.
Statements were also delivered by the representatives of Canada, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ireland, Romania, Senegal, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
from the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-11789 (E) 110920 261020

*2011789*

S/2020/893

Annex 1
Statement by
Bintou Keita

the

Assistant

Secretary-General

for

Africa,

[Original: French]
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address the Council on the subject of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
and the role of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) in this
context. This is a particularly opportune time to look at the partnership with the OIF,
as both our organizations are celebrating important anniversaries this year: 50 years
for the OIF and 75 years for the United Nations.
Today, together with the OIF, we are working to promote international peace
and security, particularly through early warning and conflict prevention, and
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are also partnering in promoting sustainable
development, good governance, democracy, the rule of law, human rights and the
inclusion of women and youth. Our partnership is anchored at the highest level,
as demonstrated by today’s meeting of the Security Council and by the General
Assembly’s regular adoption of resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIF, the latest of which was adopted on 15 April 2019 (resolution
73/290). Furthermore, contacts between the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General of the OIF, Ms Louise Mushikiwabo, are constant. In
addition, interactions between the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, on the one
hand, and the Group of Francophone Ambassadors to the United Nations, on the
other, are equally frequent.
Allow me to focus today on our collaboration in the area of peace and security.
Since our cooperation is rich and multifaceted and the time available for this briefing
is limited, the examples I will cite are merely illustrative and not exhaustive.
First of all, I would like to commend the joint work of the United Nations
and the OIF in the areas of early warning and conflict prevention, and in electoral
assistance and observation of electoral processes. Recently, the United Nations and
the OIF have cooperated in those areas in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, the Comoros, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon,
Guinea, Madagascar and the Central African Republic. The quadripartite meeting
on Cameroon of the United Nations Secretariat, the OIF, the Commonwealth and
the African Union, held on 20 July, is an example of expanded cooperation in early
warning and prevention. Also in the area of prevention, the OIF played an important
role in the establishment of the Francophone Network for the Prevention of Violent
Radicalization and Violent Extremism that Could Lead to Terrorism to mobilize
Francophone expertise on this topical international issue, which is a considerable
contribution, particularly in the Sahel.
Conflict prevention is also based on promoting fully inclusive societies,
especially for women and young people. It is a key area of collaboration between
the United Nations and the OIF. Indeed, we need to redouble our efforts aimed at
promoting the involvement of women and youth in conflict prevention, management
and resolution, as well as in electoral processes. This commitment is part of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which celebrates its twentieth anniversary
this year. It is also in line with resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security.
The imperative need for the just inclusion of women and youth in all aspects
of the life of society and the international community is inescapable. In the Frenchspeaking world alone, with some 274 million male and female French speakers
across 54 States, women inarguably represent half of the population and young
2/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

people under the age of 30 represent the majority. Our partnership with the OIF for
the implementation of the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, adopted in January
2019, aimed at strengthening the number of French-speaking women in uniform, is
a modest contribution to this effort.
Secondly, I welcome the strong support that OIF member States are providing
to peacekeeping operations in the spirit of partnership anchored in the Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. In A4P, the OIF co-sponsors and supports the theme
of performance and accountability. To this end, we are making joint efforts together
with the OIF to increase the level of French-speaking civilian and uniformed
personnel in peacekeeping operations deployed in French-speaking host countries,
including through French-language training. We encourage OIF member States
to continue their efforts aimed at building the capacity of francophone civilian
and uniformed personnel, including to enable them to reach senior positions in
peacekeeping operations and beyond. Moreover, working with the OIF, we strongly
support the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), notably through our support
for the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
The Joint Force, in particular, continues to grow in strength and deserves enhanced
international support.
Finally, it is important to underscore the important role the OIF plays in the
area of peacebuilding, in cooperation with various organizations, each of which also
plays a unique and essential role. In particular, I welcome the OIF participation in
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on Burundi, Guinea, GuineaBissau and the Central African Republic, as well as in ad hoc meetings of the PBC
on other conflict-affected francophone countries.
In all aspects of our partnership with the OIF in terms of peace and security,
we jointly support and promote multilingualism. Indeed, we subscribe to the idea
that diversity, particularly linguistic diversity, is one of the riches of the cultural
heritage of humankind. We therefore work together to celebrate and protect that
diversity.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has highlighted the need for enhanced and
renewed multilateralism in order to meet the challenges of our times. Cooperation
within and among international organizations is one of the pillars of multilateralism.
The close partnership between the United Nations and the OIF is fully in line with
that objective.
In that connection, I welcome the Security Council’s open debate via
video-teleconference on cooperation with regional and subregional organizations,
particularly the OIF.

20-117893/42

S/2020/893

Annex 2
Statement by the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Louise Mushikiwabo
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to thank the Nigerien presidency of the Security
Council for holding this open debate devoted to the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF), which was founded 50 years ago in Niamey. For the first time,
the Security Council is devoting a debate to cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIF.
This is an opportunity to reiterate my deep commitment to renewed multilateral
cooperation to benefit the people we serve and to a more agile, supportive and
effective multilateralism, particularly in the maintenance of international peace and
security, which are the subjects we will be discussing today.
The International Organization of la Francophonie is a regional organization
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. But it is, in fact, transnational,
since it brings together 88 States and Governments, including 54 full members from
five continents, united by a common language and common values.
As a crucible of cultural diversity, our organization has made cooperation and
solidarity the guiding principles of its action, which has been particularly developed
in the political and diplomatic fields.
One of the first objectives of the OIF charter, under the heading of solidarity
between peoples, is to help establish and develop democracy, prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts and support the rule of law and human rights.
The OIF has specific tools to accomplish that. Its knowledge of countries, the
bonds of trust established with local actors and diversified networks of expertise
enable it to intervene nimbly and closely match the requirements of each situation.
Preventing and responding to crises and conflicts in francophone countries is
carried out in close cooperation with our international partners, first and foremost
the United Nations.
The OIF’s actions in support of international peace and security consist of
three main areas. The first is peacekeeping. While the OIF does not currently deploy
personnel in the field, I am hopeful that it will be a major player in peacekeeping. Our
actions in this area have three objectives: to support the emergence of a francophone
strategic vision; to strengthen the ability of our member States and their personnel
to optimally contribute to peacekeeping operations; and to increase the use of French
in said operations.
Today, out of the 13 operations deployed by the United Nations worldwide,
seven are in the French-speaking world. When it comes to francophone theatres of
operations, mastery of French and knowledge of the local culture contribute to their
overall performance and security.
Despite real progress, the current level of participation of French-speaking
personnel in peacekeeping operations is still relatively limited. As of June 2020, the
proportion of uniformed peacekeeping personnel who are nationals of OIF member
States stood at approximately 40 per cent, of whom not even 3 per cent were women.
In view of the stakes in the field of peacekeeping for French-speaking
countries, I have decided, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, to further strengthen and systematize the mobilization of the International
Organization of la Francophonie and its member States. The OIF is the first
4/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

international organization to volunteer to formally assume the role of champion of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Through Morocco and France and in conjunction with the United Nations, the
OIF will fully participate in the organization of the second ministerial conference
on peacekeeping in the French-speaking world, scheduled for 2021. In the meantime,
we will organize a high-level event on the French language and intercultural issues
in peacekeeping operations, which will unite the efforts of francophone actors.
At the programme level, OIF and United Nations teams, in partnership with
France and other member States, will continue working on capacity-building for
French-speaking troops, the translation of operational manuals into French and
the teaching of French to non-French-speaking troops. We will also take action to
increase the number of female military officers in order to promote the presence of
French-speaking women, both civilian and military, in peace operations.
Our second area of action, through which we also contribute to the major
missions of the United Nations and the Security Council, is crisis prevention and
management. In tense situations, I take political and diplomatic action — either
directly or through special representatives and envoys — to prevent the escalation
of tensions or to facilitate dialogue among the parties. As such, the OIF is highly
mobilized in the Central African Republic to support the peace process driven by the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, signed in February 2019.
The International Organization of la Francophonie deliberately considers its
crisis prevention and management efforts in the context of larger dynamics for greater
effectiveness. This concerted approach is fully consistent with the development of
networked multilateralism promoted by the United Nations Secretary-General.
In that spirit, in November 2019, I encouraged the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Commonwealth Secretary-General to make a tripartite
visit to Cameroon to spur and support Cameroonian partners in the search for a
solution to the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions of the country. Those
concerted efforts continue within the United Nations.
Finally, we also stand by our countries facing major crises, as is currently
the case in Mali. As I indicated before the Permanent Council of the OIF on 25
August, I have undertaken to rapidly dispatch a high-level delegation to Bamako, in
consultation with our close international partners. I will appoint the members of that
delegation in the coming days. The OIF will play its full part in the efforts to end the
crisis and restore constitutional and democratic order to Mali.
This mobilization is part of the OIF’s growing investment in the Sahel,
alongside international and regional partners. That investment is notably reflected
in its cooperation with the Permanent Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) to promote governance and stability, and more effectively combat violent
radicalization and extremism.
I hope that our cooperation with the G-5 Sahel will reach a new level with the
establishment, in the coming months, of a youth radio station in the Sahel. We have
worked hard on this at the highest levels. In that regard, I would like to salute the
commitment of the Heads of State of the region, the Executive Secretary of the G-5
Sahel and our technical and financial partners, in particular the European Union.
Finally, and this is our third area of action, la Francophonie supports
the democratic processes of its member States. We offer structural support for
institutions of our member States that contribute to democracy, the rule of law and
good governance. The expertise we make available to our member States is based on
a unique mechanism — the networks of institutions of la Francophonie. Within these
20-117895/42

S/2020/893

structures, which include judicial, regulatory and mediation institutions, as well as
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights — the OIF mobilizes
the best skills and makes them available to its member States in a spirit of sharing
best practices. This in-depth work contributes to consolidating the institutional
frameworks essential for democratic development.
We are also very committed to supporting electoral processes themselves. In
many of our member States, elections can still bring out latent tensions and generate
major crises. The OIF has therefore developed a dedicated programme to support
and strengthen the capacities of actors involved in the preparation and holding of
elections, namely, electoral commissions, constitutional courts, media regulatory
authorities, political actors and civil society. Our actions are designed to strengthen
the professionalism and capacities of these actors on key electoral-process issues,
such as the management of litigation, the consolidation of electoral data and national
election observation. In this way, we are helping to promote the holding of free, fair
and transparent elections. This year, the OIF has been particularly active in support
of preparations for year-end elections scheduled in Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, the
Central African Republic and the Niger.
On 25 September, together with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire, I launched a francophone platform in the Security Council. This new
platform provides a framework for regular dialogue on international peace and
security issues with a view to amplifying the francophone voice in the Security
Council, as well as to develop convergences between francophones on issues on
the Security Council’s agenda. Currently, 7 of the 15 members of the Council are
members of la Francophonie.
It is also through this platform that we will continue our actions to promote the
French language and linguistic diversity in the work of the Council. This diversity,
which is dear to us, has been undermined in recent months and has contributed to
creating inequities in the participation of various members of the Council, as well
as stakeholders and members of the public that follow the Council’s work. This is
why I welcome today, in particular, the use — for the first time — of the Security
Council’s new multilingual video-conferencing system, which allows participants
to have access to simultaneous interpretation of the proceedings in the six official
languages of the United Nations, including French. This is a very important step
forward in ensuring that all delegations can participate from a distance in the work
of the Council fully, equitably and effectively.
We hope that today’s debate will contribute to a more systematic consideration
of linguistic and cultural issues in the mandates of peacekeeping operations decided
by the Council. More broadly, I call for everyone to get involved in order to ensure
that cultural and linguistic diversity is truly considered a cardinal value of the
multilateral system.
The global health crisis has further revealed the need for international
cooperation and for strengthening, while renewing, the multilateral system. The
88 States members and Governments of la Francophonie, be they from the North
or the South, are deeply committed to the principles of multilateralism. They have
placed solidarity and cooperation at the heart of la Francophonie’s action.
In conclusion, I wish to assure members of the Security Council of our
determined commitment to working together with the United Nations to build and
strengthen a truly democratic multilateralism that is in service of our populations.

6/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 3
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia,
Zohrab Mnatsakanyan
[Original: French]
In my capacity as the representative of the Republic of Armenia, which is
currently presiding over the summit of la Francophonie, I would like to thank you
very much, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to include the topic of cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of la Francophonie on the Security
Council’s agenda today. I would also like to thank the briefers who preceded
me, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of la Francophonie, for their insightful briefings.
Mr. President, it is to the credit of your country, the Niger, and its capital,
Niamey, where the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation was established
in March 1970, marking the birth of institutional Francophonie, that you have
initiated this debate, which is so timely in this year in which we celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of la Francophonie.
Fifty years after its creation, la Francophonie is an important platform
for multilateral cooperation, united around the French language and the shared
fundamental values of peace, democracy, respect for human rights and equality
between women and men. The relationship between the United Nations and la
Francophonie is nourished by numerous partnerships based on shared values, a
common will to work to strengthen international peace and security, and a joint
determination to fight against the scourge of terrorism and in favour of the prevention
of genocide and crimes against humanity. It is also based on a strong and unwavering
commitment to achieving the objectives of sustainable development.
The relationship is rich in this fruitful cooperation, which has led to the
adoption of a biennial resolution by the General Assembly. Resolution 73/290, the
most recent version of the biennial resolution, was adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly last year and addresses the commitments made at the seventeenth
summit of la Francophonie, as set forth in the Yerevan Declaration and other
documents adopted at that time
Today’s debate is taking place in the specific context of a serious global
health, humanitarian and economic crisis caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which is threatening to undermine the cohesion of our
societies everywhere and is making international cooperation — and the affirmation
of effective multilateralism — more necessary than ever. Today’s debate is also an
opportunity to reflect on our vulnerabilities and on the shrinking of civic, democratic
and humanitarian spaces, global solidarity and trust in multilateral institutions. It is
a kind of call to action; it is a test of our resilience and our collective capacity.
At a time when the negative consequences of the COVID-19 crisis are likely
to weigh particularly heavily on developing countries and on the most vulnerable
in our populations, the United Nations and la Francophonie must strongly affirm
their willingness to promote peace, cooperation, solidarity and the values of living
together in harmony. This is a challenge that both of our organizations must take up,
as we both have an obligation to take action for improved global governance.
In that regard, we strongly supported the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and resolution 2532 (2020), which demands a cessation of hostilities
during this crisis. There can be no place for the use or threat of use of force in
resolving conflicts.
20-117897/42

S/2020/893

We are also concerned by the increase in hate speech, which has particularly
marked this period of health crisis. It is now more essential than ever to demonstrate
our commitment to the values of tolerance, respect for human rights and cultural
diversity. Despite the considerable efforts of the multilateral system, we continue
to face armed conflicts, destabilizing military escalations and hate speech at the
highest political level, including in our immediate neighbourhood.
Today I am fully aware of the relevance of the Yerevan Summit’s theme
of promoting the values of living together and the importance of the Yerevan
Francophone Appeal for Living Together, launched by the Heads of State and
Government of la Francophonie. As the Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan,
stated at the Summit of la Francophonie, the values of peace, solidarity and integral
humanity that define the ideology of living together in the French-speaking world
are a common good, a wealth that it is important for us to preserve at all costs. That
is clearly an important dimension of cooperation between the United Nations and la
Francophonie on which our visions and objectives converge.
I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing our firm commitment to the
promotion of cooperation between the two organizations and its multidimensional
nature. I am convinced that today’s debate will help to enrich that relationship and
will also give full visibility to that fruitful partnership. I have no doubt that, under
the joint impetus of the Secretary-General of la Francophonie and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, cooperation will be strengthened in the future and
new and equally promising prospects for collaboration will open up.

8/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish and French]
We would like to thank the briefers for their interesting presentations.
We would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the work of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), which this year celebrated
its fiftieth anniversary and is represented here today by its Secretary-General,
Mrs. Louise Mushikiwabo.
The Dominican Republic is honoured to be an observer State of the IOF.
Since 2009, when we joined the organization, we have been actively implementing
its agenda by contributing to the settlement of international issues based on its
founding values.
We would like to highlight the significant impact of the OIF’s cooperation
with the United Nations in the context of peacekeeping, where their joint work plays
a vital role. In that regard, multilingualism is a fundamental tool in developing
peacekeeping operations. At present, half such operations are conducted in parts
of French-speaking countries, and we therefore wish to acknowledge the major
contribution made by the preparatory workshops for the troops deployed in those
countries, organized annually by France, the United Nations and the OIF.
We also recognize the significant contribution made by the OIF through
its initiatives to promote the women and peace and security and the youth, peace
and security agendas, which are priority areas for the Dominican Republic during
our membership of the Security Council. We all must commit to guaranteeing the
meaningful, full and effective participation of women and young people in peace and
political processes, thereby ensuring the credibility and durability of those processes.
We would like to highlight the positive impact of preventive diplomacy and
early warning systems as tools that enable us to anticipate and prevent the spread of
conflicts and massive human rights violations. We therefore recognize the excellent
work done by the OIF in that regard through dialogue, mediation and good offices.
Almost a year ago today, in the context of the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, we participated in a high-level meeting
of the French-speaking non-permanent members of the Security Council, where
highly topical issues were discussed, such as conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
the role of women and young people. We hope that such meetings can be repeated
annually to encourage greater cooperation among the French-speaking members of
that important body.
We would not want to fail to mention the leading role of the OIF in climate
change-related aspects by developing initiatives in that regard through its Institut de
la Francophonie pour le développement durable.
Another of the most current challenges to international security is cybercrime.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic hosted a regional workshop on national
strategies in the fight against cybercrime and the development of cybersecurity
in French-speaking Caribbean countries. At that event, experiences and practices
were shared and regional cooperation mechanisms were established to combat
that scourge.
At this time of great challenges for multilateralism, we are convinced that close
collaboration between the United Nations and the OIF facilitates a stronger and more
20-117899/42

S/2020/893

effective international multilateral system based on diversity, mutual cooperation
and shared international principles. We are very pleased that such collaboration is
reflected in tangible initiatives for peace, development and human security.
We look forward to deepening the comprehensive partnership between the
OIF and the United Nations and to continuing the strong commitment to implement
common, inclusive and people-centred strategies for peace.

10/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
Belgium welcomes the initiative of the Nigerien presidency of the Security
Council to organize this open debate on the role of the International Organization
of the Francophonie (OIF), as we celebrate its fiftieth anniversary this year. I also
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, the Secretary-General of the OIF
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia, in his capacity as Chair of the
Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie, for their enlightening briefings.
As highlighted by the briefers, as well as the General Assembly in its biennial
resolution on this subject, cooperation between la Francophonie and the United
Nations has been strengthened over the years. As a founding member of those two
organizations, Belgium can only welcome that. Belgium has three main messages to
bring to today’s debate: multilateralism, Africa and cultural diversity.
My country supports strong, effective and responsive multilateralism now
more than ever. That is the common thread of our commitment in the Security
Council. In the current climate of mistrust of multilateralism, further increased by
the global health crisis, it is more important than ever to work together, strengthen
our solidarity and find common solutions to the shared challenges we face.
In that context, the OIF brings specific added value by participating in a
renewed and inclusive multilateralism. The organization brings together as full
members, associate members or observers nearly half the States Members of the
United Nations from the five continents, a number of which are unfortunately
countries in crisis or conflict. Those States all have French-speaking populations
but with very different cultural backgrounds. Belgium is deeply committed to the
notion of a French-speaking community. In that respect, I commend the SecretaryGeneral of the OIF for her role as a peace mediator, and I welcome her efforts to
further the organization’s place on the international stage. The OIF’s response and
responsiveness to the coronavirus disease crisis have been exemplary, as was the
establishment of a solidarity fund for African women, which demonstrates that
solidarity is a core value of our Francophonie.
In that context, Belgium supports the OIF as a regional organization that is
committed to optimal cooperation with the United Nations. That also applies to the
Security Council, where many countries in the French-speaking world, as well as
thematic issues that are important to the OIF, are considered, such as the prevention
of violence, conflict resolution, democratic transition, transitional justice and the
role of women in that connection.
My second point concerns Africa. More than half the States members of the
OIF are African countries. The IOF again ensures, with its modest means, that it uses
its multiplier effect, its institutional networks and its expertise to take action in a
targeted manner. That was also the case on 25 August with the adoption of measures
against Mali following the coup d’état in order to restore constitutional order there.
I am also thinking of the support of la Francophonie for its efforts, together with the
Commonwealth and the African Union, for a national dialogue in Cameroon.
It could therefore be appropriate to explore ways to further strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF — for example, by promoting

20-1178911/42

S/2020/893

joint actions, such as setting up joint field missions or missions involving special
envoys of the two organizations.
Finally, I would like to highlight the ongoing work of la Francophonie to
mobilize the United Nations in promoting multilingualism and cultural diversity
as a key element of multilateralism, both at Headquarters and in United Nations
operations in the field. That is essential to building trust among between populations
and United Nations staff, which is indispensable for the smooth running of
peace operations.
Belgium welcomes the concrete efforts of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. We are committed to supporting them by assisting the Secretariat, in
particular in translating training manuals into French for peacekeeping troops.
We believe cultural and linguistic diversity to be at the heart of the nexus of
security, development and human rights. The need to take better account of cultural
and linguistic diversity is well reflected today in the Security Council’s first meeting
by video-teleconference in the six official languages since the beginning of the
restrictive measures as a result of the pandemic. I am very grateful to the Secretariat,
the Niger’s presidency of the Security Council and all members of the Council for
their efforts to that end.

12/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
[Original: English and French]
We thank the briefers for their presentations. Estonia welcomes the opportunity
to discuss the issue of cooperation between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF).
Regional cooperation can be a valuable tool in maintaining international peace
and security. Estonia, also as an observer to the OIF, welcomes the work of the OIF,
which helps to enhance the goals of the work of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We also welcome the attention given to multilateralism and multilingualism.
We are aware that the OIF today is not only an organization of States that have
the French language in common, but also an association of States that shares the
same universal values as the United Nations. We would particularly like to commend
the work of the OIF aimed at promoting democracy, the rule of law, human rights,
gender equality and the empowerment of women, girls and young people and their
active participation in society.
Estonia also recognizes OIF’s contribution to crisis resolution, peacebuilding
and the development of cooperation in the peacekeeping sector, including
strengthening the participation of francophone contingents in peacekeeping
operations. The access and the ability of peacekeepers to communicate with the
local population in the francophone countries is a powerful tool for building trust
and, through that, the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.
We further note the important collaboration between the OIF and the United
Nations in the field of electoral monitoring and assistance. Estonia commends the
OIF for being present in countries that have requested and allowed the electoral
monitoring missions to provide the necessary assistance and support.
In that context, we have noted OIF’s quick reaction to the recent developments
in Mali, including its decision to suspend Mali’s membership of the organization.
We recognize that, at the same time, the OIF has aimed to maintain cooperation that
would help the country’s civilian population and a transition to democracy.
Looking ahead, we anticipate our participation in the OIF summit in Tunis
in 2021, to be held under the theme “Connectivity in diversity: the digital vector of
development and solidarity in the French-speaking world”. Estonia is committed to
sharing its experience and good practices in e-governance through creative digital
solutions with the countries of the Francophonie. We need a digital future protected
by international rules, while preserving our green planet.
Finally, we reaffirm the commitment to working together with the OIF in the
implementation of its multifaceted mandate, including in relation to the maintenance
of peace and security in cooperation with the United Nations.

20-1178913/42

S/2020/893

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the Niger for organizing this debate, as well as
Ms. Mushikiwabo, Ms. Keita and Minister Mnatsakanyan for their briefings. As you,
Sir, recalled, it was in Niamey that 50 years ago 21 States established a cooperation
agreement, which became the most universal international organization after the
United Nations. Our meeting today has a symbolism that is all the stronger because
five of the founders of the Security Council are among its current members.
The commitment to the French language and multilingualism unites us, and
that is why we are such fervent defenders of it. But, beyond that, we share a common
identity among Francophones based on a set of values, foremost among which are
solidarity, cultural diversity and human rights. During the crisis that we are going
through, the International Organization of la Francophonie (IOF) has been able
to mobilize to back innovation, ensure the continuity of education for millions of
children and support the empowerment of vulnerable women and girls. I would like
to emphasize two points.
First, I want to commend the growing role of the Francophonie in peace and
security, particularly since the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on Democracy
in 2000. In that context, at the Francophonie summits, members reiterate their
commitment to strengthening their participation in peacekeeping operations.
The commitment of the International Organization of la Francophonie
to democracy also guides its work in supporting the holding of free, reliable and
transparent elections. One obviously recalls the important efforts made in some
countries by former Secretary-General Abdou Diouf and the major role of his good
offices in favour of reconciliation. In recent years, the OIF has been involved in a very
large number of electoral processes, through actions ranging from the organization
of training seminars to the deployment of electoral observation missions.
Most recently in Mali, the International Organization of la Francophonie
reacted in unison with the United Nations to condemn the 18 August coup de force. It
is now essential that the civil political transition be put in place as quickly as possible
and be accompanied by Mali’s international partners, particularly the Economic
Community of West African States. The OIF could opportunely play a role, in
cooperation with the United Nations, in long-term support for the next electoral
process, in order to allow a return to constitutional order.
In Guinea, the International Organization of la Francophonie has again
this year advocated for a resumption of dialogue. In the run-up to the presidential
election of 18 October, which we remain concerned about, we believe that the United
Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie could usefully call
on all Guinean actors to assume responsibility, engage in dialogue and exercise the
utmost restraint.
We welcome the deepening of the relationship between the International
Organization of the Francophonie and the African Union and the contribution that
this dialogue can make to preventive multilateral diplomacy.
Secondly, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations could benefit more
from the OIF’s expertise, particularly in the field. As many peacekeeping operations
take place in French-speaking countries, proficiency in French is a guarantee of
effectiveness and should therefore more systematically be a precondition for
14/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

deployment. The OIF is developing, alongside France and the United Nations, joint
training for personnel, particularly women, deployed in operations.
Similarly, the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping Observatory promotes discussion
among French-speaking contributing States, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
Its publications are valuable, and we would benefit from disseminating them and
referring to them in our work at the Council.
For its part, France will continue to work closely with its partners to develop
cooperation among French-speaking countries at the United Nations and between
the United Nations and the OIF. This has recently resulted in the establishment of a
francophone platform of the Security Council, which makes our work more inclusive,
and I thank the President of the Niger for activating it today.
I therefore call for the continuation of this fruitful francophone cooperation
and for the strengthening of ties between la Francophonie and the United Nations.

20-1178915/42

S/2020/893

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
[Original: French]
At a time when peace missions in French-speaking countries and regions are
more important than ever, it is important to have transregional organizations that we
can rely on.
I welcome the work done by the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF) in recent years to significantly advance the participation of uniformed
personnel from francophone countries in peacekeeping operations. Those efforts are
essential to building trust between the populations and the troops mobilized on the
ground, given that nearly two thirds of currently active peacekeeping operations are
deployed in OIF States, and therefore facilitating peace-building actions.
At the same time, we are also making the Security Council more inclusive,
given that the International Organization of la Francophonie today brings together
88 States and Governments and more than 300 million speakers.
Following the example of our French friends who integrate French-speaking
countries into the European Union through regular exchanges, we could consider
a similar approach in the Security Council in order to maintain a constant
dialogue on our subjects of common interest, including gender equality, peace and
sustainable development.
Like France, Germany supports multilateralism and multilingualism, and
although we are not a member of the OIF, we give them our full support.

16/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Indonesia commends the Niger for convening this important meeting. We
also thank all the briefers for their insightful briefings, Ms. Bintou Keita and Her
Excellency Ms. Mushikiwabo, and also welcome our old friend and colleague
Minister Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia.
Indonesia commends the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF)
on its close cooperation with the United Nations, as well as its active engagement in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as reflected in the Bamako Declaration.
As the biggest troop and police-contributing country in the Security Council,
Indonesia is currently deploying more than 2,500 peacekeepers, or 93 per cent of its
peacekeepers, in numerous francophone countries. In this regard, we would like to
highlight three important points.
First, with regard to broadening cooperation with the United Nations and other
regional organizations in conflict prevention, Indonesia welcomes the OIF’s call for
more frequent dialogues and consultations between the OIF and the United Nations
in the field of conflict prevention. The OIF represents a unique collective identity
bound by linguistic similarity, which transcends multiple regions around the globe.
This is also reflected in the OIF’s diverse experience in conflict prevention. This
is a great asset for all United Nations members in our collective effort to promote
international peace and security.
Indonesia calls for the OIF to also broaden its cooperation with other regional
cooperation bodies, such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
through dialogue and exchange of best practices in conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and the maintenance of peace. Being a member of the ASEAN community, Indonesia
firmly believes that dialogue is an essential part of conflict prevention, as well
as peacekeeping.
This brings to my second point, which is the understanding of local culture.
Community engagement is an inseparable part of peacekeeping operations.
It is imperative for all peacekeepers to fully understand the local culture to build
dialogue and confidence among local communities and effectively fulfil their
mandates. Indonesia firmly believes in the central role played by cultural and linguistic
understanding in community engagement. We have stressed this repeatedly in the
design of effective peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions. To that end, Indonesia
remains committed to ensuring that all of its peacekeepers are equipped with basic
training in local languages and customs of the areas where they are deployed.
Thirdly, with regard to enhancing capacity-building for peacekeepers, as
noted previously, the Security Council currently deploys peacekeeping operations
and special political missions in several francophone countries. Inevitably, the scope
of work necessitated in these missions calls for adequate French-speaking skills in
the peacekeepers.
We commend the OIF’s commitment to strengthening its cooperation with the
United Nations to increase the number of personnel with a satisfactory level of the
French language in peacekeeping operations in francophone countries. We would
like to note that such an initiative is especially important for peacekeepers from
non-French speaking countries, and we call for more capacity-building programmes
for those troop- and police-contributing countries. At present, we are the number
one troop-contributing country in the Council, serving in eight missions, including
20-1178917/42

S/2020/893

five in francophone countries. Our troops have been successful in undertaking
their duties because they learned from best experiences of other troop- and policecontributing countries, including francophone countries. A joint training exercise in
peacekeeping training centres would certainly enhance coordination on the ground,
and co-deployment would enhance peacekeeping.
In conclusion, we would like to once again emphasize the importance of
cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations to improve peacekeeping
missions’ capacity in the fulfilment of their mandates. Indonesia remains committed
to promoting the synergy between the OIF and the United Nations in our common
endeavour to maintain international peace and security.

18/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: English and French]
On 20 March 1970, 26 countries, partially or entirely French-speaking,
founded the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT) in Niamey.
Cultural cooperation was then the core of the initiative of the founding fathers at the
origin of this beautiful initiative.
After several changes, in 2005 the ACCT became the International Organization
of la Francophonie (OIF). In tune with global evolution in terms of political
pluralism and the emergence of civil society organizations defending human rights,
this change of name went hand in hand with the broadening of the organization’s
competencies and the improvement of its mode of operation. Henceforth, the OIF
dealt with issues of peace, democracy, human rights, sustainable development and
digital technologies, in addition to culture and education.
It is therefore with real pleasure that we welcome today Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, whose dynamism and commitment
make the role of that institution even more relevant and topical. The excellent
presentation that she just gave us, as well as that of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General, are proof, if need be, of the complementarity that exists between
the United Nations and the International Organization of the Francophonie. I would
also like to welcome the participation in this debate of His Excellency Mr. Zohrab
Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia, President of the Ministerial
Conference of the OIF.
I would like to welcome the happy coincidence of this debate with the first
use of the interpretation platform, which allows for the return of multilingualism to
the Security Council.
It should be emphasized that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of peace and security is based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the principle of
subsidiarity and the comparative advantages of partner organizations.
It is within this framework that cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization of la Francophonie is carried out, in particular on the
importance of early-warning and conflict prevention mechanisms, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and support for networks of women and youth involved in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
Two areas eloquently illustrate the complementarity that exists between the
two institutions.
The first is the preventive diplomacy that the OIF conducts to anticipate the
risks of crises, through monitoring and exchange of information with international
partners; facilitating dialogue through mediation and good offices; supporting the
implementation of political and peace agreements; and reforming or strengthening
national institutions in periods of transition, including support for democratic
governance and for security systems.
The second is to support electoral processes in ending crises and consolidating
democracy, thereby contributing to the establishment of a stable and peaceful
environment in its 88 member countries, and to promote free, credible and transparent
electoral processes through legal, institutional and technical mechanisms. In doing
20-1178919/42

S/2020/893

so, OIF participates in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the target of building effective, accountable and transparent institutions at
all levels.
The cooperation that the International Organization of la Francophonie is
developing with the United Nations in peacekeeping is based on the organization’s
Charter, adopted in 1997 at the Hanoi Summit. The Charter, by stating that “the
Francophonie, aware of the links created between its members by the sharing
of the French language, wishes to use those ties in the service of peace”, invited
French-speaking States to become involved in issues relating to the establishment,
maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security.
Therefore, the question of the participation of French-speaking countries in
United Nations peace operations, which has been specifically raised since the 2000s,
revolves around two issues: on the one hand, the significant increase in the number of
peace operations conducted in French-speaking countries and, on the other hand, the
relatively low volume of personnel deployed by French-speaking States to contribute
to these operations.
To that end, la Francophonie, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, carries out advocacy actions among its
members and supports, at the political and technical level, the increase in francophone
peacekeeping capacities; promotes multilingualism, particularly the use of French, in
peace operations; and contributes to the dissemination of United Nations standards
and procedures in French, including recruitment procedures, in order to promote the
candidacies of francophone personnel in peace operations, particularly women.
In addition, with respect to peacebuilding, the International Organization
of la Francophonie plays a major role in contributing to conflict prevention and
management and in supporting transitions. In that regard, it pursues a dual purpose:
security, by strengthening peace through the implementation of conflict prevention
and management mechanisms and providing support for national actors in their
efforts to internalize mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of disputes and a
political purpose, by promoting the Francophonie’s approach to crisis prevention,
as well as by giving concrete expression to the Francophonie’s commitment to
fighting terrorism and violent extremism, alongside national and multilateral actors,
with a view to guaranteeing stability in its space. To that end, it contributes to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, namely, the target of supporting
national institutions responsible for strengthening the means to prevent violence and
to fight terrorism and crime, particularly in developing countries.
It should be recalled that the International Organization of la Francophonie is
a pioneer in involving women and youth in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
In accordance with the framework agreement of 21 May 2012, the OIF and
UN-Women have deemed it essential to establish an institutional dialogue among
Governments, partners and actors within their respective networks and bodies, with
a view to promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality within the States
and Governments that are members of la Francophonie.
This cooperation led to the organization, in Abidjan in 2016, of the
international seminar for the promotion of women’s participation in peace processes,
the recommendations of which included investment in and support for the training of
women in crisis prevention and preventive diplomacy; training for and the provision
of technical and financial support to women’s organizations to participate in the
negotiation of peace agreements and in the follow-up thereto; strengthening the role
of women in parliaments, through training in conflict prevention and management
techniques; and integrating women into the development and implementation of
20/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

programmes on preventing and responding to radicalization, violent extremism
and terrorism.
In addition, in implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), on the youth, peace
and security agenda, the OIF has launched a call for francophone youth, peace and
security initiatives. On the strategic level, that call is aimed at mobilizing francophone
youth, on the five continents covered by the francophone space, in support of the
prevention dimension of that resolution. Specifically, it consists, among other
things, of strengthening the resilience of francophone youth and consecrating their
role as an agent of change and peace promotion, and fostering the development and
enhancement of youth organizations of francophone civil society, working on youth
and peace issues.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Niger’s commitment to the principles
and ideals embodied by the OIF and commend the eminently positive role played by
the Secretary-General and other bodies of la Francophonie in the promotion and
protection of these ideals of peace, the defence of human rights, and the promotion of
good governance and democracy. In the face of so many achievements and gains, we
cannot but pay tribute to the founding fathers of the institutional Francophonie —
Presidents Diori Hamani of the Niger, Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia, Léopold Sédar
Senghor of Senegal and Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia — thanks to
whose vision and foresight we have inherited this tool of cooperation and solidarity
among peoples.

20-1178921/42

S/2020/893

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the briefers for their
remarks, and we commend the Niger for convening this debate.
Regional and subregional organizations occupy a critical space in our
multilateral system. They serve as intermediaries that link the international
community to the local and contextual realities found within States, and provide
their constituents with much-needed insulation against global turmoil. In the case
of the International Organization of la Francophonie, the international reach and
geographically dispersed membership of this institution reinforces its strategic
value to the multilateral system, which is manifested through technical cooperation,
solidarity, capacity-building and the advancement of democracy and human rights
among its members.
At a time when the international community is faced with many threats
including the interlocking health, socioeconomic, political, and security challenges
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the adverse impacts of climate change, and
the heightened risks of violent conflict precipitated by divisions along ethnic,
communal and political lines, the crucial role of regional and subregional groupings
cannot be overstated. More pressingly, given the current geopolitical tensions
and fragmentation across the multilateral system, groups like la Francophonie —
which places solidarity at the core of its mandate — are essential for ensuring
that countries are able to confront their development challenges, and to build
peaceful, prosperous and inclusive societies in accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. In this regard, we applaud la Francophonie’s efforts in
advancing multilateral cooperation, promoting sustainable development, improving
access to quality education, addressing climate change, strengthening the rule of law
and encouraging the active social, economic and political participation of women,
girls, and youth in Francophonie societies.
More than 50 per cent of French-speaking persons live on the African
continent. We therefore encourage the International Organization of la Francophonie
to further advance its capacity-building and development-assistance activities in
African countries, especially those in vulnerable contexts, such as in the Sahel
region; strengthen the institutional relationships with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, and the Group of Five for the Sahel, which are at the forefront of
the international community’s efforts to promote lasting peace and security on
the continent; and increase cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission in
Francophone countries such as Burundi and the Central African Republic, in order
to bolster the United Nations sustaining peace agenda at a time when there is a
shortage of predictable and reliable financing for peacebuilding activities.
As we continue working towards silencing the guns across Africa to build
peaceful and resilient societies, in accordance with the African Union’s Agenda
2063, la Francophonie remains an essential partner to the United Nations.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes that the
challenges of the twenty-first century can only be addressed through partnerships
that yield people-centred solutions. We commend la Francophonie for its endeavours
in this regard and encourage the continuation of these efforts going forward.

22/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matthews Matjila
I wish to extend our appreciation to Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and the Chair of Council of the Ministers of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF); Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; and
Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, for their briefings.
Over the past few years, the United Nations has been enhancing its relations
with various regional and subregional organizations in the advancement of its core
mandates, pertaining to the promotion of development, human rights and peace
and security.
In this regard, South Africa wishes to underscore the valuable contribution that
regional, subregional and other international organizations make to the maintenance
of international peace and security, and their cooperation with the United Nations in
the context of Chapter of VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a member of the African Union and of the Southern African Development
Community, we recognize the positive and complementary relations between
the United Nations and these regional organizations. While acknowledging the
complementary roles of the United Nations and regional actors, my delegation
wishes to stress the importance of the principles of subsidiarity and comparative
advantage in the resolution of conflicts, which the African Union upholds, which
entrust regional and subregional organizations with taking the lead in finding a
solution to a conflict situation owing to their geopolitical situation and/or familiarity
with the crisis.
However, we also underline that the Security Council remains the only
international body with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Hence, in our view, the Security Council must work closely with
regional organizations whose activities include the promotion of peace and security.
South Africa would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the OIF on
the fiftieth anniversary of its founding, which coincides with other significant global
anniversaries this year, specifically, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations, and a review year of silencing the guns on the African continent.
We raise this latter point as most members of the OIF are from the African continent.
We thus commend the efforts and contributions of the OIF in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts in its member States by focusing, among others, on
early warning, prevention and peacebuilding activities, as well as on consolidating
democracy and entrenching the rule of law. These efforts are imperative, in particular,
to the development trajectory of the African continent, especially in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Cooperation among regional organizations is equally important, primarily in
instances where there is overlapping membership. We therefore encourage closer
cooperation and coordination between the OIF and other regional organizations,
such as the African Union; subregional organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States, which have overlapping membership
with the OIF; and other similar organizations, such as the Commonwealth.
The tripartite visits undertaken by the African Union, the OIF and the
Commonwealth to Cameroon in the past few months aimed to provide assistance
20-1178923/42

S/2020/893

with peacebuilding and national cohesion activities, demonstrate the importance of
collective efforts on issues of mutual interest in a member of these three organizations,
and derive desired outcomes from such peace and assistance initiatives.
We also encourage OIF to continue working closely, as appropriate, with
United Nations country teams and regional special political missions as well as
peacekeeping operations, in particular in promoting multilingualism and inclusivity.
In conclusion, we wish to highlight that regional and subregional organizations
can also play a cardinal role in promoting the meaningful role of women and
youth in peace processes and in coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is hoped that the OIF, like other regional, subregional and international
organizations, will also contribute towards the ongoing review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.

24/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 13
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I thank you, Mr President, Assistant-Secretary-General Keita, SecretaryGeneral Mushikiwabo and Minister Mnatsakanyan for their informative briefings.
The United Kingdom welcomes the strong relationship and cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie. The equality,
complementarity and solidarity among the Francophonie’s 88 member States is a
powerful force for good in the world.
The Francophonie undoubtedly has a role to play alongside the United
Nations and other organizations in the fields of conflict prevention, mediation and
the exercise of good offices, including in settings such as Cameroon. The United
Kingdom encourages the Francophonie, along with the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and the Commonwealth,
to continue to support efforts to end violence and restore peace in Cameroon’s NorthWest and South-West regions.
The Francophonie can also make valuable contributions to United Nations
efforts to assist countries emerging from conflict to hold successful elections and
strengthen the role of democratic governance — for example, in the Central African
Republic, where elections due this December will constitute a critical milestone in
the implementation of the peace agreement. It is vital that all of the Central African
Republic’s partners work together to ensure that those elections are free, fair,
inclusive, transparent and credible, and conducted in a climate of peace.
The United Kingdom, also hopes to see the Francophonie join the United
Nations in encouraging the consolidation of democratic governance and in
upholding the importance of human rights. This will be vital in Burundi, where the
peaceful transfer of power earlier this year has created a window of opportunity for
strengthening governance, accountability and human rights.
But it is also critical in countries where we see signs of rising instability as
elections approach. As we made clear in the Security Council in July, we have been
alarmed by the violence in Guinea in recent months and, more recently, troubled
by the violent clashes breaking out in Côte d’Ivoire. The United Nations, the
Francophonie and all international partners should work with stakeholders in both
countries in the coming months to encourage them to uphold the democratic values
and human rights that underpin peace, stability and prosperity.
And in Mali, the international community must do all it can to encourage a
timely transition to a civilian, democratically elected Government that can meet the
needs of the Malian people and strengthen the social contract between citizens and
the State.
Finally, I would like to turn to peacekeeping and the importance of ensuring
that all relevant Member States deploy peacekeepers who are fully trained,
equipped and prepared to deliver their mandates. Language skills are essential in
this respect. They facilitate engagement with the local population, lead to better
situational awareness and help peacekeepers deliver on mandated responsibilities,
such as the protection of civilians, while ensuring their own safety and security.
The United Kingdom will ensure that we have the right language capabilities among
our peacekeepers deploying to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali later this year, and we urge all our fellow troop- and
police-contributing countries to do likewise.
20-1178925/42

S/2020/893

Annex 14
Statement by the Deputy Political Counsellor of the United States of
America to the United Nations, David Lee
I thank the Secretary-General of the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF) for her briefing on the work of the Organization, and the other
briefers for their informative remarks. The United States is pleased to take this
opportunity to celebrate the Organization’s fiftieth anniversary.
Since its creation, the OIF has used its good offices, its ability to mobilize
French-speaking professionals and technical experts, and its coordination capabilities
to help maintain peace, strengthen democratic institutions, and reinforce human
rights. These efforts have played out not just in French-speaking countries, but all
over the world.
Collaboration and coordination between the OIF and the United Nations have
been particularly noteworthy in challenging situations. Working with at-risk youth
populations in Mali is just one example of where the OIF and the United Nations
have worked hand-in-hand in complex environments to maintain international peace
and security.
The OIF’s work to increase the number of qualified peacekeepers and to
promote women’s participation in peacekeeping has been particularly valuable. These
efforts closely parallel two of the United States’ top priorities in the United Nations.
Because we have seen the direct consequences of poor performance in peacekeeping,
we are fiercely committed to having highly-qualified peacekeepers, and the OIF’s
initiatives have a direct and positive impact on that front. And we know that more
women peacekeepers mean better peacekeeping performance and effectiveness. On
that note, I would also like to congratulate my Indonesian colleagues for the adoption
of last month’s important resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping.
We also know the ability of peacekeepers to communicate with local populations
is tremendously important when working to build trust, gather timely information
and deliver much-needed security. With over 50 per cent of the peacekeeping budget
dedicated to operations in Francophone areas, the OIF serves a vital function in
preparing Francophone peacekeepers to face the dynamic and complex environments
they are called to work in. We commend the OIF’s efforts to build up the reserve
of French-speaking peacekeepers working in United Nations peace operations, to
promote peacekeeping reforms, and to reinforce African peacekeeping capabilities
in Francophone areas.

26/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to extend our warm welcome and appreciation to Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF), and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations, for
their invaluable briefings. We also thank Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia and current Chair of the Ministerial Conference of la
Francophonie, for his insightful presentation.
We commend the Niger on its initiative to hold today’s open debate.
The United Nations today would not be the same without regional and
subregional organizations. Many have been developed in parallel with the 75-year
history of the United Nations across a broad agenda of mutual interests and concerns
within their respective regions. It is therefore only natural to see cooperation
between them recognized very early in the United Nations Charter and subsequently
strengthened throughout many resolutions as well as in practice. Viet Nam
highly values and welcomes the complementary role of regional and subregional
organizations, including the OIF, with its 50 years of rich experience, to the work of
the United Nations as a whole and particularly to the Security Council.
The OIF brings together 88 members and observers that share not only French
as a common language but also a strong determination to work together towards
international peace and security, among other things. This ambition has been well
reflected through the participation of its many members in the Security Council
mandates of peacekeeping, conflict prevention and promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda. We highlight in this regard the ongoing cooperation between
the OIF and the Peacebuilding Commission, the Department of Peace Operations
and the Department of Operational Support, and we welcome the attention given to
the role and participation of women personnel. The OIF has also played an important
role in raising awareness and increasing resources for these activities.
Our ever-changing world is facing a growing number of complex and crosscutting challenges. Several OIF members and observers have been challenged
by ethnic and religious conflicts and attacks or threats of terrorism. Difficulties
arising from resource constraints, lack of French-language knowledge by youth and
connectivity initiatives among the Francophonie community are also affecting the
work of the organization.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations and the OIF should make concerted
efforts to promote multilateralism and find peaceful solutions to conflicts on the
basis of international law, contributing to the alleviation of hotspots on the Security
Council’s agenda. For instance, the OIF may consider creating a network of
francophone members in West Africa and the Sahel to share experience and best
practices in the implementation of United Nations programmes such as the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the recent Support Plan for the Sahel.
The United Nations and the OIF could also seek to enhance triangular cooperation
with the African Union and other regional organizations to resolve conflicts in
that region.
The OIF has been well known for its commitment to promoting multilingualism.
That approach within peace operations is very much welcomed, especially given
that approximately half of peace missions have been deployed in French-speaking
countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Central African
Republic, so as to facilitate a better understanding and engagement with the local
20-1178927/42

S/2020/893

community. In this aspect we see great potential for the OIF and the United Nations
to further cooperate, with the allocation of adequate resources, on language and
expertise training programmes for both United Nations and local staff and teachers
in order to increase the effectiveness of peace operations.
As a member of the OIF and the Security Council, Viet Nam fully supports and
stands ready to work with other Member States to strengthen existing cooperative
mechanisms and identify new synergies between the OIF and the United Nations for
the common objectives of global peace, security and development.

28/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 16
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Canada

to

the

[Original: English and French]
Canada thanks the Niger for having organized this important debate to
highlight the contribution of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF)
to conflict prevention, the peaceful resolution of crises and peacekeeping, and the
organization’s role at the United Nations. We also thank the six other members of the
Security Council that are also either member, associate or observer States of the OIF
for their continued commitment to these two organizations.
Canada has long been committed to developing the political dimension of La
Francophonie. Canada has supported the OIF in the defence of democratic values and
human rights and has encouraged it to develop mechanisms to enable it to respond to
political, security and social crises in the Francophone space.
Founded 50 years ago in Niamey, the OIF channels the aspirations of more
than 300 million francophones on all continents. The actions of the OIF at the
United Nations can only make the realities and challenges of the French-speaking
populations more tangible and understandable. The OIF’s work to promote respect
for multilingualism within international organizations is therefore essential for
Francophones who wish to be heard and understood in the various multilateral
forums. The equal participation of States in international discussions is at stake.
As a bilingual State, we are committed to continuing to support Frenchlanguage capacity-building in peacekeeping missions, including through our
contributions to the OIF. Canada is present in three of the five operational zones
where French is one of the official languages, or language of common use, in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic. Canada
supports peace and stabilization efforts in those three countries and in other Frenchspeaking countries including Haiti, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Niger and Senegal.
Canada also participates in strengthening the military peace capacities of 14 member
and associate member countries of La Francophonie and promotes the integration
of feminist and gender-equality perspectives into the armed forces. Canada also
contributes to making key documents and guidelines available in French, some in
collaboration with the Department of Peace Operations, as well as training. We will
continue our efforts in that regard.
In this time of pandemic that threatens hard-won peacebuilding gains in
fragile and conflict-affected States, it is all the more important to mobilize the
forces of the francophone space to protect the most vulnerable, including women and
girls. Strengthening collaboration between La Francophonie and the United Nations
to ensure the inclusion of women and youth in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding is crucial. The active participation of women and girls in peace
and security creates unique opportunities to achieve transformative solutions and
ultimately create more inclusive, peaceful and egalitarian societies.
In this year of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and the
fiftieth anniversary of La Francophonie, Canada is proud to reaffirm its membership
in these organizations and to encourage convergence between the United Nations
and the OIF. We are more committed than ever to promoting peace, democracy and
human rights, and we will continue to support the actions of the OIF in this mission.

20-1178929/42

S/2020/893

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the
United Nations, Léon Kacou Adom
[Original: French]
Allow me to extend my warm congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
the Niger’s accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I would like to wish you and all your colleagues every success in the
conduct of the work of the Council, and I take this opportunity to reiterate Côte
d’Ivoire’s ongoing support.
I also congratulate Ambassador Djani on the outstanding work accomplished
during the Indonesian presidency of the Council last month. I welcome the effective
participation of Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, and commend them on the relevance of their contributions to
this open debate. And, finally, I note with satisfaction the presence of Mr. Zohrab
Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Chair of the Ministerial
Conference of la Francophonie.
My delegation welcomes the holding of this open debate on the theme
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations: role of the International Organization of la Francophonie”. It comes at
a very opportune time in the context of the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of
the OIF.
It would also like to underline the eminent role played by the Republic of
the Niger in the creation, on 20 March 1970 in Niamey, of the organization, which
promotes, inter alia, peace and solidarity. Since then, the OIF’s 88 member States
and the 300 million francophones spread over the five continents celebrate 20 March
of each year as the International Day of la Francophonie.
Fifty years after the creation of the OIF, the values of humanism, democracy and
respect for the diversity of cultures and languages that it promotes are more relevant
than ever in the light of the profound changes that humankind has undergone. These
transformations, which are complex and irreversible, and their consequences for
peace, security and development in the world can only have a dynamic and beneficial
effect in the framework of strengthened multilateralism through cooperation among
nations, the United Nations and subregional and regional organizations.
Because it brings together peoples from five continents, there is no doubt
that the OIF has an international perspective, which not only allows it to be fully
cognizant of their realities but also gives it the legitimacy necessary to promote their
deepest aspirations in international forums. It can therefore develop multifaceted
cooperation with the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as play a supporting role in the implementation of their strategic priorities.
In its 50 years of existence, the OIF has undeniably accumulated a great deal of
experience. This gives it a comparative advantage in carrying out the tasks assigned
to it, namely, the promotion of plurilingualism and cultural diversity; the promotion
of peace, democracy and human rights; support for education and research; the
promotion of economic cooperation in the service of sustainable development; the
prevention and resolution of conflicts; and peacebuilding.
With this comparative advantage, the OIF is able to engage with the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in multifaceted and mutually
30/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

beneficial cooperation, in particular in the fields of conflict prevention, peacebuilding,
health, education, gender promotion and the fight against climate change.
I would like to note here, among other things, the support of the OIF for
African regional and subregional organizations in the operationalization of earlywarning and crisis-management mechanisms, the prevention of radicalization and
violent extremism, and the strengthening of the role of women in the processes of
crisis recovery and peacebuilding.
It is unanimously agreed that the increase in the number of unilateral initiatives
is one of the major trends of recent decades. This undermines the commitment made
by the signatories to the San Francisco Charter in 1945 to promote dialogue between
States and multilateral approaches to the challenges of our time.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, today’s
open debate gives us an opportunity to call for the strengthening of multilateralism,
with a view to devising effective collective responses to contemporary challenges,
including that represented by the coronavirus disease. The strong multilateralism
that we hope to see must be based on respect for and the effective implementation of
the principle of multilingualism. This is a sine qua non for a common understanding
and equal participation in the quest for consensual solutions to current problems in
the areas of peace, security and development.
That is why Côte d’Ivoire is also campaigning for respect for multilingualism
in peacekeeping operations, which, in our view, remain the most effective tool
available to the United Nations in its strategy for prevention, conflict management
and peacebuilding. French-speaking countries contribute approximately 41 per
cent of the uniformed personnel of United Nations peacekeeping operations, while
the francophone space currently hosts nearly half of the 16 ongoing peacekeeping
missions in the world.
Côte d’Ivoire, which is firmly committed to multilateralism, reaffirms its
full support for the initiatives of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
which is one of the major international institutions working to build a peaceful and
united world. It will continue with its commitment to promoting the values embodied
by the OIF through close cooperation with your country, Mr. President, the Niger, as
well as with all other Member States and observers.
That is the reason why my country accepted the honour bestowed upon it of
chairing the Group of Francophone Ambassadors to the United Nations and why it
initiated, along with other Member States, the francophone platform in the Security
Council, with a view to maintaining an ongoing dialogue among the Permanent
Representatives of OIF member States.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep conviction that the OIF has
the attributes necessary to claim a prominent place in the international institutional
architecture and play a key role in strengthening the links between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in order to effectively contribute
to the achievement of our common objectives.

20-1178931/42

S/2020/893

Annex 18
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Ireland

to

the

[Original: French]
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this important debate
today. I would also like to congratulate the Niger on its presidency of the Council.
Ireland looks forward to working closely with your country when we join the Council
in January.
Cooperation on the part of the Security Council with regional organizations is
crucial to maintaining international peace and security. Ireland is proud of its role as
an observer in the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF).
Ireland has always attached great importance to the principles of the OIF,
namely, the French language; cultural diversity; peace, democracy and human rights;
support for education; and cooperation for sustainable development.
The OIF plays a key role in bringing together a large number of actors
dedicated to promoting peace and in particular to mediating crises and conflicts
in the francophone world. The OIF also plays a vital electoral assistance and
monitoring role.
Over the past two decades, the commendable activities carried out by the OIF
have led to a considerable increase in the participation of French-speaking actors in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in terms of both advocating that its member
States become involved in peacekeeping operations and facilitating the training of
francophone military, civilian and police personnel, either in person or online.
Promoting linguistic diversity and multilingualism in peacekeeping operations
is an important objective, both in the field and at headquarters, all the more so since
a significant proportion of United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed in
French-speaking countries. Language skills can create greater cultural sensitivity to
local contexts and can contribute to better situational awareness. Those skills can
also improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping contingents.
The OIF has also contributed to strengthening the capacity of francophone
actors in peacekeeping operations through the creation of the Francophone
Expertise and Training Network for Peace Operations. This network, which brings
together francophone peace operations training centres, has increased the visibility
of their actions and strengthened their ties with the United Nations and other
international organizations.
In Ireland, we have always attached great importance to multilateralism.
Membership in the United Nations is an essential element of Irish foreign policy.
Ireland has a long history of participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The Irish Defence Forces provide training to other troop-contributing
countries, and we are pleased that the Niger, Togo and Burkina Faso have recently
been able to benefit from such training. In addition, Ireland was pleased to contribute
last year to the seminar on peacekeeping operations in the francophone context in
Djibouti, organized in collaboration with the OIF.
We believe that the activities of the OIF have led to a substantial increase in
the participation and capacity of its member States in peacekeeping operations, as
well as the use of the French language, all of which represent a valuable contribution
to peace and security worldwide.
32/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

In conclusion, we would like to once again thank you, Sir, for organizing
this important debate. The values of multilateralism and multilingualism are closely
linked. We continue to take a great interest in supporting United Nations and
OIF missions.

20-1178933/42

S/2020/893

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
[Original: French]
We warmly welcome the initiative of the Niger, as President of the Security
Council, to organize this open debate of the Council on an important and topical
issue. This timely initiative is being launched by the country where the birth
certificate of the francophone movement was signed 50 years ago. Moreover, the
former President of the Niger, Hamani Diori, is one of the founding fathers of
the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). In that context, we also
welcome the organization by Tunisia of the next OIF summit, which will undoubtedly
contribute to strengthening francophone action throughout the world.
There is a long tradition of productive and multidimensional cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIF, particularly with regard to early warning,
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. It is essential for
all of us to continue to strengthen that cooperation.
Romania is the flagship State of the OIF in central and eastern Europe and
was among the countries that initiated and promoted resolution 1631 (2005), on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations. Given that the
OIF is an organization with a universal vocation, it is all the more important that
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF becomes an integral part of our
efforts to consolidate peace, security and development.
We greatly appreciate the participation of the Secretary-General of the
OIF in our meeting. Since taking up her new position less than two years ago,
Ms. Mushikiwabo has given a strong impetus and new energy to the OIF. Under
her leadership, the OIF is becoming more pragmatic, more committed to finding
answers to the major global policy issues and more effective. For example, today, she
led the work of the Groupe de réflexion sur les orientations et la gouvernance de la
Francophonie, which is tasked with proposing a new vision, adapted to the current
context, on the objectives and activity of the OIF.
In recent years, especially after the adoption, in 2000, of the Bamako
Declaration, which established the benchmarks for the organization’s political
action, the OIF has asserted itself on the international political scene. We all need
systematic and close cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF. Most of
the peacekeeping missions under the auspices of the United Nations are deployed in
the francophone space. At the same time, the francophone space has demonstrated
that it has the will, capacity and instruments to effectively support United Nations
action in favour of peace and development.
With regard to peacekeeping, Romania is strongly committed to qualitative
and quantitative progress in French-speaking theatres of operation. Concretely,
a significant part of the Romanian uniformed personnel is currently deployed in
Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic.
The training of future peacekeeping personnel in the field is very important for
the success of the missions. In our view, the effective communication of uniformed
personnel in the language of the local population is essential, and it contributes
to fulfilling fundamental operational tasks. Communicating in French with
local actors and civilians promotes increased confidence in the personnel of
United Nations missions.

34/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

A good illustration of the pragmatic cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIF is the International Superior Course of the Mihai Viteazul Gendarmerie
School of Applications, in Bucharest. For more than 10 years, the course, which is
accredited by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and supported by France
and the OIF, has been training high-level officers from about 40 countries for United
Nations peace missions in French-speaking areas. It is a successful project, which
is developing organically and contributes to the achievement of our objectives.
In addition, since 2014, the school has been part of the Francophone Expertise
and Training Network for Peace Operations of the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
There are many other areas where the United Nations and the OIF can
cooperate more closely, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
fight against climate change and youth and gender equality. In each of those areas,
the OIF has great projects that are well-aligned with our common objectives within
the United Nations.
We are convinced that this is the right time to relaunch successful cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIF in the service of peace, security and
development, for a strong and active multilateralism. Robust and effective
multilateralism can exist only through respect for multilingualism and through
the wise use of the competitive advantages of each organization with universal or
regional objectives.

20-1178935/42

S/2020/893

Annex 20
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Senegal

to

the

[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Republic of the Niger and its Permanent
Representative, Mr. Abdou Abarry, for convening this important open debate on
the cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF).
My delegation followed with great interest the statements of Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and Mrs. Louise Mushikiwabo, SecretaryGeneral of the OIF, who gave a comprehensive overview of United NationsOIF cooperation and showed the OIF’s key role in the promotion of sustainable
development and international peace in all its aspects.
Indeed, as was emphasized in these remarkable briefings, cooperation between
the two entities is generally excellent. There is no longer any need to prove the OIF’s
relevance in advancing the global agenda of the United Nations Secretariat. Through
its various activities on the international scene, the OIF actively contributes to
the resolution of economic, social, intellectual and humanitarian problems, while
providing a space for harmonizing the efforts of nations.
To the multisectoral achievements outlined in the concept note (S/2020/880),
we can add the establishment, in 2017, of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory, a
framework that allows francophone States to take more ownership of peacekeeping
issues and participate more actively in the preparation and strategic management of
peace operations.
Nevertheless, that achievement cannot hide the multiple challenges that
persist in many areas. Given the format of the meeting, I will address only the issue
of multilingualism and the use of French as a working language within the United
Nations and in peacekeeping operations.
The General Assembly, through numerous resolutions on the issue, considers
multilingualism to be a fundamental value of the Organization and believes that it
contributes to the achievement of the objectives set forth in Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
However, in practice, it is clear that English is clearly and concerningly
predominant, despite the appointment, in December 2015, of a coordinator in charge
of the generalized application of multilingualism throughout the Secretariat.
That discrimination, often justified by financial contingencies, constitutes a
serious handicap for users of other languages and particularly for French-speaking
users, whose development and effectiveness it mitigates. Many representatives give
up speaking at meetings at Headquarters because they cannot express themselves
clearly in English, and they spend a great deal of time reading and understanding
documents that are often available only in English.
In the theatres of operation, the predominance of the English language is
unquestionable. That undermines the performance of French-speaking troop- and
police-contributing countries, which struggle to fully grasp working documents such
as regulations, directives, standard operating procedures and other manuals essential
to the understanding and accomplishment of a mission. Much of that documentation
is available only in English, even though 50 per cent of peacekeeping operations are
deployed in the Francophone space.
36/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

It is my pleasure here to salute the commendable ongoing efforts of OIF
countries to help French-speaking troop-contributing countries overcome the
handicaps associated with this tyranny of English. These include, most recently, the
2019 publication of a guide in French taking into account the conduct of peacekeeping
operations since the force generation and the organization, during the same year, of
a seminar to inform and update military and police advisers of French-speaking
Permanent Missions to the United Nations on the contingent-owned equipment
manual. Another example is the recent commissioning of an itinerant team of experts
who travelled throughout French-speaking countries to familiarize the heads of
their contingents with the contingent-owned equipment manual and United Nations
procedures prior to deployment.
Finally, because the Action for Peacekeeping initiative gives pride of place to
the performance of peace operations, we must now give the same special attention
to language capabilities as we do to specific military capabilities. The sharing of a
common language by peacekeepers and the populations they are tasked to protect
builds trust and facilitates interaction. That is why, in many respects, it is a real
performance factor that the United Nations would do well to enhance.
While aware of the financial implications, I remain convinced that the United
Nations must fully take on French as a working language by reconsidering the place
of multilingualism in its priorities. For its part, the OIF, which encompasses more
than 45 per cent of United Nations members, in conjunction with the Group of
Francophone Ambassadors, must absolutely insist that the Secretariat make available
the documents that govern the work of the Blue Helmets in at least both working
languages — English and French — before they enter into force. In the same vein,
the OIF should continue to work towards the establishment of a permanent internal
fund dedicated to the translation of documents while this issue is definitively taken
up by the United Nations.

20-1178937/42

S/2020/893

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: English and French]
Switzerland thanks the Niger for organizing this debate and the speakers
for their contributions. As a French-speaking country and as a member of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), Switzerland underlines the
importance of the cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF.
The multilateral system stands to benefit from the complementarity between
the two organizations and the comparative advantage of each. Cooperation is
particularly important in areas such as the promotion of democracy and conflict
prevention. Strengthening that cooperation is therefore in the interest of the
Security Council.
Switzerland would like to highlight two important areas of action to deepen
the cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF.
First, free and fair elections are essential to peace and security. All too often,
violence, including by Government entities, still occurs and hinders full participation.
The inclusion of all groups is key to preventing the violence that tends to erupt when
stakeholders question the integrity of the process. Special attention must be given to
minorities, and the inclusion of women and youth is also essential. Civil society also
plays an important role in all stages of the electoral process. Through their technical
expertise and political monitoring, the OIF and the United Nations play a key role
in supporting elections. With several elections approaching in OIF member States,
particularly in West Africa, good collaboration between these two organizations can
support promote democratic gains and stability in the region.
Secondly, the United Nations must protect and promote multilingualism and
multiculturalism within the Organization. Our own experience in Switzerland, with
four national languages and different cultures, demonstrates the value of diversity in
the maintenance of peace and security. We welcome efforts to increase the number of
French-speaking staff members, particularly in peacekeeping missions in francophone
contexts. We invite the United Nations, including the Council, to further integrate
the francophone expertise of the OIF in its work. A good example of the added
value of the OIF is the work of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory. Through its support
for the Observatory’s research activities, Switzerland contributes to improving the
representation of francophone countries in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Fifty years after its creation, the OIF plays an important role in ensuring
strong and effective multilateralism. The Council must continue to recognize
the OIF’s key role in maintaining peace and security. Switzerland welcomes the
continued cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations with regard to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

38/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to join previous speakers in thanking the Niger for
organizing today’s open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of
the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
for her briefing on cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations. I would also
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita, and the representatives
of civil society who are virtually with us today, for their ideas and recommendations.
This is a very special year for the OIF, as it marks the fiftieth anniversary of its
creation. Over these 50 years, the OIF has grown considerably — from 21 to 88 full
member States, associate members and observers — and with a presence on the five
continents. The OIF represents more than a third of the members of the General
Assembly and promotes multilateral cooperation in areas of common interest.
As an observer country of the OIF, Ukraine fully shares in the organization’s
activities aimed at meeting global challenges, ensuring sustainable development and
defending democracy and human rights in the world. We fully support the OIF’s
activities to promote the French language, to ensure peace, democracy and solidarity
and to face the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is at the heart of the concerns
of millions of people around the world today.
We encourage the OIF to continue to strive to protect human rights and
ensure gender equality, empower women, girls and young people, and support their
more active participation in the life of society, because they are our future. We are
convinced that the activities of la Francophonie through diplomatic channels and
direct contacts, such as what we are doing today, contribute significantly to the
promotion of the principles of democracy and the strengthening of the rule of law,
peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is highly
indispensable in promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The
OIF’s action has also become an important framework for multilateral cooperation.
According to its Charter, the OIF’s objectives include assisting in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts, and the promotion of the rule of law and
human rights. These objectives are the Security Council’s principal areas of interest.
Since the founding of the United Nations, the fundamental norms of its Charter
have been violated on numerous occasions. Any infringement of the provisions of
the United Nations Charter, any arbitrary or selective interpretation of its Articles,
any measure likely to impair the Organization’s authority or incite a breach of the
letter and spirit of the principles enshrined in the Charter clearly constitutes a threat
to international peace, with grave consequences for the well-being of all peoples.
The events currently provoked by the Russian occupation of the Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol and certain regions of Donbas clearly demonstrate that the
violation of the fundamental principles of international law by a permanent member
of the Security Council constitutes a serious threat to peace and security in Europe
and the world as a whole. I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the fact that
the Russian-Ukrainian war has been described by the United Nations as one of the
deadliest in Europe since the Second World War.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the OIF, and in particular its
Secretary-General, for supporting the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
20-1178939/42

S/2020/893

independence of Ukraine, upholding a policy of condemning Russia’s attempt to
annex the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and of refusing
to recognize the legitimacy of this annexation. This OIF policy is fully in line with
the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and its own
Charter. The OIF Secretary-General should know that we in Ukraine appreciate it
very much.
The success of OIF action in favour of peace and democracy depends above
all on our solidarity. On behalf of my country, I would like to confirm Ukraine’s
irrevocable commitment to promoting these values and assure the OIF SecretaryGeneral that she can always count on Ukraine in this regard.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the role of regional organizations
depends on close cooperation with the United Nations — a cooperation that will
make the world more peaceful and sustainable, more resistant to conflicts and
pandemics, and more open and united.

40/42

20-11789

S/2020/893

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The United Arab Emirates thanks the delegation of the Niger for organizing
today’s meeting on the important topic of the role of the International Organization
of la Francophonie (OIF). My country is proud that its status was elevated from
observer member to associate member by a unanimous decision of the States
members of the OIF at la Francophonie’s summit in Yerevan in October 2018.
The importance of regional organizations in promoting peace and security
and preventing conflict has been widely recognized by the international community.
Regional organizations have a unique advantage over outside organizations in their
better understanding of the peace and security challenges arising in their own
regions. The geographical proximity and close historical and cultural ties among
their members give regional organizations a distinct ability to play a constructive role
in the pursuit of peaceful solutions to conflicts. The United Arab Emirates applauds
the commendable efforts by the International Organization of la Francophonie in
support of United Nations initiatives undertaken to tackle challenges in Frenchspeaking countries.
In the light of today’s debate, the United Arab Emirates would like to make
three recommendations.
First, the Security Council should strengthen its cooperation with regional
organizations in the area of preventive diplomacy in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. We have seen success stories in this regard,
particularly with regional organizations on the African continent, including,
most recently, the decisive role played by the Economic Community of West
African States in the Gambia. Swift action by regional organizations in response
to early-warning signs is not only one of the most effective ways of addressing
peace and security issues, but it is also the most cost-effective, considering the
significant drain on United Nations resources when the Organization has to enter
conflict-management mode.
Secondly, we encourage continued progress in enhancing consultation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional organizations on peacekeeping.
We welcome the recent collaboration between the Department of Peace Operations,
the Department of Operational Support and the OIF aimed at building the capacity
of peacekeepers and promoting multilingualism in field operations.
The OIF has been an important advocate for increased participation of women
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. To that end, the United Arab Emirates has
been playing its part by providing multilingual training to female military officers
from countries in Asia and Africa, including French-speaking countries. This
commitment reflects our conviction that more women peacekeepers means more
effective peacekeeping. The United Arab Emirates was also proud to co-sponsor
resolution 2538 (2020), which the Security Council adopted last month.
Thirdly, we believe that regional organizations should step up their efforts
aimed at mainstreaming and highlighting the positive work of young people on issues
of peace and security. In this regard, we commend the work of the OIF in supporting
youth networks involved in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Indeed, the
meaningful inclusion of youth in decision-making processes not only leads to a
more peaceful and dynamic society, but also provides alternatives to the cycles of
extremism and violence that have ensnared many countries. My country’s record in

20-1178941/42

S/2020/893

empowering youth stands as a testament to how youth can form the cornerstone for
an open, tolerant and thriving society.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its strong commitment to
continuing to support cooperation with regional and international mechanisms so as
to achieve our shared goal of global peace, security and prosperity for the benefit of
all humankind. It is only through a truly global partnership that we can find political
solutions to the world’s long-standing or protracted conflicts.

42/42

20-11789
