S/PV.7596

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7596th meeting

Tuesday, 22 December 2015, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/ Ms. Sison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-44647 (E)
*1544647*

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in Yemen.
I have just returned from the first face-to-face
talks in the Yemen peace process, which I facilitated
in Switzerland. While the meetings did not bring
about an end to the fighting, as we had all hoped, they
did result in constructive talks between the Yemeni
Government and its political and military opponents.
The dialogue provided a firm foundation for resuming
talks in the near future and the basis for a renewed and
strengthened cessation of hostilities. I am very grateful
to the Government of Switzerland for having hosted the
talks and for its excellent support.
The talks were conducted during a very bleak
period for Yemen and during a worsening security
situation. Since my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7542), violence has pervaded in many parts
of the country, resulting in hundreds of civilian deaths
and many others injured. The catastrophic situation
with regard to Yemen’s health-care system was made
even worse with the destruction of two Médecins
Sans Frontières medical facilities in Taiz and Saada.

2/22

22/12/2015

Cross-border attacks in the north involving the use
of heavy weaponry had a serious impact on security
and stability in the border area. The residents of Taiz
continue to suffer the consequences of heavy fighting
and severe lack of assistance. Artillery fire and air
strikes have continued to affect the residential areas of
the city. Those attacks, which constitute grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and obstruct the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, have had a
devastating impact on the lives and livelihoods of the
city’s residents.
As I have noted in earlier briefings, the conflict
and the security vacuum it has caused have led to the
dangerous expansion of extremist groups in the country,
particularly in the areas of Abyan, Albeda’a and Shabwa.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has consolidated
its presence in the Governorate of Hadhramaut and its
control of the port of Al Mukalla. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham has continued its campaign of
attacks and assassinations of political leaders and
security officials. The Governor of Aden, Major
General Mohammed Jaafar Saad, was assassinated on
6 December, along with six of his guards, one day after
my visit to Aden. At the time, I strongly condemned
that act of terrorism.
The talks in Switzerland followed many weeks of
consultation with Yemeni leaders and the Governments
in the region. I consulted with the Foreign Ministers of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, the State of Qatar, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC), all of whom expressed their
strong support for the peace process. Despite the grave
security challenges, I visited President Hadi Mansour in
Aden on 5 December for a final consultation in advance
of the talks. I also met repeatedly with Vice-President
Khaled Bahah and Yemeni Government representatives
in Riyadh, and with representatives of the Houthis, the
General People’s Congress and other stakeholders in
the Sultanate of Oman. Despite profound differences,
we were able to agree on the format and agenda of the
talks in the days before the consultative meeting.
On 15 December, delegations finally met around a
single table in the town of Magglingen, Switzerland.
The talks were aimed at putting an end to violence
in Yemen and developing a clear framework based
on resolution 2216 (2015), which will bring the
country back to a peaceful and orderly transition, in
accordance with the GCC Initiative and the outcomes

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

of the National Dialogue. Participants in the talks
demonstrated the courage and determination needed
for successful negotiations. In the weeks of preparation
for the talks, the Government of Yemen, the Houthis,
the General People’s Congress and other key Yemeni
stakeholders expressed their willingness to have a full
and comprehensive cessation of hostilities during the
talks. President Hadi communicated his support for
the ceasefire to the Secretary-General in a letter dated
7 December. States of the region and the coalition also
expressed support for the cessation of hostilities, which
I believe was essential to ensure the confidence of the
Yemeni people in the peace process.
I announced the cessation of hostilities on the
morning of 15 December. The Government of Yemen,
the Houthis and the General People’s Congress publicly
welcomed my announcement and pledged to respect
the cessation of hostilities. In order to minimize the
violations, a coordination and de-escalation committee
was established, comprised of military advisors from
the two delegations and United Nations experts. The
committee liaised with the military leadership in
Yemen in order to help avert clashes and any escalation
of violence, with some success in the early days.
Tragically, we were unable to preserve the
cessation of hostilities throughout the duration of the
talks, although we did see a significant reduction of
violence in the first few days. Numerous violations
were reported by the committee on the third day. The
lack of compliance with the ceasefire demonstrated
the need for stronger agreements and more robust
mechanisms to ensure adherence. The participants in
the talks subsequently agreed that the committee’s work
would continue over the coming months immediately
after the end of that round of talks. We agreed with the
delegations that the committee should be based in the
region, with United Nations support. To that end, I hope
that we can rely on the generous support of Member
States. This is a concrete and practical outcome of the
talks in Switzerland, and I hope it will allow for a more
effective ceasefire agreement in the near future.
The agenda for the talks included the discussion
of humanitarian issues, confidence-building measures
and a general framework that could serve as the
foundation for a comprehensive settlement. The first
days of the talks also saw constructive engagement
on humanitarian issues. In order to ensure that the
discussions on humanitarian issues were grounded
in the practical challenges of delivering assistance in

S/PV.7596

Yemen, I invited several senior officials from United
Nations humanitarian agencies to join the talks. With
their assistance, the participants in Switzerland agreed
to restore humanitarian access to Taiz, which had been
largely cut off from aid for many months. I am very
grateful to my colleagues from the United Nations
humanitarian agencies who were able to operationalize
that agreement immediately. A large United Nations
convoy with fuel and food supplies entered Taiz on
17 December, the first large shipment of aid to arrive in
almost three months. As noted in the final communiqué
of the talks, the sides are committed to working with
me and the United Nations humanitarian team to build
on the agreement with a view to ensuring expanded aid
in the coming weeks.
Most importantly, the discussions in Switzerland
led to a common understanding of a negotiating
framework for the conclusion of a comprehensive
agreement to end the conflict and resume inclusive
political dialogue. That framework is firmly based
on resolution 2216 (2015) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions, and provides a mechanism for a
return to a peaceful and orderly transition based on
the GCC Initiative and National Dialogue outcomes.
The two sides have agreed that the framework will
serve as the foundation for the next round of talks. The
framework provides a mechanism for negotiating the
sequencing and interdependence of the key elements
of resolution 2216 (2015), including the creation of
interim security committees, the withdrawal of militias
and armed groups, the restoration of State institutions
and State functioning, and the resumption of inclusive
political dialogue, which will be needed to come to an
agreement on the remaining steps of Yemen’s political
transition. The framework provides the foundation for a
new political consensus with special security measures,
which will help Yemen to achieve stability and enable it
to confront the expansion of terrorist groups.
The talks reveal deep divisions between the two
sides on the path to peace and the formulation of a
future agreement. Trust between the parties remains
weak. I must admit that there were several days when
I feared that the two sides would not find a way to
make progress on any of the central issues. Ultimately,
however, the commitment of the delegations, especially
the Chairs, proved stronger than those divisions. By
the end of the talks, the delegations had agreed to
meet again next month using a common framework,
which will help them map out a clear and effective path

15-446473/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

towards peace and a negotiated and inclusive political
transition.
The parties to the talks should be commended
for the progress that has been made and the courage
they demonstrated at the talks in Switzerland. We all
know that the path to peace in Yemen will be a long
and difficult one, but we also know that failure is not
an option. The lives of the Yemeni people have been
devastated by the most horrific violence and conflict
that the country has ever seen. It is time to begin creating
a safe and stable future for the generations to come.
The challenge now will be to find a way to strengthen
and build upon the progress we have made thus far. The
peace process is in its very early days. In order for it to
flourish and prosper, it will take nurturing, care and a
great deal of support.
I would like to sincerely thank President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour for his strong commitment to
bringing lasting peace to Yemen. I am also very grateful
to the Government’s delegation, led by the Deputy Prime
Minister Abdul Malik Al-Mukhlafi, for its constructive
and open spirit during the consultations. I am equally
grateful to Mr. Aref Al-Zouka and Mr. Mohammed
Abdulsalam and their respective teams for their
conciliatory and courageous attitude during the talks.
I must also thank Member States for their tireless
and steadfast support of our efforts, which has been
invaluable. I hope we can count on their continued help
in the coming months. I need the Council’s support in
order to ensure a durable and comprehensive ceasefire
in advance of the upcoming round of talks. I will
also need the Council’s backing for the negotiating
framework that we have proposed to the parties and
which, I believe, will help Yemen to find an end to the
war and the beginning of a more prosperous and stable
future.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed
not only for his briefing but for the tireless work that
he and his team are putting in, as well as for the risks
he is taking in travelling to Yemen and investing all his
efforts in trying to bring about a political solution.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al Hussein: I thank you, Madam President,
for allowing me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in Yemen.
I am encouraged by the recent efforts by the parties
to the conflict, supported by the Special Envoy of

4/22

22/12/2015

the Secretary-General for Yemen, aimed at reaching
a peaceful solution. The earlier intensification of
the conflict in Yemen led to a dramatic increase in
the number of civilian casualties and aggravated the
already dire humanitarian situation. It also continues to
undermine prospects for peace.
The conditions of life have become untenable for
the vast majority of people in Yemen. The combined
impact of the violence and the artificial impediments
to the delivery of humanitarian assistance have proved
disastrous. At least 21 million people — 80 per cent
of the population — currently rely on some measure
of humanitarian assistance, while approximately
half the population is suffering from malnutrition.
Furthermore, the findings of my Office indicate
a continued intensification of existing patterns of
violations, including, inter alia, the violation of the
right to life and the destruction of civilian objects and
infrastructure, as well as illegal detentions, committed
by all parties to the conflict. As the violence continues
to intensify, the number of civilian casualties across
the country continues to increase. According to
information gathered by my Office in Yemen, over
2,700 civilians have been killed and more than 5,300
have beeb injured since the start of the conflict. My
Office has also documented dozens of cases of alleged
illegal detention, primarily at the hands of the popular
committees. Sadly, it is children who are bearing the
brunt of the conflict in Yemen. There has been a steady
increase in the number of children killed and injured.
This year alone, more than 600 children have been
killed, and over 900 have suffered serious injury. That
represents a five-fold increase over the figures for 2014.
In September, I presented a report on the situation
of human rights in Yemen to the thirtieth session of the
Human Rights Council. The report addresses credible
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, as gathered by
my Office. The report also presents the Human Rights
Council with a number of recommendations, chief
among which is a call for an international investigation
into credible allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as well as a call for accountability for the perpetrators
of such crimes.
The Government of Yemen earlier announced
its intention to create a national commission of
investigation, which I welcomed. The Human Rights
Council subsequently adopted resolution 30/18, which

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

calls on my Office to provide technical assistance to
a national commission of inquiry and to report to the
Council on the situation of human rights in Yemen at its
thirty-third session. The recruitment and deployment of
new staff members to support follow-up to that Human
Rights Council resolution are currently pending
approval by the Fifth Committee.
I have observed with extreme concern the
continuation of heavy shelling from the ground
and the air in areas with a high concentration of
civilians, as well as the continued destruction of
civilian infrastructure — in particular hospitals and
schools — by all parties to the conflict, although a
disproportionate share appeared to be the result of air
strikes carried out by coalition forces. My Office will
continue to document credible allegations of violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in
the context of Yemen, and will continue to call upon all
parties involved to abide by, and commit themselves to,
the protection of civilians and to hold to account those
responsible for serious violations of international law. In
that regard, I also strongly encourage the Government
of Yemen to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, or at least to urgently accept its
jurisdiction. I further call on the Security Council to
do everything within its power to help restrain the use
of force by all parties and to urge all sides to abide by
the basic principles of international humanitarian law,
including by immediately removing all impediments to
humanitarian assistance and fully cooperating with the
humanitarian response team.
Unless Yemen and the world urgently rise to meet
the extraordinary challenges presented by the situation,
the consequences could be even more catastrophic. To
that end, I urgently call on the Council to expedite and
intensify diplomatic efforts to bring about a ceasefire
and to help create a framework for negotiating a
comprehensive and sustainable peace in Yemen. Any
military solution that falls outside the context of a
negotiated agreement may in the short term bring about
an immediate strategic advantage to one side or another,
but it will inevitably render Yemen and its neighbours
less stable and less secure over the long term.
A failure to act decisively not only spells misery
for the millions of vulnerable people in Yemen today,
but will inevitably push the country into an irreversible
process of Balkanization, the consequences of which
would lie outside anyone’s control. The potential
ramifications of a failed State in Yemen would almost

S/PV.7596

inevitably include the creation of safe havens for
radical and confessional groups such as the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. That, in turn,
could expand the conflict beyond Yemen’s borders,
potentially shattering regional stability. Finally, in the
light of the enormity of the crisis, it is imperative that
the relevant stakeholders put aside their political and
ideological differences in order to achieve our common
goal of re-establishing some measure of security and
stability in Yemen.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kang.
Ms. Kang: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the latest
developments in Yemen on behalf of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien.
The conditions today for the people inside Yemen
are appalling. Around 7.6 million people now require
emergency food assistance to survive. At least 2 million
people are malnourished, including 320,000 children,
who suffer from severe malnutrition, which represents
a two-fold increase since March. There can be little
doubt that the serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation has been caused by the current conflict in
Yemen.
Since mid-March, the conflict has spread to 20 of
Yemen’s 22 governorates, exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian situation brought on by years of poverty,
poor governance and ongoing instability, and triggering
a large-scale protection crisis. Since March, around
8 million people have lost reliable and safe access to
drinking water. At least 1.8 million children have had
to drop out of classes, adding to the 1.6 million who
were already out of school before the crisis began.
The conflict has had a widespread impact on the
whole array of social infrastructure, including markets
and road networks. That, combined with import
restrictions, has crippled the economy and amplified
the vulnerability of the civilian population, including
their ability to procure food. Institutions that provide
basic services in Yemen are unravelling. The north
has no financial resources, and the relevant authorities
cannot procure the supplies they need or to pay salaries
to doctors, nurses and teachers.
While some 14 million people lack adequate access
to health-care assistance, Yemen’s health system is

15-446475/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

close to collapse. Prior to the conflict, some 70 per cent
of health care was provided by the private sector, which
is now no longer functioning because of the failing
economy, and the public system is unable to absorb
the burden. Health facilities are closing — including
190 that provided nutrition services — medicines and
supplies are depleted and health workers have gone
unpaid for months. Patients with chronic illness, such
as kidney disease and diabetes, can no longer find the
most basic treatments.
Relentless air strikes, shelling and violence
continue to force Yemeni families from their homes.
Today Yemen has over 2.5 million internally displaced
people (IDPs) — an eightfold increase since the start
of the conflict. While displacement has decreased in
the southern governorates, where people have been
returning home in recent months, it has increased
significantly in the northern governorates, primarily
due to air strikes. Taiz governorate now hosts the highest
number of IDPs — nearly 400,000 people — followed
by the northern governorates of Amran and Hajjah.
In addition, almost 170,000 Yemenis, refugees and
migrants have fled to neighbouring countries, often
forced to take perilous sea journeys.
The conflict is devastating the country and
causing widespread suffering as parties show disregard
for human life and the protection of civilians and
indiscriminately target civilian infrastructure, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law. More than
2,700 civilians have been confirmed killed, at least
637 of them children. At least 70 health facilities have
been hit by air strikes or shelling. Over 170 schools
have been destroyed, and more than 600 damaged. At
least 58 schools have been occupied by armed groups,
nearly all of them in Taiz governorate. Another 238
schools are hosting people displaced by the violence.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict has verified at least
740 cases of child recruitment this year — almost five
times the number in 2014. Nearly 85 per cent of those
children have been recruited by non-State actors.
Yemeni women have been particularly impacted by
the conflict, and their voices are important for us to listen
to and heed. Over 30 per cent of displaced households
in some areas of the country are female-headed, a
notable increase from the 9 per cent before the current
crisis. Approximately 70 per cent more gender-based
violence incidents have been reported since March.
Women are also disproportionately impacted by the

6/22

22/12/2015

failing economy and social services, resulting in a lack
of access for many to life-saving reproductive care.
Despite a challenging and dangerous environment,
humanitarian organizations on the ground are
responding with life-saving assistance. Four million
people have been provided access to emergency water
and sanitation through water trucking and the provision
of fuel. Since April, monthly food distributions have
been steadily expanding, with 1.9 million people
reached in November and 3 million people planned
for December. By February, 5 million people should
be receiving food assistance each month across the
country. Over 250 metric tons of life-saving medical
supplies have been distributed to health facilities,
assisting more than 7 million Yemenis. International
and national non-governmental organizations are
playing a significant role in the response, running and
supporting health facilities, providing psychosocial
care, administering treatment to malnourished children
and implementing critical water and sanitation projects.
The announcement of the cessation of hostilities by
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen and
the agreement by the Yemeni parties, as of 15 December
was seized by humanitarian actors as a long-awaited
opportunity to reach areas of the country that have been
inaccessible, in particular to carry out independent
needs assessment and projet monitoring, two activities
that have been extremely challenging due to the lack
of security guarantees and continuing hostilities. While
United Nations agencies and partners were able to
proceed with some of their intended activities, notably
in Taiz governorate, deliveries have been impacted by
continued fighting, denials of clearance for convoy
movements, and delays stemming from the resumption
of cumbersome movement notification procedures to
the coalition.
We are very grateful for the tireless efforts of the
Special Envoy. I welcome the agreement reached in
Switzerland to facilitate humanitarian access to all
affected governorates in Yemen, in particular Taiz. I call
on the parties to take concrete measures to implement
that in practice. Over 200,000 civilians in Taiz have
been effectively cut off from assistance. Three months
of virtual siege has grounded to a halt much of the city’s
basic services. Over 50 per cent of its water network
has been destroyed by fighting. The health facilities
that remain open are operating with limited capacity
and are overwhelmed with the war wounded, often to
the detriment of those with chronic illness. To date,

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

only a small amount of supplies have entered the areas
of the city affected by the siege. Wheat, pulses, oil and
sugar have been offloaded in the warehouses of the
partners of the World Food Programme in the districts
of Al-Mudhaffar, Al-Qahirah, Al-Salh and Al-Taiziah.
The distribution of those supplies has not yet taken
place.
We continue to monitor commercial imports into
Yemen, and I am relieved to report some improvements
in that regard. Food imports have returned to pre-crisis
levels. Although still half of what they were before
the crisis, fuel imports have increased fourfold since
October. Prices remain high despite that progress, in
part because of damaged road networks throughout the
country. It is vital that continued increases in imports
of all critical commodities are sustained. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism is
expected to be operational in mid-January, once all
pledges have been received, thereby ensuring steady
flows of commercial supplies, especially those vital to
the survival and wellbeing of the Yemeni people.
May I once again remind the parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians from hostilities; safeguard civilian
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals; and
enable the movement of humanitarian workers and
supplies into and across all areas of the country. United
Nations agencies and partners will continue to scale up
their assistance to save lives. However, only a political
settlement can end the immense suffering facing more
than 20 million men, women and children in Yemen
today.
The President: I thank Ms. Kang for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
President for her initiative in holding this important
open debate. I welcome the briefings from Special
Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed, from High Commissioner
Al Hussein and from Assistant-Secretary-General
Kang.
As all the briefers have made painfully clear, the
situation facing the people of Yemen is alarming.
Yemenis are in the midst of one of the very worst
humanitarian crisis in the world. We have heard the
statistics just now. But to bring it home to this Chamber,
if the members of this Security Council were an average

S/PV.7596

group of 15 Yemenis, 12 of us would need humanitarian
assistance and four would need emergency food
assistance just to survive.
Against that appalling backdrop, however, there are
some signs of hope. We welcome the positive progress
made at the United Nations talks last week and the attimes constructive approach taken by the delegations.
I am sure all of us here will join me in praising the
Special Envoy for his efforts to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. Ismail says he needs our backing. On
behalf of the United Kingdom, I can say that he has
it. I hope that the whole Council will support him and
encourage further progress at the talks.
The onus must now be on all parties to build on the
progress made by taking forward the agreements and
implementing further confidence-building measures.
This will lay the foundations for a sustainable peace.
The United Nations-facilitated talks remain the best
way to resolve the current crisis in an inclusive manner.
I welcome the agreement by the delegations to ensure
a greater involvement of women in the next round of
talks. Women are greatly impacted by the conflict, so
we must heed their voices.
I believe that there are three steps that now need
to be taken: a ceasefire, alleviating the humanitarian
situation and implementing resolution 2216 (2015).
The first step has to be a meaningful and sustainable
ceasefire that is respected by all sides. We welcome
the agreement reached in Switzerland to extend the
ceasefire until 28 December and give our full support
to the work of the Coordination and De-escalation
Committee. But there have been too many breaches
over the past week, and it does need to be extended
further beyond 28 December. Without a ceasefire,
all other efforts to improve the situation in Yemen,
whether human rights or humanitarian or political in
nature, are all put in jeopardy. I therefore call on all
sides to respect the ceasefire and fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
Secondly, we need to be doing all we can to alleviate
the dire humanitarian situation and help the 21 million
Yemenis in need of assistance. The agreement reached
to allow humanitarian access to Taiz was a crucial
step in this regard. Over 100 World Food Programme
trucks reached the city last week, and medical supplies
are also arriving. All parties must do what they can
to facilitate rapid and safe access to humanitarian aid
and remove bureaucratic impediments. Increasing

15-446477/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

commercial imports, improving port capacity and
granting greater access to finance for traders would all
be vital if markets are to reopen.
We all have a role to play, and I am proud that the
United Kingdom has doubled its assistance over the past
year to around $110 million, but overall the international
humanitarian response remains underfunded. In
addition, we should all be worried by the continuing
arbitrary detentions and enforced disappearances of
non-governmental organization workers, activists,
protesters and journalists. These repressive measures
by the Houthis are not only closing down the democratic
space, but are also denying Yemenis the fundamental
rights to which we are all entitled. The United Kingdom
called for the release of all those unlawfully detained,
including the Yemeni Defence Minister, Mahmoud
Al-Subaihi, and for the human rights of all Yemenis to
be respected.
The third step needs to be building on the
discussions in Switzerland last week for a framework
for implementing resolution 2216 (2015). This means
the Houthis relinquishing weaponry, withdrawing from
towns and cities, and recognizing the legitimacy of the
Government of Yemen. It also means former President
Ali Abdullah Saleh stopping his destabilizing actions,
which continue to undermine the peace, security and
stability of Yemen.
There are other areas that are crucial to further
progress. Reviving the social welfare fund, protecting
State institutions, stopping the recruitment and
use of children, and taking action against the use of
landmines — these are all vital to finding a sustainable
peace in Yemen. In addition, the Special Envoy has
reminded us of the risk that Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) and Daesh Yemen will exploit
the current situation to consolidate their position.
The seizure of towns in southern Yemen by AQAP
earlier this month and the multiple and coordinated
attacks conducted by Daesh Yemen across the country
should alarm us all. Countering such terrorist threats
must remain a top priority for the Council and the
international community as a whole.
In conclusion, I would reiterate that a longterm solution must be found through dialogue and
negotiations. We should encourage all sides to take
forward the agreements made in Switzerland and build
on this solid foundation when talks resume in January
2016. There will be much to discuss in 2016 to ensure
that resolution 2216 (2015) is implemented in full and
8/22

22/12/2015

that ordinary Yemenis can eventually return to a life of
normality and safety.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Prince Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings.
Chad is following with great concern the ongoing
hostilities and the persistent deterioration of the security
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. Civilians,
including women and children, represent 80 per cent
of the victims of this war and continue to pay a very
heavy price. The human cost is overwhelming, as we
have just heard: over 6,000 deaths, more than 27,000
wounded, nearly 2.5 million internally displaced.
Further, for more than three months, thousands of other
innocent civilians have been under siege in the city of
Taiz and have been denied the subsistence minimum by
the Houthi and their allies.
Against this sombre backdrop, the destruction of
vital infrastructure and the lack of basic social services
exacerbate the suffering of civilian populations. This
disastrous war threatens the unity of Yemen and, in the
absence of a political perspective, contains the seeds
of a regional conflict with incalculable consequences.
Moreover, it provides a breeding ground for terrorist
groups such as Al-Qaida, thereby threatening
international peace and security.
As a result, the international community and
countries of the region should encourage the fostering
of conditions conducive to dialogue and help the parties
opt for a political solution to the conflict. It is therefore
urgent to make every effort to promote de-escalation,
establish a comprehensive permanent ceasefire and
meet the pressing needs of needy populations in
all affected areas. In this context, we welcome the
recent holding in Switzerland of consultations among
the Yemeni actors under the auspices of the United
Nations and salute the tireless facilitation efforts of
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General. We hope that the parties will
resume consultations shortly, as planned, in order to
adopt measures for building mutual trust that will lead
to starting a peaceful dialogue.
Nevertheless, we deplore the repeated violations of
the ceasefire by the Houthis and their allies and call

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

on all parties to respect their commitments and refrain
from any action likely to undermine the ongoing peace
efforts. Accordingly, the international community as a
whole must exert all necessary pressure on all parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in
the process of exiting the crisis in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue conference. The Security Council
should continue to monitor the situation in Yemen
closely and give its full support for the Special Envoy’s
efforts in order to provide a decisive boost to the peace
process.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting in an open
format, to accord the issue the attention that it deserves.
My delegation is appreciative of the insightful briefings
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein; and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyungwha Kang. Listening to the briefers, Malaysia is deeply
concerned about the protracted conflict in Yemen and
the humanitarian disaster that it has triggered.
We take note of the progress made by the conflicting
parties in Switzerland last week in the talks brokered
by Special Envoy Ahmed. The fact that the conflicting
parties had come together to engage in face-to-face
negotiations for the first time since the escalation of
the conflict is by no means a small feat. However,
we regret the lack of commitment on the part of the
conflicting parties to engage in good faith and to adhere
to the ceasefire agreed prior to the talks. Clearly, the
conflicting parties seem to think that they can still win
the war militarily.
Malaysia reiterates our position that a political
solution remains the only legitimate path towards a
democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen. Prolonging the
military conflict will only benefit terrorist groups such
as Al-Qaeda and Daesh. In the past months, we have
seen how these terrorist groups and their affiliates have
sowed sectarian discord and expanded their influence
in Yemen, taking full advantage of the lack of effective
Government and ongoing insecurity in the country.

S/PV.7596

The protracted conflict has exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis at the expense of the Yemeni people,
particularly children. Since March, over 600 children
have been killed in the conflict. The staggering figure of
10 million children are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance, while over 500,000 children under the age of
five are at risk of severe acute malnutrition. In addition,
half of Yemen’s school-aged children are out of school.
Over 1,000 schools are unable to resume lessons since
they are destroyed, damaged or being used as temporary
shelters for internally displaced persons.
In that regard, we reiterate the urgent need for an
immediate ceasefire or, at the very least, ample periods
of humanitarian pauses to allow humanitarian aid
and personnel to reach those in need. As repeatedly
expressed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Malaysia emphasizes that
humanitarian aid cannot and should not be expected
to take over the role of commercial shipments to
the country. We therefore remain concerned about
the continuing blockade of commercial shipments
and allegations of corruption on the part of certain
parties who are trying to benefit from the blockade
at the expense of the welfare of the people. Malaysia
urges all parties to respect international humanitarian
and human rights law, ensure humanitarian access,
minimize harm to civilians and refrain from damaging
civilian infrastructure. We wish to see independent
investigations into various incidences that seriously
violated international humanitarian and human rights
law, including targeted attacks on civilians, schools and
medical facilities.
In concluding, Malaysia reaffirms our strong
support for the efforts of Special Envoy Ahmed
to identify and implement confidence-building
measures towards achieving a durable ceasefire and a
comprehensive settlement. We look forward to the next
round of talks, which we hope will take place in January.
The success of the talks depends on the political will of
the conflicting parties themselves. We therefore urge
all parties to extend their full cooperation in the peace
process and demonstrate their sincerity in ending the
conflict and returning the country to its democratic
transition path, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementing mechanisms, and the
National Dialogue outcomes. We echo the view of the
international community that this remains the only

15-446479/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

legitimate path in the long run, and we will continue to
support Yemen towards that endeavour.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s open meeting of the Security Council on the
issue of Yemen. It has been some time since we last
had an opportunity to address this crisis in the Council,
and with today’s briefing we have avoided the trap
of overlooking and neglecting the grave situation
in that country. I thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator for their briefings.
The magnitude of the humanitarian catastrophe
in Yemen is highly alarming. Before March, half of
Yemen’s population lived below the poverty threshold.
We can only imagine what the situation is like now. In
August, the President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, visited Yemen, and upon
his return stated that Yemen, after five months, looks
like Syria after five years. Today, 14.5 million people
in Yemen are living in food insecurity, and we have
all seen the shocking photos in the media of children
suffering from malnutrition. We know what that will
mean over the coming years. Even if the war in Yemen
were to come to an end today, the future of the next
generation has already been jeopardized. Given the
situation, I would like to focus on three points
The first is the absolute and pressing need for
a ceasefire. The objective today must be for parties
to agree to a ceasefire, which must be put in place
immediately and be effective and, if at all possible,
permanent. We believe that a ceasefire is needed to
foster trust and allow negotiations to be resumed in
good faith. The war in Yemen has taught us that a
military solution is not a viable option. The progress
that we have seen on the ground over the past few
months is irregular and cannot be consolidated easily
from a military perspective, especially in a country like
Yemen, which has a plethora of militias with shifting
loyalties and terrorist groups, some of which are
extremely dangerous. It involves not only finding the
right humanitarian approach but also being pragmatic
in seeking a solution that is not military and that must
be embraced by all sides.
The second point that I wish to make is the need to
respect international humanitarian law. It is absolutely
essential that the core elements of international
10/22

22/12/2015

humanitarian law be upheld at all times as hostilities
continue. Last week’s ceasefire, despite its limitations,
was nonetheless very useful for humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in many
areas of the country. We also have positive information
from the past few months, as noted by Assistant
Secretary-General Kang in her briefing, about the
delivery of goods into the country, including fuel,
without which no basic services can be provided. But it
is clear that there are severe shortages, and we are still
a long way from a situation that could be considered
acceptable. The entry of goods into the country must be
stabilized and all ports along the Red Sea must be made
operational. We also recall yet again the importance of
preventing attacks on schools, hospitals, other health
infrastructures and, of course, medical staff.
The third point concerns the role of the region.
The war in Yemen is very closely linked to regional
dynamics. Throughout 2015, we have seen considerable
headway made in reducing tension in certain conflicts
in the Middle East. In July, we reached a historic
agreement on Iran’s nuclear dossier. Last week, we
unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), aimed
at laying the foundation for negotiations in Syria with
a clear and well-drafted road map. We need that same
strength and spirit of consensus with regard to Yemen.
We therefore call on all countries of the region to
exercise their influence upon the parties to that end.
We wish to express our support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, whose skill, level-headedness
and discretion have enabled him to persuade the parties
to sit at the negotiating table and to extract from them
a promise to return to negotiations in January 2016. We
also commend the Secretary-General for the key role
he plays in keeping a watchful eye on the situation in
Yemen. He has become personally involved in the quest
for a solution to that crisis.
I wish to conclude by extending our profound
gratitude to all the humanitarian workers and staff of the
United Nations agencies, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and NGOs such as Médecins Sans
Frontières, who have continued their work on the
ground in Yemen, who risk their lives every day to
mitigate the impact of this humanitarian catastrophe.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United
15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7596

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs.

food, medicines and fuel. Yemen has thus become one
of the worst, if not the worst, humanitarian crises in the
region, despite the silence of the media about this fact.

We must acknowledge the fact that the Security
Council’s efforts regarding the situation in Yemen
have been ineffective, since resolution 2216 (2015),
which we adopted in April, has failed to bring about
any significant resolution of the armed conflict there.
Venezuela is still convinced, however, that only
dialogue and negotiations can lay the groundwork for
ending the conflict so as to promote a peaceful and
orderly political transition. In that regard, we commend
the peace talks that took place in Switzerland last week.
The Special Envoy’s new initiative demonstrates the
importance of the leadership of the United Nations in the
political negotiation process and its role as a mediator
in the conflict. That process should be conducted in
good faith, without conditions, and should include
representatives of civil society, including women, with
the aim of outlining public policies that benefit the
population of Yemen as a whole.

It is deeply regrettable that the conflict has so far
resulted in about 6,000 deaths, half of them civilians,
and more than 27,500 wounded. According to UNICEF,
those numbers include 637 children killed and 927
injured. To that tragedy we must add the 1.3 million
children under five who are at risk of malnutrition and
2.3 million people who have been forced to leave their
homes, while hundreds of thousands more have fled
the country. We hope the parties to the conflict can
guarantee access to the country’s more remote areas for
humanitarian workers so they can provide assistance
to relieve the people’s most urgent needs. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and the various humanitarian and
volunteer agencies, among others, for their invaluable
efforts to relieve the adverse impact on the civilian
population in the wake of the conflict.

Unfortunately, despite the fact that the parties
agreed to suspend hostilities before the talks began,
there have already been violations of the ceasefire,
which have a damaging effect on the dialogue and
put obstacles in the way of a peace agreement. In
that regard, we urge the parties to comply with their
commitment in order to facilitate concrete progress for
the good of the people of Yemen.
Achieving a political, peaceful and definitive
settlement in Yemen has become correspondingly
more difficult as the conflict has been prolonged.
It is regrettable that a lack of political will among
the parties to end hostilities has resulted in a chaotic
situation that has had a terrible effect on the civilian
population. We therefore call once again on the parties
to commit to specific goals with a view to settling the
crisis as quickly as possible. We reiterate that we will
see positive results from the negotiations only to the
extent that the parties demonstrate flexibility and a
willingness to compromise in order to reach a secure
and lasting peace in Yemen.
Thanks to the armed conflict, Yemen is dealing
with a serious humanitarian crisis that is shaking it
to its foundations. According to a number of reports,
80 per cent of the population — more than 20 million
people altogether — is in urgent need of some form
of humanitarian aid to meet their desperate needs for

I would also like to take advantage of this occasion
to firmly condemn the assassination earlier this month
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) of
the Governor of Aden, Mr. Jafar Mohamed Saad. We
reiterate that the only beneficiaries of the conflict in
Yemen are Al-Qaida and ISIS, which feed on chaos
and violence in their efforts to achieve their objectives.
As Mr. Ahmed said in his briefing, those terrorist
groups have expanded their activities into Yemen,
further complicating what was already a precarious
political situation. As we have already said, effectively
combating terrorism in Yemen requires the existence of
a State with solid institutions, but that can be achieved
only when the armed conflict ends and peace and
stability are restored, with the participation of every
sector of society.
As we have said before and say again, we
reject violence and terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations. Given the devastation caused by this
conflict, Venezuela appeals to the parties to take
urgent steps aimed at reaching an agreement that can
end the hostilities. We call on all concerned to respect
international humanitarian and human rights laws,
which are being violated repeatedly and systematically
by the parties to the conflict. Dialogue is the only way
we can achieve peace and stability. We reiterate that
the solution must be political, negotiated and peaceful.
Countries that have any influence on the parties should
do all they can to help achieve progress in this process.

15-4464711/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

22/12/2015

The situation in Yemen is tragic. We should see
the prolonged crisis as an urgent wake-up call, telling
us that we cannot abandon our efforts to help reverse
the prevailing climate of violence. The international
community has an obligation to support any peaceful
political efforts to protect Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the country,
and in particular to work to ensure the protection of
Yemenis affected by the war.

people. Alongside the efforts to advance Yemen’s
political settlement process, we hope that the United
Nations will continue to improve its coordination of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance there. The parties
concerned should also cooperate actively with United
Nations efforts by ensuring that there are no obstacles
to safe humanitarian access. International donors
should honour their commitments as soon as possible
in order to ease Yemen’s humanitarian crisis.

Finally, we believe the Council should act
constructively to address the political crisis affecting
our brothers the people of Yemen and to help its millions
of citizens overcome the hardships the war has caused.

China has been following the situation in Yemen
closely. We have actively promoted the peace talks and
provided large amounts of humanitarian assistance.
China will continue to work with the international
community in a concerted effort to push for an early
resumption of peace and stability in Yemen.

Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Envoy Ahmed, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Al Hussein, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kyung-wha Kang for their briefings.
Thanks to the active good offices of the international
community, including the United Nations, the settlement
process in Yemen has made progress recently. The
Yemeni parties have restarted their political dialogue in
Switzerland and have arrived at agreements, including
on a temporary ceasefire, developments that China
welcomes. China greatly appreciates the good offices
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Envoy, Mr. Ahmed, in mediating the conflict in Yemen.
In Yemen, history has repeatedly shown that war
offers no solutions and that political dialogue is the
only path to achieving a durable peace. The parties
must sit down and continue their talks. It is hoped that
they will proceed based on the long-term interests
of their country and their people and in the interests
of peace and stability in the region in general. They
should take this opportunity to continue to participate
unconditionally in the political dialogue, conducted
under United Nations auspices, ensure that it continues
as scheduled, demonstrate their good faith and see that
it produces policy decisions that can result as soon as
possible in a political settlement that reflects reality in
Yemen and accommodates all the parties’ concerns. We
hope that the international community will work hard
to promote the peace talks, build confidence and allay
suspicions, and that other States in the region and the
relevant regional organizations will continue to play a
constructive role.
The protracted conflict in Yemen has resulted
in a deteriorating humanitarian situation. China
sympathizes deeply with the suffering of the Yemeni

12/22

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): My delegation
welcomes the initiative, Madam President, to hold this
open briefing on Yemen. I thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions, which once again remind
us of the deep and abysmal crisis that Yemen is in. To
expect a military solution or a surrender of the other
side is to court a self-defeating illusion. One may win
a war but lose a country while doing so. If the conflict
continues, the consequences will be devastating for
generations to come — for Yemenis and for the entire
region and beyond.
Let me express our full support to the mediation
efforts of Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. There needs to be viable
follow-up to the meetings in Switzerland. We welcome
in particular the commitment of t+he parties to continue
the work of the Coordination and De-escalation
Committee. The three key pillars — the cessation of
hostilities, unhindered humanitarian access and a
political process that puts Yemen’s transition back
on track — must be unconditionally supported and
sustained. The transition framework is well-known,
based on resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and the National Dialogue outcomes.
The onus is on all of the parties to break the cycle
of violence and restore respect for human life. If Yemen
and the Yemenis are to have a viable future, a durable
solution leading to transition and peace must be found
now. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham will not wait. They are
already making themselves very comfortable on the
ground, and we know what happens where they settle
in. We cannot afford another terrorist black hole in the
region.
15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

We are well aware of how difficult the process is.
We pay tribute to the Special Envoy’s perseverance
and tenacity in keeping the hope of negotiations
alive. Having the date for the next meeting is a small
but important signal. We hope that the talks will
increasingly be based on substance and the agenda set
forth by the Special Envoy, ideally all in one package.
We would like to thank the Special Envoy for reaching
out to Yemen’s women in particular. Their voices must
continue to be part and parcel of all the talks and the
efforts aimed at restoring peace in that much-suffering
country.
Confidence-building measures, including a
prisoner release, are key to making sure peace happens.
We welcome the fact that more than 100 United
Nations food trucks managed to reach Taiz, and that
both sides have agreed to make humanitarian access
to the city permanent. However, more deliveries of
that kind are most urgently needed across the country.
Malnourishment, starvation, the stunted growth of
children — all of that will negatively impact the future
of the country and should not be allowed to continue.
It is disappointing that the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism is not yet operational. Given
the level of delivery shortages, including the delivery
of commercial goods and fuel in particular, any further
delays are unacceptable, including considering the fact
that the coalition has acknowledged that the approach
offered by the United Nations would substantially
alleviate their concerns regarding possible breaches
of the arms embargo. A lot of figures have been
mentioned. I will refer to only one that speaks for itself
and underlines the urgency. The prices of fuel and
cooking gas have gone up by 300 per cent over pre-war
levels, in a country that was already very poor before
the crisis struck.
We regret that ceasefire violations continue to
occur on both sides. It is crucial to observe and to
extend the ceasefire, with an effective ceasefire
coordination mechanism in place and operating. In that
context, let me also stress, as many delegations have
before me, the critical need for all parties to the conflict
to observe international humanitarian and human
rights law. Schools, health facilities and humanitarian
and medical workers must be protected and safe from
attacks. Violations against them may amount to war
crimes. Those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights law must sooner or later be held
to account.

S/PV.7596

Let me move now to the issue of sanctions. When
the sanctions regime was set up, the prevalent thinking
was that the threat of sanctions alone was sufficient to
deter spoilers. That proved erroneous. Empty shells
do not deter spoilers. When the first individuals were
finally designated in November 2014, it was already
too late, since by that time arms were flowing freely
into the Houthis’ hands, and they were well advanced
in their march against the legitimate Government of
Yemen.
A lot more needs to be done with regard to former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, his son Mr. Ahmed Ali
Saleh and the inner circle, who have played a huge role
in stoking the conflict. Some countries have already
started identifying and freezing their assets. We
encourage all countries that may have information on
their assets to step up their cooperation with the Panel
of Experts as they prepare their final report to the
Committee, which is due in January.
The need to stop uncontrolled arms flows into
Yemen and to deal with the massive saturation of the
country with arms was evident even before the conflict
flared. Lithuania has consistently supported the idea
of an arms embargo that could have given a United
Nations-supported disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration effort a better chance of success. The
targeted arms embargo has finally been imposed. Yet we
need to admit that, as currently structured and applied,
its impact is yet to be assessed. For that we need better
reporting on the implementation of the arms embargo.
It is important to also ensure that reported cases of
arms-embargo violations, such as the one concerning
the attempted weapons transfer from Iran, should be
seriously examined by the Panel and the Committee.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. We are also
grateful to thebriefers — Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, whom I welcome back to the Council, and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang. We wish to thank them for their
updates on the situation in Yemen.
We have very closely followed the mediation
efforts of Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We
commend him for his commitment to searching for
peace in Yemen. Getting the Government of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and the Houthis to
engage in discussions for the first time is in itself is

15-4464713/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

a very encouraging development that we can describe
as a significant silver lining in the cloud. We wish to
welcome the agreement reached by the parties on the
broad framework for ending the conflict. Particularly
noteworthy are the confidence-building measures
agreed by the parties, including the release of prisoners
and the facilitation of humanitarian access.
We are concerned, however, that a permanent
ceasefire has not yet been agreed. An enduring
ceasefire, we believe, will be the most effective
confidence-building measure. We encourage the parties
to extend the current temporary ceasefire to make it
permanent. Even with a temporary ceasefire in place,
numerous violations have rendered it tenuous. It is not
enough to have a ceasefire; the parties must refrain
from violence during the ceasefire. That is a crucial
first step in de-escalating the conflict and improving
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We look forward
to the resumption of talks on 14 January. It is our hope
that they will build a scaffolding on top of the gains of
the first round to produce an outcome that will end the
conflict in Yemen.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I wish to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings today. I would
also like to thank the United Nations staff in Yemen,
who work around the clock to deliver assistance despite
the serious security risks in the country.
The direct talks among the parties to the conflict
in Yemen, held recently in Geneva, provide a source
of relief. Jordan supports the positive development
at the political level and the inclusion of the Houthis
in an attempt to implement resolution 2216 (2015).
The declaration by President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour of a seven-day ceasefire, parallel to
the negotiations in Switzerland, was a welcome step.
We also welcome the fact that he has extended the
ceasefire. That is proof of the Yemeni Government’s
genuine commitment to finding a negotiated political
and peaceful settlement, which they favour over any
other solution. The Government’s tireless support for
the cessation of hostilities following the ceasefire is due
to their belief that it can further successful negotiations
in Switzerland.

14/22

22/12/2015

The negotiations in Switzerland mark a decisive
turning point in the current political crisis in Yemen.
Even if it is only a beginning, we look forward to a more
definitive cessation of hostilities. Negotiations have
allowed us at least to begin to overcome the deadlock
that has characterized the political situation in Yemen
for some years now. Those who were engaged in the
negotiations in Geneva agreed to the implementation of
a ceasefire monitoring committee and a humanitarian
mechanism. We therefore underscore the importance
of such negotiations, even if they are but a beginning.
They took place at a timely moment, and the initial
results have been fruitful.
Similarly, we are looking forward to the next
cycle of negotiations, which are scheduled to begin on
14 January 2016, and we underscore the importance of
the framework for the negotiations, which is provided
by resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and the outcomes of the Yemeni
National Dialogue. We would also like to reiterate the
importance of pursuing negotiations, and we call on all
parties to participate seriously and in good faith in the
discussions because we are firmly convinced that the
solution to the Yemeni crisis is a political one involving
the re-establishment of the legitimacy embodied by
President Hadi Mansour and by the control of the
Government over all areas of Yemen, including all of
its governorates.
Jordan profoundly regrets and unequivocally and
robustly condemns all violations of the humanitarian
pause agreed by President Hadi Mansour. There
have been many reported violations of that pause,
particularly in the Taiz and Marib governorates. I
prefer not to go into detail concerning those violations,
but I would draw everyone’s attention to the fact that
they have been duly documented in report S/2015/582.
Such violations are not limited to Yemen alone; we
have seen similar violations in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, with the launching of ballistic missiles. That is
a serious and alarming development and a clear act of
provocation. Nonetheless, the Yemeni Government has
maintained its commitment to respecting the ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities, while the coalition forces
have expressed their commitment to the truce and have
held back from responding to provocation.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is a further
source of concern. We have always called attention
to the inextricable link between the humanitarian
situation and a political settlement, which go hand in

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

hand with the restoration of the legitimacy of the duly
elected Government of Yemen. Those three elements
go together. We need to identify the root causes of the
escalation of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, owing in
part to the fragility and weakness of the country and its
institutions. We are aware that the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council — particularly resolutions
2201 (2015) and 2216 (2015) — are not being properly
implemented because of that weakness.
I would like to draw particular attention to the
humanitarian situation in the city of Taiz, which is
suffering the worst form of collective punishment by
being besieged. Because of the humanitarian blockade,
no aid is getting through, putting the city’s population
of 400,000 at risk of their lives. We therefore call on
the international community to urgently respond by
exercising pressure on the Houthis and their partners so
as to open the roads and infrastructure for the delivery
of aid to that city and to ensure that no humanitarian aid
is diverted. During negotiations, we noticed the failure
to reach an agreement on enabling humanitarian aid to
reach Taiz, and we need to urgently remedy that.
Despite the violations of the humanitarian pause,
there is nonetheless grounds for hope because the
information gathered by the security forces indicate
that, despite the violations, it has been possible to
improve the humanitarian situation. Thanks to the
humanitarian pause, some aid has have been delivered
to other affected cities and regions, which makes it
very clear, once again, that a political solution lies in
the framework of the GCC Initiative, the outcomes of
National Dialogue and resolution 2216 (2015).
This might be the last statement made by my country
before the Security Council on the subject of Yemen.
As a parting appeal, we therefore call on all members
of the Security Council and the entire international
community to work together in shouldering our
responsibilities to the people of Yemen and implement
all possible measures aimed at helping the Yemenis
achieve progress on the path to peace and stability
in their country and among themselves, because our
brotherly country of Yemen and its people are known
for their generosity and wisdom. Its people look to the
Council to bring them hope and an end to the tragedy,
which has led to the suffering of children, women, men
and the elderly in Yemen.
It is also extremely important to listen to the
concerns of the country and to ensure that the GCC is
part of the solution, because Yemen has made it very

S/PV.7596

clear that the deterioration of the security situation in
that country is a serious threat to the region in general,
including the members of the GCC. They therefore need
to be part of any solution, and we need to keep an eye
on any repercussions resulting from potential political
insecurity in the broader region and any potential
spillover, should the situation in Yemen deteriorate
further. If that does happen, Yemen will become a
fertile breeding ground for terrorists to extend their
control and grip and to project the shadow of terrorism
throughout the region, becoming a much greater threat
than they already are, including for GCC countries.
As we have seen throughout the world, terrorists have
irrefutably demonstrated that what is happening in our
region will not remain contained there, but will impact
the entire world.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein; and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, for their briefings on the situation in Yemen.
We welcome the resumption of negotiations
between the Yemeni parties. We note the productive
work of Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who overcame
numerous difficulties in Switzerland and was able
to bring together all the key parties to the conflict to
conduct comprehensive political talks with a view to
putting a timely end to the bloodshed. We regret that
the talks did not coincide with a lasting ceasefire. It is
not encouraging that the meeting has been deferred to
mid-January. We underscore our position that we do see
no alternative to a political settlement of the conflict.
We truly hope that the Coordination and De-Escalation
Committee, comprised of military advisers from each
party to the conflict, will be able ensure reconciliation
as soon as possible.
We believe that the agreements with regard to
unhindered humanitarian access and the lifting of any
blockades are exceptionally important. We continue
to believe that the establishment of humanitarian
pauses is timely, a point on which Russia has insisted
since the very beginning of the crisis in Yemen. Such
humanitarian pauses, aimed at alleviating the suffering
of civilians, are of critical interest and must be complied
with under all international humanitarian laws. The
Russian Federation has provided and will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to Yemen.

15-4464715/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the outcome that was reached under
Mr. Ahmed’s leadership in Switzerland with regard
to the exchange of prisoners. In the future, it will be
necessary to gradually establish an atmosphere of
mutual trust. In that regard, the unifying elements
might also include a joint effort to fight the terrorist
threat emerging in the country. The development of
events on the ground this year have demonstrated the
evident futility of wagering on a military solution to
resolve the crisis in Yemen. Ongoing military clashes
can lead only to the further deterioration the situation,
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and promote the
anarchy and chaos that terrorist groups actively exploit
to spread their presence and influence in Yemen. All
Yemeni patriotic forces must come together to push
back against terrorism.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, and his team. We expect an increased
level in his efforts to end the military clashes as soon as
possible and launch substantive talks on the withdrawal
of forces and the start of an inclusive dialogue to rebuild
statehood and the unity of the country.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We would like to thank
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
We also take this opportunity to commend
Mr. Ahmed for being able to broker the ceasefire
agreement last week, which surely brought a welcome
break in the fighting for the people of Yemen. After
more than a year of fighting, the loss of thousands of
lives and the worsening humanitarian situation, the
warring sides have to seize such opportunities in order
to reduce the suffering of the people of Yemen and to
achieve a sustainable political settlement.
It is most unfortunate that the proposed ceasefire
was repeatedly violated during the peace talks in
Switzerland, and that no tangible outcome was
achieved. However, we are fully aware that this
process will take time and patience. We therefore
welcome the announcement by Special Envoy Ahmed
that a new round of talks will be held on 14 January.
In the meantime, we reiterate our call on the warring
parties to respect the safety of the civilian population
and to heed the call for a permanent ceasefire in order
to prevent further loss of life and the proliferation of
16/22

22/12/2015

terrorist armed groups, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, that have exploited the violence to
spread their influence in that volatile region.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein; and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang for their
briefings. We welcome the update on the first round
of talks in Switzerland, as well as the forthright nature
of the briefings on the human rights and humanitarian
situations in Yemen.
All of us here would have wished to see greater
progress made in the past week’s talks. Even so, it is
welcome that the parties have found some important
areas of agreement and that there is a commitment to
resuming talks in mid-January. It is vital that both sides
remain committed and engaged, without preconditions,
to achieving a negotiated solution to the crisis, and to
working to ensure progress towards that goal at the next
round of talks. We agree with the Special Envoy that
the Security Council must support his efforts. We call
on all sides to engage meaningfully. Those who may
seek to undermine the talks or the ceasefire should
know that there will be consequences.
The violations of the temporary ceasefire on both
sides are very disappointing. We commend, however,
the efforts of humanitarian agencies to reach those
in need during the window provided. It is important
now that the ceasefire be extended and respected,
both to facilitate further humanitarian access and to
provide the resumed talks with the best prospects for
success. Given the fragmented nature of the forces on
the ground, we call on all sides to exercise restraint in
responding to provocations in the weeks ahead in order
to give the ceasefire a chance to take hold.
The situation in Yemen has deteriorated very
seriously during 2015. A country that was already
seriously impoverished has now suffered egregiously
due to serial failures in its leadership and sectarianism.
The longer this conflict continues, the more the Yemeni
people suffer, and the greater the threat to the stability
and security of neighbouring countries. It is in the
interests of all sides in the conflict to end the fighting
and instability as soon as possible and work towards
an inclusive and sustainable political solution. Only
then can the work of the political transition resume and
the country’s leadership begin to address the multitude
15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

of political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges that await.
Hostilities in and around civilian areas, including
the use of heavy weapons and cluster munitions, as
well as air strikes and anti-aircraft fire, have inflicted
an unacceptably high toll on the civilian population.
Weapons flows from Yemen into Somalia and elsewhere
threaten regional stability. There is mounting evidence
that extremist groups, such as the Yemeni incarnations
of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
are the primary beneficiaries of continued instability
and conflict. Neither Yemen nor its neighbours can
afford this conflict.
Efforts to prevent the flow of arms into the country
continue to inhibit access for desperately needed
imported goods. New Zealand supports, both politically
and materially, the development of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism, and hopes that
with its implementation the passage of commercial
supplies into Yemen will be significantly improved.
We are very encouraged that the parties have agreed
to remove barriers to the safe, rapid and unhindered
access of humanitarian supplies to all parts of Yemen.
These commitments must be honoured by all sides.
As we have heard, serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law have
been committed. To avoid deepening the divisions
within Yemeni society, it is essential that the national
commission of inquiry independently and thoroughly
investigate violations by all sides and share its findings
with the international community. Against that
background, the focused discussion of the Security
Council today is significant. Since the beginning of
its political transition in 2011, the United Nations and
the Security Council have played a significant political
role in Yemen. And since April this year, resolution
2216 (2015) has been prominent in the Yemeni political
discourse.
Ultimately, there will have to be an inclusive solution
that provides for broad participation in governance
arrangements. Any agreement will necessarily have
challenging and complicated security arrangements
that provide for the disarmament of armed groups and
the re-establishment of State authority. The Council
must be ready to support such efforts with the same
commitment we have been able demonstrate on other
regional issues.

S/PV.7596

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of the United States to convene
this public meeting. We thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Sheik Ahmed; United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein; and
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyungwha Kang, for their briefings.
The information provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
stakeholders reveals the serious deterioration of the
situation in Yemen, in particular the humanitarian
situation. We note with alarm reports of actions that
may constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We condemn the use by all parties of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas and their serious
consequences on the civilian population and Yemeni
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals. In
particular, we condemn indiscriminate aerial attacks
and the use of schools for military purposes, in violation
of resolution 2143 (2014), and the possible use of cluster
munitions. In the absence of a political solution and a
definitive ceasefire it is urgent that we reiterate the call
on the parties to the conflict to respect international
law. For its part, the international community should
promote justice and accountability. We support the
recommendation of the High Commissioner pertaining
to the establishment of an impartial and independent
mechanism to investigate all allegations of violations
and abuses of international human rights law and
violations of international humanitarian law.
We thank the agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations and its partners for their efforts to
address the humanitarian needs in Yemen. Nevertheless,
we must not forget that humanitarian assistance
relieves the symptoms of the conflict without curing
the underlying problem. We reiterate that a political
solution is the only remedy for the latter. We call on
the parties to constructively resume direct negotiations
in January without preconditions. Such negotiations
would be a step in the right direction. We also reiterate
our support for the work of the Special Envoy. Only
through a political solution can the crisis in Yemen
come to a sustainable end, thereby making it possible to
address the institutional, economic, humanitarian and
security challenges faced by the country. With regard

15-4464717/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

to the latter, we must not lose sight of the threat posed
by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.
Given that this will probably be our last opportunity
to refer to the matter within the context of our two-year
tenure as a member of the Council, we wish to note how
deeply moved we are by the conflict in Yemen, having
seen first-hand the disappointment of the dreams of the
women and men who in 2011 aspired to build a better
country. We hope that we have contributed, through
our actions in the Council, to ensuring due respect for
the humanitarian needs and protection of the civilian
population affected by the conflict, including children,
and we call on the Council to continue to work towards
the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and
subsequent relevant resolutions, and well as towards
the eradication of the use and recruitment of children
in Yemen.
We hope that the international community will not
fail the Yemeni people and that it will support them in
creating the conditions that will help them establish a
stable, tolerant, inclusive and democratic system.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Assistant
Secretary-General Humanitarian Affairs for their
briefings and their commitment.
For several months, Yemen has been plunged into a
major humanitarian and political crisis. In that context,
France welcomes the emerging progress. France also
welcomes the holding of talk in Switzerland from 15 to
20 December and the ensuing progress, in particular
the establishment of a military committee tasked with
ensuring respect for the ceasefire and the establishment
of humanitarian access to the city of Taiz. In that
regard, we would be remiss not to acknowledge all the
work undertaken by the Special Envoy in bringing the
two parties together and leading them to the negotiating
table. We also commend the parties’ commitment to
putting an end to the hostilities. However, in the face of
the continued fighting, we must recognize the long road
that remains to be covered before lasting trust between
the parties can be re-established. In that context, a
lasting ceasefire respected by all must be put in place
without delay.
The second round of negotiations, which will begin
on 14 January, should make it possible to make progress
towards a compromise agreeable to all the parties
in order to pave the way for the establishment of an

18/22

22/12/2015

inclusive Government, promote national reconciliation
and re-establish the rule of law. Such a compromise
should also make it possible to relaunch a political
transition process based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), as well
as on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.
A political solution is all the more necessary given
that the humanitarian and human rights situation
is now more critical than ever. As the Council was
just reminded, more than 80 per cent of the Yemeni
population currently requires humanitarian assistance.
Millions of people lack access to water, suffer from
malnutrition and have no access to medical attention. We
hope that the mechanism for delivering humanitarian
assistance to the city of Taiz can be rapidly expanded
to other cities in the country. Likewise, the human
rights situation throughout the country is extremely
troubling, if not to say tragic, as we just heard from the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, whose presence
here today I welcome.
The situation in Yemen is not just a regional threat
but an international one. The growing strength on
Yemini territory of the terrorist groups Al-Qaida on
the Arabian Peninsula and Daesh has gone hand in
hand with the disintegration of the Yemeni State. That
development represents a threat to regional stability
and to all countries, as we have seen. The exacerbation
of that threat heightens the urgency of a political
solution, which alone can address the root causes that
are undermining Yemen.
France therefore takes the opportunity of this
formal meeting of the Security Council to call on the
parties to take all the necessary measures to ensure the
success of the negotiations, as well as to urge regional
partners to use their influence to support the efforts
of the Special Envoy. It is incumbent upon all of us
collectively to support the fragile process leading to
an end of the crisis. In that regard, it is vital for the
Security Council to play its full role. France will
continue to spare no effort to work with its partners on
the Council to that end.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed, High
Commissioner Al Hussain and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kang for their briefings on Yemen’s dire
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges.

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

I want to particularly commend the Special Envoy for
traveling here straight from a week of political talks
in Switzerland. We are grateful to him. I also want to
thank all the Council members who have spoken before
me. This is a very opinionated group, as it should be,
and we do not always agree on everything. But listening
to the remarks here this morning, one thing is clear: the
Security Council is united on Yemen. We are united,
to begin with, in our support for the work undertaken
by the Special Envoy and his team over the past
week in Switzerland and well beyond. He negotiated
critical confidence-building measures, a mechanism
seeking to de-escalate military tensions and improved
humanitarian access to all governorates. Those are
important steps forward, and we commend him for his
work. As others have noted, after nearly nine months
of fighting and more than 2,700 civilian deaths, such
steps are long overdue. The United States stands ready
to work with the rest of the Council to hold all sides
to their commitments in advance of the resumption of
talks next month.
Today has also shown that the Council has a
common vision of what must happen next. As the
negotiators are returning home from Switzerland, let
me highlight three of the most important messages we
as the Council have sent today.
First, all sides must do more to facilitate access
for life-saving humanitarian assistance and shipments
of the most basic commercial goods. We heard to day
about Yemen’s already devastating humanitarian crisis,
including the fact that more than 80 per cent of the
population needs humanitarian assistance. In some
governorates, including Aden and Sa’ada, but especially
Taiz, it is even worse. There, nearly every resident
requires aid. The suffering is being significantly
and unnecessarily compounded by restrictions and
impediments to access that are preventing assistance
from getting through, from reaching those who need
it most and thereby causing dramatic price increases
in the markets. That has to stop. Recent events have
shown that access can be improved even in the absence
of a lasting political agreement.
After the lifting of restrictions on commercial
vessels entering the country in October, food imports
finally returned to pre-crisis levels, as we heard from
Ms. Kang today. More ships are now reaching many of
Yemen’s ports to deliver their cargo. Now we have to
find ways to increase the through-put of those ports by
shortening the time needed to unload critical supplies.

S/PV.7596

And — this is critical — the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism must become operational at
long last to help restore the confidence of the shipping
industry and further accelerate shipments of goods,
especially fuel. Fuel imports are still only half of what
they were before the crisis, and fuel drives so much of
what goes on in the country, including even the ability
to access clean water.
Meanwhile, more than 100 trucks were finally
allowed passage into Taiz last week to deliver drinking
water, food, medicine and other basic supplies. But
those supplies now need to actually reach the more
than 200,000 besieged civilians. With enormous needs
still unmet, progress like this is just the beginning. The
Houthis must allow access into Taiz. Similar efforts
should be made elsewhere to facilitate the transport of
staple goods.
Secondly, the Council today reaffirmed its
conviction that the crisis will be solved not through
military action but, as we have all heard again and
again, through political dialogue like the one that
the Special Envoy managed to restart in Switzerland.
That progress reinforces the message that the Council
previously sent through resolution 2216 (2015), which
called unequivocally for a consensus-based political
solution to the crisis based on dialogue. Such dialogue
will lead to peace only if all parties fully commit to
its success and are willing to make hard compromises.
The lack of trust among the parties after everything is
understandable, particularly after the Houthis violated
one agreement after another in their military push
southward — the event that precipitated the current
phase of the conflict. But for the sake of the Yemeni
people, the warring parties must now come together to
engage in good faith. They must be prepared to show
flexibility and adhere to compromises once the talks
conclude. Even when there may be provocations on the
ground, everyone must be resolute in the commitment
to return to a political transition based on the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As the transition takes shape — and I
realize that we are not there yet — it will be critical
that it incorporate not only armed groups but also
Yemeni women and members of Yemeni civil society.
We commend the Special Envoy for his dedicated effort
to that end. Such representatives must have the freedom
to leave Yemen to take part in peace talks, and we
hope that they are also able to leave Yemen to provide

15-4464719/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

the Security Council with first-hand perspectives on
conditions on the ground.
Thirdly, and finally, the Council made clear today
that all sides must commit to a de-escalation of the
hostilities and a lasting ceasefire. The ceasefire that
began last week was imperfect, but it was a step. The
United States joins others in welcoming President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour’s commitment to
extending it, and we urge forces on the ground to respect
this halt in attacks. To bolster the ceasefire, we hope
that all parties will send empowered representatives
to the United Nations-proposed coordination and
de-escalation committee without delay.
While urging all sides to respect the ceasefire, I
also want to reiterate that all parties must fully abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
which, as High Commissioner Al Hussein reported,
has been violated repeatedly during this conflict, with
horrific consequences. Militias loyal to the Houthis and
former President Ali Abdullah Saleh must stop any and
all indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas, including in
Taiz, and they must halt their cross-border attacks. We
will also urge the Saudi-led coalition to ensure lawful
and discriminate targeting and to thoroughly investigate
all credible allegations of civilian casualties, and make
adjustments as needed to avoid such incidents.
Today’s Council meeting has sent a single, unified
message about what must be done in Yemen. We stand
behind the Special Envoy’s efforts and we urge all sides
to continue moving towards a political transition. In the
interim, we call on them to improve access, de-escalate
hostilities and commit to a lasting ceasefire. Our unity
on this issue stems from our shared conviction that too
many Yemenis have already suffered from this war. Let
me conclude with the story of just one of them.
In October, a 6-year-old boy named Fareed Shawki
was playing hide-and-seek in Taiz when a missile
struck nearby. He was hit by shrapnel and rushed to
a hospital along with at least six other boys who had
been injured. Having lived too long amid conflict, he
knew what could happen. “Don’t bury me,” he cried ,
as doctors worked and his father watched. “Don’t bury
me.” Fareed later succumbed to his injuries. He was
buried by his relatives, as his father could not bear to
do it himself.
In its profound tragedy, Fareed’s story is the story
of this war. It is a story that should have had a different
ending very long ago. The parties have a chance to end

20/22

22/12/2015

the conflict now, and the United States joins the other
members of the Security Council in urging them to do
so.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express our gratitude to our
friend Ambassador Samantha Power, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for
her continuous efforts and her engagement on the
Yemeni issue, most recently expressed here during her
statement, in which she referred to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Taiz as a result of the policy
of collective punishment practiced by the militias of
Houthi and former President Saleh against the people
of this long-suffering governorate. We also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for according the
Yemeni crisis great attention through his Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who is
making serious efforts to find a negotiated solution for
the implementation of resolution 2216 (2015). On behalf
of the Government of Yemen, I also thank the team of
the Special Envoy for its major efforts in organizing the
talks at the Magglingen centre in the Swiss town of Biel
from 15 to 20 December.
We have just closed another chapter in the efforts
to bring about peace in my country based on resolution
2216 (2015), which informed the Biel negotiations
agenda with the aim of reversing the putsch by the
Houthis and Saleh against the legitimate authorities and
ending the suffering of millions of our people, whose
blood has been shed as a result. The coup has destroyed
their homes, deprived them of their livelihoods and
inflicted a toll of death and hatred — a situation alien
to our social fabric, which has shaped our people over
centuries of coexistence. Much success was achieved in
the Biel talks, in spite of the challenges and difficulties
in the consultations, including the lack of readiness by
the putschist side and the fact that its leadership did
not authorize its interlocutors to engage effectively to
achieve the points set for the negotiations.
We look to our supporters in the Security Council,
the international community and the 18 sponsors of
the political process in Yemen to bring more pressure
to bear with regard to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all regions in Yemen, especially to Taiz.
The long-suffering city Taiz is being blockaded in an

15-44647

22/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

unprecedented manner, to the point of genocide. Its
citizens look forward to a spirit of solidarity in the form
of the delivery of humanitarian, medical and emergency
relief assistance to vanquish the spectre of death.
We also look for a major role by the United Nations
and the Red Crescent in securing the release political
detainees as a building block of the confidence-building
measures in the consultations. The Government of the
Republic of Yemen seeks to revive economic life and
commercial activity as the lynchpin of normalization.
The Government reached an agreement in early
August with the United Nations and the coalition
forces to implement the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism. However, financial and
organizational impediments, which the Yemeni
Government has nothing to do with, has prevented its
operationalization to date. The Mechanism can achieve
a lot to guarantee the restart of commercial activity.
In addition, the representative of the Office for the
Coordiantion of Humanitarian Affairs mentioned at the
Biel talks the presence of numerous shipments in the
Port of Aden, which are intended for the central and
northern governorates. However, the local warlords,
loyal to the Houthis and Saleh, seek to impede its transfer,
plunder it instead in order to enrich themselves on the
black market. There are also large quanties of supplies
awaiting distribution at the Port of Al-Hudeidah. But
the putschists are deliberately obstructing it, in an act
of cheap political blackmail that brazenly ignores the
suffering of the Yemeni people.
Based on its from responsibility to the patient
Yemeni people — from Sana’a to Al-Mahrah — the
Government expresses its readiness to spare no effort to
deliver food, medicine and supplies to all areas of Yemen
without exception. My Government is also committed
to peace, and to ending the war and the suffering of
the Yemeni people, as well as to providing a conducive
environment for the consultations, as reflected
President Mansour’s letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral on 6 December. The President declared an
unconditional ceasefire 10 days before the launch of
the consultations in order to foster an atmosphere of
confidence. He is continuing to extend his hand for the
sake of peace, but the putschists refuse even reveal the
fate of the detainees or to allow the Red Cross to visit
them. Refusing to release them or to allow them access
to relief supplies is a violation of humanitarian law as
well as an affront to human dignity.

S/PV.7596

Against that backdrop, on the instructions of
President Mansour, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Abdul Malik Al-Mukhlafi,
head of the Yemeni delegation to the Biel consultations,
confirmed another one-week extension to the ceasefire,
thereby abiding by the letter and spirit of the President’s
letter to the Secretary-General.
Flagrant violations by the putschist forces of the
Houthi and Saleh militias are still occurring daily all
over Yemen. Those militias are violating human rights
through abductions, threats and intimidation of young
men, as well through the illegal financial fees imposed
on businessmen under the flimsy pretext that the
extorted funds are contributions to a legitimate military
effort. Further human rights violations by the Houthi
and Saleh militias include the arrest of journalists, who
now languish in prisons run by the militias. Many of
the detainees have been subjected to psychological and
physical torture.
The putschist forces continue to target children with
a long-term plan. Numerous militia leaders regularly
visit schools to recruit children for military purposes,
despite the fact that children should clearly remain in
school rather than be put in harm’s way at the deadly
military front. We know that members of the Council
have followed press and other media reports of the
visits by those militias members to schools in Sana’a to
spread their discourse designed to stoke violence and
extremism.
Finally, I cannot but affirm that all segments of
Yemeni society, throughout the homeland and in the
diaspora, hope that the putschists will join, in a sincere
and credible manner, the next round of consultations
scheduled for 14 January, and that the suffering of
the country, which has been triggered by the militias’
theological project, which is entirely alien to the
Yemeni social fabric, will touch their humanity and
move them to seek reconciliation. As we express our
appreciation for Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed and his team,
we call upon them, before they embark on a new round
of consultations in mid-January, to address the issue of
confidence-building measures. More importantly, we
call for the release of the political detainees from the
putschist prisons, pursuant to those detainees’ rights
under international law. We also call for the lifting of all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
all affected regions, for the resumption of commercial
activity in order to revive Yemen’s economic life, and
for the end of black market trade by the Houthi warlords.

15-4464721/22

S/PV.7596

The situation in the Middle East

My Government will continue, with the same
momentum, to sincerely engage in the United
Nations-led consultations and in the implementation
of resolution 2216 (2015) and all the other United
Nations resolutions relevant to the question of Yemen.
We will spare no effort to eliminate all the effects of
the putsch, restore the Government’s legitimacy and
pursue the dream of all of the children of Yemen for a
democratic federal Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and the outcomes of

22/22

22/12/2015

the comprehensive National Dialogue. This is our joint
vision with the United Nations, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the sponsors of the Yemeni political process,
namely, to shape a future in which the community of
Yemeni men and women will be free from the myths
of dynastic hegemony and will remain within the Gulf
family, bound together in amity, solidarity and a single,
shared destiny.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

15-44647
