S/PV.6977

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6977th meeting

Wednesday, 12 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Millicay
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Zhenhua
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2013/308)

13-36112 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336112*

S/PV.6977

Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2013/309)
Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2013/310)

2

13-36112

S/PV.6977

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/308)
Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2013/309)
Letter dated 23 May 2013 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2013/310)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2013/308, S/2013/309 and S/2013/310,
which contain letters dated 23 May 2013 addressed to
the President of the Security Council from, respectively,
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council again as the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I congratulate His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, upon his country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The United Kingdom
has long been a strong advocate of international justice,
and I wish it every success in its presidency.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
in the Security Council today of Mr. Nikola Selaković,
Minister of Justice and Public Administration of the
Republic of Serbia.

As was the case last December (see S/PV.6880), I
am appearing before the Council today in two capacities
and will accordingly deliver two reports: one on the
ICTY’s progress in relation to its completion strategy
and another on the ongoing work of the Mechanism in
preparation for the launch of The Hague branch of the
Mechanism in a few short weeks.

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and President of the International

Written reports concerning both institutions were
presented to the Council last month. In addition, the
Council will recall that a confidential report in relation
to the ICTY was submitted in April, in accordance with
resolution 2081 (2012). In my remarks today, I wish to

13-361123

S/PV.6977

provide an overview of a few key issues contained in
those written reports, and I will not repeat the contents
of the reports in detail.
Before doing so, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, operating under the excellent leadership
of Guatemala, for the Working Group’s sustained
support for the work of the Tribunal. I would also like
to recognize the invaluable assistance provided to the
ICTY and the Mechanism by the Office of the Legal
Counsel.
Allow me first to update the Council on the progress
being made by the ICTY towards the completion of its
mandate and its closure.
The Tribunal has achieved much since I submitted
a written report to the Council last fall. The Tribunal
has completed the trials in three cases: those of
Haradinaj et al., Tolimir, and Stanišić and Župljanin.
Since my written report was submitted in May, two
more trials have been completed, with the issuance of
trial judgements in the cases of Prlić et al., and Stanišić
and Simatović at the end of May.
As detailed in my May report to the Council, the
Tribunal has also completed the appeal proceedings in
two cases: Lukić and Lukić, and Perišić. Other cases
on appeal are moving ahead, with appeal hearings held
in the complex, multi-appellant case of Šainović et al.,
as well as in the Ðorđević case and in the rule 98 bis
appeal in the Karadžić case.
Only four trials concerning the core statutory
crimes now remain to be completed. Three of those
trials involve the late-arrested accused, Karadžić,
Hadžić and Mladić. The Hadžić case remains on track
and is expected to be completed by the end of 2015.
The Mladić trial is likewise proceeding apace and
is expected to conclude by mid-2016, as previously
forecast.
The Karadžić case, originally anticipated to
be completed by the end of December 2014, is now
anticipated to be completed by July 2015. As detailed in
my written report submitted in May, there are numerous
factors leading to that recalculation.
The only other remaining case at trial is the Šešelj
case. The Trial Chamber has now scheduled delivery
of the judgement in this case for 30 October 2013,
three months later than forecast in my written report

4

last November. The reasons for this delay include
the departure of senior staff members as well as the
simultaneous involvement of all Judges on the bench in
other, ongoing cases.
Turning to the Tribunal’s appellate cases, I wish
to first pause and express my gratitude to Security
Council members for their recognition of the need to
restore the ICTY to the full complement of permanent
Judges and the work that they have done in relation to
this matter.
A judgement in the rule 98 bis appeal in the
Karadžić case is anticipated by July 2013. It is also
expected that the multi-appellant case of Šainović et
al. will be completed by December 2013, as previously
projected. The appeal judgement in the Ðorđević case is
now expected by December 2013, two months later than
the previous forecast. That postponement is attributable
to the need to replace a Judge on the bench due to her
resignation from the Tribunal, the heavy workload of
the other Judges on the bench, and other factors, as set
forth in my May report.
There has also been a small delay in the
projected completion of the appeal judgement in
the multi-appellant case of Popović et al., which is
now anticipated to be completed in October 2014. As
explained more fully in my written report submitted
in May, that change was occasioned by complexities in
the case which have required additional preparations in
advance of the appeal hearing.
For those cases that have experienced changes in
projected end dates, a number of different measures
have been adopted to minimize delays, including the
reassignment of additional legal staff members to assist
in judgement drafting.
As previously reported to the Council, it is currently
anticipated that appeals in three cases are expected to
go beyond 31 December 2014. In two of those cases,
Tolimir and Stanišić and Župljanin, the forecasted
completion dates for the appeals are just a few months
past the target date. We continue to look for ways to
bring the projected completion dates for these cases,
and, indeed, all of our cases, forward. However, any
appeals in the third case, that of Prlić et al., are only
expected to be completed in mid-2017.
With respect to the Prlić et al. case, I note that there
is still a possibility that any appeals filed in that case
may go to the Mechanism, rather than the Tribunal. We

13-36112

S/PV.6977

will have to see what happens. Similarly, it is not yet
clear whether any appeals in the Stanišić and Simatović
case will go to the Mechanism or to the ICTY.

I would now like to turn to the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

In sum, while the Tribunal has made tremendous
progress in many respects, there have been some delays
in certain proceedings, as fully explained in my report
to the Council. I deeply regret those delays. But I hasten
to remind the Council that many of the factors leading
to the delays are not uncommon to judicial and criminal
proceedings the world over.

At the outset, I am very pleased to advise that all
arrangements are in place to ensure a seamless transfer
of functions from the ICTY to The Hague branch of
the Mechanism on 1 July 2013, in full compliance
with the requirements of resolution 1966 (2010). I have
every expectation that, as the Mechanism officially
becomes a transcontinental institution, it will continue
to operate as smoothly as it has done since the opening
of the Arusha branch last July. In that respect, I wish to
express my gratitude to the Mechanism’s Registrar and
Prosecutor for helping to make that possible.

More importantly, while unexpected developments
may give rise to delays in any criminal case, the impact
of such developments on the efficient completion of
proceedings is magnified by the unique situation and
mandate of the Tribunal. Thus, for example, the typical
difficulties and unpredictability involved in identifying,
preparing and presenting evidence are multiplied many
times over in a Tribunal situated far from the site of the
alleged crimes, when most witnesses must be brought
from thousands of kilometres away to appear in
court, and when the official languages of the Tribunal
differ from those of the accused and most witnesses,
necessitating constant translations of witness testimony
and extraordinary amounts of documentary evidence.
The breadth and complexity of the crimes and
modes of individual criminal responsibility alleged in
the Tribunal’s cases only compound those challenges
further. As I have previously explained to the Council,
the pending closure of the Tribunal also produces its
own challenges, primarily that of retaining the highly
qualified and experienced staff members so necessary
for the Tribunal’s expeditious and orderly closure.
I wish to underscore that all efforts are being
made on the part of the Tribunal to complete its
pending judicial work as quickly as possible while
fully respecting the fundamental rights of the accused
and the appellants to due process in accordance with
international standards. As set forth in the 15 April
written report to the Council, the Tribunal has also
developed a consolidated, comprehensive plan that sets
forth the processes and procedures for the Tribunal’s
eventual closure. In the meantime, my colleagues and
I at the Tribunal remain grateful to the Council for
its continued support, just as I remain grateful to the
Judges and all of the staff of the Tribunal for their deep
commitment to our work.

Upon the opening of The Hague branch in July and
in accordance with its mandate, the Mechanism will
assume responsibility for a variety of functions inherited
from the ICTY, including the enforcement of sentences,
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions and
the protection of victims and witnesses in completed
trials of the ICTY. The Mechanism will also assume
the authority to hear appeals against judgements or
sentences handed down by the ICTY where the notice of
appeal is filed after 1 July 2013, as already mentioned;
the authority to conduct reviews of judgements
handed down by the ICTY and to try contempt cases;
and the authority to decide on requests for pardon or
commutation of sentences. The Mechanism has already
taken on responsibility for managing the archives of
both the ICTY and the ICTR, although the latter retains
responsibility for the preparation of its records for
transfer to the Mechanism.
From an administrative standpoint, all is going
well. The Mechanism has issued a number of practice
directions and promulgated other policies, thereby
developing further its legal and regulatory framework.
Work on the Mechanism’s permanent premises in
Arusha is on track and funding is in place. The
Mechanism is grateful for the support and cooperation
of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
in relation to that project.
Turning to the Mechanism’s judicial work, I note
that there have been a number of rulings, as set forth in
more detail in my written report (S/2013/309, annex I).
Since my previous report to the Council, the Mechanism
has received its first appeal from judgement, in the
Ngirabatware case. As I mentioned earlier, additional
appeals from ICTY trial judgements are expected in the

13-361125

S/PV.6977

future, including potential appeals in the cases of Šešelj,
Karadžić, Hadžić and Mladić. The Mechanism has also
been seized of a number of motions and requests in
relation to certain contempt allegations. That litigation
is an example of the sort of unanticipated ad hoc judicial
activity that may arise before the Mechanism.
Finally, in my role as President, I have issued
decisions in relation to the enforcement of sentences
and on a request for review of an administrative
decision. Meanwhile, ICTR President Vagn Joensen,
who has been serving as the Mechanism’s Duty Judge
in Arusha, has likewise ruled on a variety of matters. I
am very grateful to President Joensen for his work on
behalf of the Mechanism, and for being such a collegial
and effective partner of the Mechanism in his capacity
as President of the ICTR.
In addition to its responsibility for its own cases,
the Mechanism is also responsible, with the assistance
of international and regional organizations and bodies,
for monitoring cases referred by the ICTR to national
courts for trial. As explained in my written report, two
cases were referred by the ICTR to France for trial
there. Pending finalization of arrangements with an
international organization to assist in the monitoring
of the two cases, the Mechanism has made interim
monitoring arrangements. I am most grateful to the
French authorities for their cooperation in relation to
the matter.
The ICTR has also referred a number of cases for
trial in Rwanda. Although some of the cases involve
individuals who are still fugitives, in the case of
Uwinkindi a trial is expected to commence later this year.
Pending the finalization of monitoring arrangements,
the ICTR staff has been conducting interim monitoring
of the ongoing pre-trial proceedings.
I wish to thank the Rwandan authorities for their
cooperation in facilitating the monitoring, which is an
important aspect of the Mechanism’s mandate, and,
more generally, for the warm welcome I received upon
my first official visit to Kigali last December. I am
most grateful for the open and frank discussions I had
while there and for Rwanda’s ongoing cooperation with
the Mechanism. Following the opening of The Hague
branch, I look forward to building on existing relations
with States in the former Yugoslavia to develop
similarly productive and cooperative relationships with
those States.

6

Turning to the issue of the enforcement of sentences,
I would like to express my concern regarding the
situation in Mali, where 17 persons convicted by the
ICTR are serving their sentences. Those 17 individuals
are now the responsibility of the Mechanism, and the
Mechanism’s Registrar is monitoring the security
situation closely. The Mechanism is also taking steps to
implement recommendations made by an independent
penitentiary expert whom the Registrar hired to review
enforcement practices in the two countries currently
enforcing ICTR sentences, namely, Mali and Benin. At
the same time, the Mechanism is looking to increase
its capacity to enforce sentences in Africa and is
actively taking steps to enter into the enforcement of
sentences agreements with new States. The cooperation
and leadership of the Council and its members in that
regard would be much appreciated.
Since the opening of its Arusha branch, the
Mechanism has received and addressed a number of
requests from national authorities for assistance in
relation to national investigations, prosecutions and
trials of individuals charged in relation to the genocide
in Rwanda. On 1 July, the Mechanism will assume
similar responsibilities in relation to requests related to
events in the former Yugoslavia.
Finally, I would remind the Council that the
Mechanism is responsible for the trial of three
individuals who were indicted by the ICTR. The arrest
and transfer of those three fugitives to the Mechanism’s
custody remains a top priority, and Prosecutor Jallow
has primary responsibility in that regard. But as we
have learned from experience at the ICTY, where the
last two fugitives were finally arrested in 2011, thanks
to the work of Serbian authorities and ICTY Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, Member States play an invaluable
role in ensuring that fugitives are apprehended.
The United States recently reaffirmed its
commitment to offer financial rewards to individuals
who provide information leading to the arrest or
transfer of certain fugitives, including all nine ICTRindicted fugitives, through its War Crimes Rewards for
Justice Program. We are very grateful to the United
States for its initiative in that regard. I call upon other
Member States to take steps to ensure that all of the
remaining ICTR-indicted fugitives, whether they end
up being tried by the Mechanism or by Rwanda, are
arrested and brought to trial. Thanks to the dedication
and cooperation of Member States, the ICTY has been

13-36112

S/PV.6977

able to account for all 161 of the individuals whom it
has indicted.
It is vital for the ICTR’s legacy, and indeed for the
cause of international justice, which we all hold so dear,
that we ensure a similar result for those indicted by the
ICTR.
Before closing, I must acknowledge an important
milestone: 25 May 2013 marked 20 years since the
Tribunal’s establishment by the Council in resolution
827 (1993). The Tribunal’s principals, Judges and staff,
together with dignitaries representing a large number of
Member States and a host of others, commemorated this
occasion in the presence of His Majesty the King of the
Netherlands and the United Nations Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs and Legal Counsel, Patricia
O’Brien.
I am grateful to the Council for its statement
recognizing this important milestone and the Tribunal’s
contributions over the past 20 years. I am equally
grateful to it for recognizing that the Mechanism plays
an essential role in ensuring that the impending closure
of the ICTY and the ICTR will not leave the door open
to impunity. As Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
remarked on the occasion of the ICTY’s twentieth
anniversary, a new “age of accountability is becoming
a reality”. That is in good measure due to the work of
the ICTY over the past two decades. With the sustained
support of the international community and the Council
in particular, the Mechanism will carry that strong
legacy forward in the years ahead.
The President: I thank Judge Meron for his
briefing, and I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Security Council for June.
I wish you all the best for a successful tour of duty,
Mr. President.
It is a great honour for me to address the members
of the Security Council and present to them the current
update on the completion strategy of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I wish to
express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all
of the Governments represented on the Council for
their continuing support as we draw ever closer to the
conclusion of our work.
The ICTR has now completed all trial work, has
successfully met all timelines projected in December

for appeals, and has finalized its decision to transfer the
second case of an accused in custody to Rwanda. Five of
the six remaining ICTR appeals cases remain on track
for completion before the end of 2014, and the transfer
to the Mechanism of judicial records not in active use
is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. The
Mechanism is now handling its first appeal from an
ICTR trial judgement, and I have been actively involved
in judicial matters handed over to the Mechanism in
my role as Duty Judge of its Arusha branch. Relocating
acquitted persons and those released after completing
their sentences in Tanzania remains a pressing concern
and will require the enhanced cooperation of Member
States. Finally, owing to difficulties that I will explain
shortly, the ICTR is now projecting completion of its
final appeals judgement in the Butare case by July 2015.
I will begin by explaining the status of the trials
and appeals. I am happy to report that all substantive
trials have now been completed with the delivery of the
trial judgement in the Ngirabatware case in December
2012. Thanks to the continued hard work and dedication
of our staff, the ICTR successfully met its timelines for
trials and appeals as projected when I last addressed the
Council six months ago (see S/PV.6880). As expected,
the notice of appeal in the Ngirabatware case has been
filed with the Mechanism, marking the first time that it
will handle an appeal from judgement in a case before
the ICTR or the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. That is an important milestone in
our transition. I would also like to call the Council’s
attention to the fact that the Appeals Chamber has
met its accelerated projections to date, delivering one
appeal judgement concerning two persons in the case of
Mugenzi and Mugiraneza in February. It also rendered
a final decision upholding the Trial Chamber’s referral
of the Munyagishari case to Rwanda on 3 May. Bernard
Munyagishari is expected to be transferred to Rwanda
imminently, and appeals projections in the remaining
cases have stayed roughly the same, save for the Butare
appeal slipping into 2015.
Five of the six remaining appeals cases concerning
nine of the remaining 16 persons are still expected
to be disposed of before the end of 2014, and the
final multi-accused appeal judgement concerning six
persons in the Butare case is now anticipated by July
2015. This slip in the final case’s projected completion
was caused by inability of our language services to
meet the accelerated plans for translation of the Butare
trial judgement and other documents pertaining to the

13-361127

S/PV.6977

appellate proceedings, which the defence is legally
entitled to receive in a language that the accused can
understand before filing their appeal briefs. Although
the Tribunal made every effort to meet the accelerated
schedule by providing the translated Butare trial
judgement by August 2012, with the remaining staffing
levels in our language section, the final French version
could be completed and delivered to the parties only
in February. That meant that the briefing schedule for
the appeal had to be pushed back as well. Additionally,
after reviewing the written judgement in a language
they could understand, several appellants requested
leave to expand the scope of their appeals beyond that
in their original Notices of Appeal, which the projected
Butare completion date of December 2014 was based
on. All those circumstances have led to the current
projected completion date of July 2015. In all other
cases, however, I am happy to report that the appeals
work remains on schedule and all appeals except Butare
are on track to be completed in 2014.
I would next like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to the Council for its adoption of resolution
2080 (2012), which extended the terms of the ICTR
Appeals Chamber Judges until the end of 2014 or until
completion of the cases to which they are assigned,
if sooner. The swift action taken on that request has
helped ensure that the Tribunal will continue to meet
its completion strategy targets. As projected in our last
report, two of the three judges on the Ngirabatware
case demitted office after completion of their final case,
and the third, Judge William H. Sekule of Tanzania,
was redeployed to the Appeals Chamber in March 2013,
bringing the number of permanent judges sitting in the
Appeals Chamber to 11 at that time. On 31 May, Judge
Andrésia Vaz of Senegal resigned from her position
as appeals judge, returning the total to 10 judges on
the appeals bench. The preeminent knowledge and
experience that Judge Vaz brought to the bench will
be sorely missed. and reassigning the 10 cases she
was working on has increased the strain on the other
judges. In order to try to mitigate any detrimental
effect on the completion of appeals work that would
come with the loss of such an esteemed judge, I will
be sending a letter to the Secretary-General requesting
the swift appointment of a replacement for Judge Vaz,
and expressing how important it is that the replacement
judge have a deep knowledge and understanding of
the Tribunal’s jurisprudence and practice, so that no
time will be lost in dealing with the heavy workload
remaining for appeals.

8

I turn now to an important issue that the ICTR
has been raising with the Council for several years.
The enhanced cooperation of Member States to assist
with our persistent and increasingly dire problem of
relocating persons who have been acquitted or released
after completion of sentence by the Tribunal is crucial
to the completion of our mandate. I continue to see as
a cornerstone of my presidency the deployment of all
possible efforts in that regard; during the reporting
period, I increasingly applied my energies to persuade
Member States to assist with relocation.
There are now seven acquitted persons, one of
whom was acquitted in 2004, and three persons released
after the completion of their sentences who remain in
safe houses in Arusha, under the Tribunal’s protection.
Those 10 individuals remain on Tanzanian territory
without proper immigration status and are unable to
move freely. The ICTR is deeply concerned about the
consequences of failing to uphold the fundamental right
of freedom to live one’s life after being acquitted. The
importance of finding host countries for those persons
before the Tribunal closes cannot be stressed enough.
That is why I have worked closely with the
Registrar to develop a strategic relocation plan which
was recently submitted to the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. We call upon all Member
States, in particular those members of the Council in a
position to do so, to assist with that persistent problem,
and thank those that have already enhanced their
cooperation with the Tribunal in that respect.
I next turn to downsizing and the transition to
the Mechanism. The Tribunal continues to face staff
recruitment and retention challenges arising from the
downsizing process. Where recruitment is required, the
ICTR continues to have difficulty attracting suitably
qualified candidates given the limited contractual
security that it can provide as a closing institution.
The Tribunal also is still experiencing difficulties in
retaining experienced staff due to the lack of financial
incentives to stay and complete their work and the lack
of possibilities for upward mobility.
I once again wish to express the gratitude of the
Tribunal to the Department of Management, especially
the Office of the Controller and Human Resources
Management, which have steadily assisted the ICTR in
meeting the challenges to preventing any further delay
in the completion of its mandate. Their collaboration
on implementing mitigating strategies in line with the

13-36112

S/PV.6977

applicable staff rules and regulations has also afforded
staff members much-needed support in transitioning
from the ICTR to other careers.

can only be transferred once they are no longer in use.
Those records are expected to be handed over as part of
the liquidation process after the ICTR’s formal closure.

Despite the persistent staffing challenges, the
Tribunal has successfully met its projected deadlines and
remains with only appellate work and the continuation
of the transition to the Mechanism, going forward. The
transition is well under way, as the handover of judicial
functions to the Mechanism is now complete and, as
the Prosecutor will describe in more detail, a smooth
transfer of prosecutorial tasks remains on track.

I will conclude with some thoughts on our place
in history. Since its inception, the ICTR has sought to
contribute to the process of reconciliation in Rwanda
by helping to restore a sense of justice and playing a
role in the development of a lasting peace in the Great
Lakes region. Rebuilding that sense of justice has
paved the way for moving past the events of 1994. The
Tribunal has helped to ensure that those events are never
forgotten through its outreach and capacity-building
initiatives, and we recognize the need to ensure that the
Tribunal’s records are readily accessible to the people
of Rwanda in posterity.

In addition to the Ngirabatware appellate
proceedings, the Mechanism’s jurisdiction now
encompasses requests for review of ICTR judgements,
trials for contempt of court or false testimony from
ICTR trials and trials of the remaining three toppriority ICTR fugitives, once arrested.
The monitoring of all referred cases also falls
under the Mechanism’s responsibility, although the
ICTR Registrar and I will continue to help oversee
the administration of the interim monitoring of the
Uwinkindi trial and that of Bernard Munyagishari,
once he is transferred to Rwanda by ICTR staff, until
the Mechanism concludes a final agreement with an
organization in each case.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
President Meron and Registrar Hocking for the excellent
cooperation between the ICTR and the Mechanism
throughout the transition, which I am confident will
continue until the handover is complete.
With respect to the preparation of the ICTR’s
archives, much progress was made during the reporting
period, as the Tribunal is now in a position to transfer
40 per cent of its hard-copy records to the custody of
the Mechanism, including 60 per cent of the judicial
records. The actual handover process for those records
is scheduled to begin later this month, since renovations
of the temporary record repositories — which will house
the records until they are moved to the Mechanism’s
new building — are almost finalized.
The target date for the completion of the records
handover process remains December 2014, and we
anticipate that all closed judicial records will have been
handed over by then. However, we must bear in mind that
some records which are still in active use in support of
the functions of the ICTR, including active files related
to the Butare case, will remain our responsibility and

The transition to the Mechanism, which is notably
tasked with maintaining and furthering the Tribunal’s
legacy, marks the etching of a new chapter into the
history of international law. The writing of that next
chapter has already begun, with the work of the
International Criminal Court and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. With the impending closure of the ad hoc
Tribunals, the Mechanism will ensure that their legacy
is preserved and that the lessons learned are shared
with their successors.
Before facing the renewed challenges that the
next chapter will bring, we would, however, be remiss
if we did not underline how far we have come with
Member States’ cooperation and the crucial role it has
played, as well as the difficulties we will face without
reinvigorated efforts in certain areas. The tremendous
support of the international community for the ICTR has
enabled it to not only prosecute those most responsible
for the Rwandan genocide, but also, in turn, to assist
national jurisdictions that are able to complement its
work, thereby further strengthening accountability for
the most serious crimes under international law.
Such empowerment of national institutions
has substantiated the Tribunal’s commitment to
implementing the rule of law and may, ultimately, allow
for impunity to be successfully challenged in a lasting
way at all levels. However, we are in desperate need
of increased cooperation with respect to relocation and
trust that Member States will do what is necessary to
help us accomplish that important task before closure.
It has been and continues to be an honour and a
privilege to take part in this important task, and it has

13-361129

S/PV.6977

been a great honour for me to address the members of
the Council today.
The President: I thank Judge Joensen for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Council on our
progress towards the completion of our mandate. In
the reporting period, as we marked 20 years since the
creation of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), we witnessed significant critique
of the Tribunal’s work. Never before has so much been
said and written about our cases, our legacy and our
contribution to reconciliation in the region.
Certainly for the Office of the Prosecutor, it has
been a difficult and challenging period. As a party to
the proceedings, we must accept the judgements issued.
However, we are using and will continue to use all
remaining legal mechanisms to press for the outcomes
that we think are just and which properly reflect the
culpability of the accused persons brought before the
Tribunal.
But, despite the rising crescendo of debate about
the Tribunal, we will remain focused on successfully
completing our last cases. The Karadžić trial is now
well into the defence evidence presentation phase of
the case. If the current swift pace continues, it will
be completed before the end of this year. To promote
efficiency, the Karadžić prosecution team has devised
cross-examinations that minimize court time while
ensuring that the evidence is properly tested.
In both the Mladić and Hadžić cases, the Prosecution
is continuing with its presentation of evidence. In
those cases too, efficiency techniques developed over
previous years are minimizing the amount of court time
used. At the same time, the Prosecution is constantly
reassessing its strategy to further expedite the process.
For example, in Mladić, the Prosecution has reduced
the number of witnesses planned from 200 to 170, after
verifying that it would not have a negative impact on
the outcome of the case. If the current pace continues,
the Prosecution will complete its cases in both Mladić
and Hadžić well before the end of this year.
The Prosecution’s work on the last trials and
appeals has been helped by good cooperation from
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Each
of those countries has responded appropriately to our

10

requests for assistance concerning documents and
access to witnesses. We will continue to require their
prompt and effective responses to our requests in the
next reporting period.
In my recent reports and briefings to the Security
Council, problems relating to national war crimes
strategies in the former Yugoslavia — in particular, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina — have become an increasingly
disturbing refrain. Those problems remain, and urgent
action is needed on many fronts if the situation is to
be corrected. In that regard, I will travel to Sarajevo at
the end of June for in-depth discussions on the status
of the nine pending Category II cases transferred from
my Office to Bosnia and Herzegovina some years ago.
At the same time, we will hold a practical information
session in Sarajevo for entity-level prosecutors about
accessing materials from our databases. We want a
greater commitment to using the resources available in
our databases in The Hague.
We have a number of other ongoing initiatives
to build capacity, including a detailed proposal for a
coordinated and comprehensive training programme;
the development of resources to transfer expertise
from the ICTY for the purposes of sexual violence
prosecutions, which still represents a very important
challenge for our colleagues in the region; and the joint
ICTY/European Union Liaison Prosecutor and Young
Professionals Programme, which is now in its fourth
year.
It is clear that the international community is playing
a very important role in terms of capacity-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly grateful to
partners such as the European Union, UN-Women, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which are working with us on many of the initiatives
I have mentioned today. But it is also clear that our
efforts will bear little fruit until political leaders on all
sides genuinely commit to making national war crimes
strategies successful, and more needs to be done.
In the reporting period, we saw signs of progress
with the conclusion of two regional cooperation
protocols for war-crimes prosecutions: one between
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the other
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
is a step in the right direction, but the States involved
must now turn their words into concrete actions. More
generally, we strongly encourage the responsible

13-36112

S/PV.6977

authorities to make adequate resources available in
order for them to successfully implement their national
war crimes strategies. We also ask the States Members
of the United Nations to remain committed to ensuring
positive results.
I would like to highlight two other issues concerning
regional commitment to the rule of law. The first is
Serbia’s work on fugitive networks. Serbia’s efforts to
establish accountability for those who have assisted
ICTY fugitives to evade justice is a work in progress,
and we ask that it be finalized promptly and effectively.
The second issue is the lack of progress in locating
missing persons, including through exhuming mass
graves. During my recent visits, survivor communities
expressed significant frustration in that regard, and
authorities in the region must urgently refocus on
locating missing persons, regardless of their ethnicity.
As we enter the ICTY’s twenty-first year of
operations, the thousands who survived crimes
committed during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
should be foremost in our minds. For them, the passage
of 20 years has little meaning. The crimes that they
lived through and the crimes that took away their loved
ones are ever-present, and we must redouble our efforts
to facilitate redress for them.
We are now just a few short weeks from the start
date of The Hague branch of the Residual Mechanism.
The parallel establishment of the Mechanism while the
ICTY’s work continues has resulted in a more complex
operational framework. Nevertheless, our core concern
is to ensure an effective transition and the best possible
outcome in each one of our cases, regardless of whether
it will be ultimately completed by the ICTY or the
Mechanism.
Safeguarding the quality of our work also requires
attention to the issue of staff retention, as was mentioned
by the two Presidents. The loss of key staff members
of the Tribunal at critical junctures in our work poses
a significant challenge. In our Office, we are seeking
creative ways of encouraging our staff members to
stay at the ICTY. We want our personnel to see their
work through. At the same time, we want to help them
make a successful transition to the next step in their
careers. Retention incentives are the key to meeting
that objective. We also hope that the international
community will see that ICTY staff members are a
tremendous resource for future international justice

initiatives and a highly transferable asset for the United
Nations system more generally.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: Mr. President, I am greatly honoured
to brief you once more on the progress of the completion
strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to present to you the second
report on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2013/309, annex II).
For the past six months, our focus at the ICTR has
been on the prosecution and completion of appeals; the
referral of cases to national jurisdictions; the preparation
of Office of the Prosecutor records for archiving and
handover to the International Residual Mechanism; the
completion of legacy, residual and closure issues; and
the provision of support to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. That focus
will, with the exception of referrals of cases to national
jurisdictions, continue for the months ahead. The past
six months have also seen the Offices of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) spending significant time
attending to the arrangements for the commencement
of The Hague branch of the Mechanism, which is due
to be launched on 1 July 2013.
The appellate workload of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTR continues to be heavy, following
the conclusion of the trial phase of ICTR cases in
December 2012. Since the beginning of this year, the
Office of the Prosecutor has argued and finalized
the hearing of 10 prosecution and defence appeals in
connection with the Ndahimana and Ndindiliyimana et
al. cases, which were heard in the May 2013 session of
the Appeals Chamber conducted in Arusha, Tanzania.
Those cases are now pending final judgement by the
Appeals Chamber.
Briefing and oral argument are ongoing in 13
other appeals in four remaining cases before the ICTR
Appeals Chamber. With the exception of the Butare
case, which comprises seven defence and prosecution
appeals, judgements in all of those pending cases are
scheduled to be delivered before the end of December
2014. Therefore, absent any changes in the judicial
calendar, all but one of the ICTR’s remaining appeals

13-3611211

S/PV.6977

will be completed within the time frame of the ICTR
completion strategy as set out by the Council.
Last month, the Appeals Chamber also affirmed
the referral of Bernard Munyagishari, a detainee, to
Rwanda for trial. That decision in effect concludes the
ICTR’s work on the programme for the referral of cases
to national jurisdictions. My Office has now secured
the referral of a total of eight cases to Rwanda and two
cases to France for trial. As a result of those referrals
and the completion of all trials in the first instance, the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR has no further
trial or fugitive-related workload. The tracking and
arrest of the three top-level fugitives, namely, Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana, and the monitoring of referred
cases are now being managed by the Mechanism.
The preparation of the reports of Office of the
Prosecutor for archiving by the Mechanism has
progressed well during the past few months. The
preservation of files, which involves the cleaning,
rehousing in acid-free boxes and scanning of Office
of the Prosecutor documents, has been completed in
56 cases, representing 414 linear metres of records.
Similar work is in progress for 22 cases involving 250
linear metres of documents and is due to commence
for the other Office of the Prosecutor documents. The
entire Office of the Prosecutor audio collection of 2,681
cassettes has now been completely digitized, and the
digitization of the Office of the Prosecutor videotapes
is soon to commence. ICTR records that are ready for
archiving continue to be prepared for a handover to the
mechanism as its archives unit builds up its capacity
to receive the records. The remaining records will
be handed over to the Mechanism when they are no
longer required as working records by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTR.
In addition to the archiving of records, work
continues on a number of other important legacy
projects on which the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTR has been working and which we plan to conclude
before the expiration of the Tribunal’s mandate. We
note that with the launch of the joint international ad
hoc Prosecutors’ “Compendium of Lessons Learned
and Suggested Practices” on the investigations and
prosecution of international crimes in November 2012
at the Annual Conference and General Meeting of the
International Association of Prosecutors, there has
been renewed interest in the legacy of the Tribunals
by academics, human rights practitioners, lawyers and
national prosecuting as well as judicial authorities.

12

The Office of the Prosecutor has also concluded
the preparation of a best practices manual on the
tracking and arrest of fugitives. The document will
be available to national and international Prosecutors
in due course. Work on the best practices manual on
the investigation and prosecution of sexual violence is
scheduled for completion this year. Work also has been
ongoing on other subjects, such as the documentation
of the genocide on the basis of adjudicated facts and
the lessons to be drawn from the referral of cases with
particular regard for their relevance to the principle of
complementarity in international criminal justice.
We expect, over the next year until the closure of
the Tribunal, to be actively engaged in a number of
those initiatives aimed at promoting best practices and
lessons to be learned in the struggle against impunity,
especially at the national level. Those legacy products
are aimed at recording the challenges and responses to
the investigation and prosecution of these difficult cases
and in assisting national and international prosecuting
authorities in managing the range of challenges that
we may face, as they are the front line in ensuring
accountability for international crimes.
I am pleased to note that the interest in the work of
the ICTR and its potential impact at the national level is
increasing. That is indeed a good sign for the legacy of
international justice, and we hope that Member States
will deepen the impact through national programmes
and appropriate legislative measures.
Permit me now to turn to the operations of the
Residual Mechanism. I am pleased to report that all
the core staff as well as the ad hoc staff necessary to
conduct one upcoming appeal are already in place at
the ICTR branch of the Mechanism in Arusha. That
branch is now fully operational. Recruitment of staff
and other logistical and administrative arrangements
are in progress for the establishment of The Hague
branch of the Mechanism effective from the beginning
of July. We therefore expect some of the core staff of
the Office of the Prosecutor of The Hague branch to be
in place in time for the commencement of the branch.
The support and cooperation of the Registry and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY has been helpful
in that respect.
The Arusha branch of the Mechanism continues to
track the three top fugitives, namely Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana. In that regard, the Mechanism is in
the process of launching a number of new initiatives

13-36112

S/PV.6977

aimed at increasing public interest and participation
in tracking to supplement the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor and of the national and regional lawenforcement authorities. We shall continue our contacts
with Kenya, Zimbabwe and other States in the Great
Lakes region concerning tracking of the three top-level
fugitives, and we urge the Council to request all States
to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism in that
respect. We shall also continue to provide support to
the Rwandan tracking group in respect of the cases of
the fugitives that have been referred to that jurisdiction.
The Arusha branch has attended to 26 requests for
assistance from seven Member States in the past six
months in support of ongoing national investigations
or prosecutions. Those figures are in keeping with
the increasing trend of ongoing investigations within
national jurisdictions against persons suspected to have
participated in the Rwandan genocide. Those national
efforts are quite welcome because they will contribute
significantly to closing any gaps in the struggle against
impunity for atrocities committed in Rwanda in 1994.
The monitoring by my Office of cases transferred
to national jurisdictions continues. The two cases of
Munyeshyaka and Bucyibaruta referred to France are
progressing in that jurisdiction. The Jean Uwinkindi
case referred to Rwanda is before the Kigali High Court
for trial. Preliminary proceedings are in progress and
subject to determination of applications made by the
defence; subsequent trial proceedings are anticipated
to be completed expeditiously. With the recent
confirmation of the referral of Bernard Munyagishari
to Rwanda for trial, I have now appointed a monitor to
observe the proceedings in this case.
While the transfer of cases to national jurisdictions
has facilitated the early conclusion of the work of the
ICTR, its work will really be done only when all the
fugitives have been arrested and brought to justice,
whether at the Mechanism or in national courts. In
respect of both, three are under the mandate of the
Mechanism and six continue to be under the mandate
of Rwanda. The Mechanism is committed to supporting
and supplementing Rwandan efforts at tracking the six
fugitives whose cases have been transferred to their
jurisdiction. The cooperation of all Member States is
critical for the struggle and for ensuring accountability.
In that regard, I wish to acknowledge the support
received from the United States Government through
its War Crimes Rewards Program over the years and its
assurances conveyed yesterday by Mr. Stephen Rapp,

Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues, that the
Program will continue to support the tracking of the
remaining fugitives.
I would urge the Security Council to request all
Member States once again to support the Residual
Mechanism and Rwanda in the tracking and arrest of
those fugitives and in ensuring their accountability in
the appropriate jurisdiction.
The President: I thank Mr. Jallow for his briefing.
I remind Council members of the Council’s
agreement in note 507 of July 2010 (S/2010/507) that
they should keep their interventions to five minutes or
less. As a number of Council and non-Council members
are participating in today’s debate, I shall monitor
implementation of that agreement closely.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala has the honour to chair the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. Perhaps that explains
why we have the privilege of being the first to intervene
in this debate, a debate that we would have liked to have
been more open to other States Members of the United
Nations.
I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for their respective reports (S/2013/308 and S/2013/310)
as well as for the report on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (S/2013/309).
My delegation would like to recognize the huge
commitment demonstrated by the staff of both
Tribunals to the goals laid out in the completion
strategies. In that spirit, we welcome the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 827 (1993),
through which the Security Council unanimously
established the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. That historic resolution gave clear
expression to the commitment of the Council to the rule
of law and the fight against impunity.
Twenty years after the establishment of this
Tribunal, we recognize its considerable success and
progress in developing its international jurisprudence
and in providing justice to victims by apprehending all
fugitives, by trying individuals who bear the greatest

13-3611213

S/PV.6977

responsibility for serious violations of human rights,
irrespective of their rank. The Tribunal has contributed
to strengthening national systems, working closely
with local authorities.
Regarding the ICTR, we take note of the forecasts
asserting that almost all trials will conclude within
the established deadline. However, we are concerned
that nine persons continue to be fugitives from justice.
We would recall the mandatory character of Security
Council decisions and the requirement that States
cooperate. The ICTR will be able to complete its work
successfully only if it receives the effective cooperation
of all States.
Likewise, as the closure of the Tribunal approaches,
we are concerned about the human rights situation of
those acquitted or who have served their sentence but
have not been relocated. We support the recent strategic
plan prepared by the ICTR for the relocation of those
individuals. We are studying recommendations to
find the most efficient way to implement them. In that
respect, we would urge States to cooperate with the
Tribunal and provide it with all necessary assistance
to support its strategic plan for relocating those
individuals. As is well known, the Tribunals are still
having considerable difficulties in concluding their
mandates, and we recognize the need to show flexibility
in case assignments and the setting of dates for appeals
and trials.
More generally, we welcome the fact that both
Tribunals are continuing to take all possible measures
to conduct their proceedings swiftly, fully respecting
due-process guarantees. We remain concerned about
the reports from both Tribunals concerning their
difficulties in retaining staff, which is a key obstacle
to the timely achievement of the goals and strategies.
This is why we support the proposals of the President
of the ICTY aimed at achieving the objectives of the
completion strategy.
The work of both Tribunals is at a crucial stage,
at which they are attempting to effectively conclude
their cases while carrying out their outstanding tasks
in connection with the Residual Mechanism. The
Mechanism will guarantee that there are no gaps in
the fight against impunity, given the large number of
ongoing functions that must remain after the closure of
the Tribunal.
We welcome the fact that both Tribunals have been
working together to ensure a gradual and effective

14

transition towards the Residual Mechanism. We note
the progress made in connection with the Mechanism
and welcome the process under way whereby by 1 July
the new branch of the ICTY mechanism will begin its
work.
In conclusion, we would like to express our national
position to the effect that the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals is in an optimum position,
given its technical composition and its flexible
mandate, to address additional issues related to
international criminal justice, such as matters related
to the International Criminal Court on the agenda of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I wish to
thank the United Kingdom for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their extensive briefings. I take this
opportunity also to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, under the
leadership of Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala,
and of the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs in
assisting the Tribunals and the Mechanism to reach
their goals.
Today’s briefings noted the developments registered
in the past six months and the progress achieved in
meeting the completion strategy targets. We welcome
the efforts and commitment of both Tribunals, while
fully respecting and safeguarding due process, in
completing the outstanding proceedings within the
established time frame and in ensuring a smooth
transition of their duties to the International Residual
Mechanism.
The ICTR has completed its work at the trial level
with respect to all 93 accused persons and is focused
substantially on the appeal phase, which, naturally,
increased the workload of the Appeals and Legal
Advisory Division of the Tribunal.
We note that the ICTR is currently facing great
difficulties in relocating 10 individuals who were either
acquitted or released after completion of their sentences
and who still remain in safe houses in Arusha under the
Tribunal’s protection. This situation impedes the welltimed completion of the ICTR’s mandate and creates an
additional burden. We welcome the Tribunal’s efforts in
resolving the issue and emphasize that the cooperation

13-36112

S/PV.6977

of States remains a crucial pillar of the work of the
Tribunal.
The ICTY has also made progress in its path towards
the transition and has already concluded proceedings
against 136 out of 161 indicted individuals. The report
notes that the ICTY anticipates concluding all trials
this year, except with regard to three individuals whose
arrests occurred later. However, given the sharply
increasing workload of the Appeals Chamber, the
existing challenges to retain highly experienced staff
members can hinder the timely delivery of judgements.
We note that the Arusha branch of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals has been
duly functional since its inauguration last July 2012,
and that the opening of The Hague branch next month
will certainly make the Mechanism fully operational.
Resolution 1966 (2010) empowered the Mechanism with
the residual functions of the Tribunals after their closure.
The successful operation of the Mechanism will depend
significantly on the cooperation of States, especially
when it comes to the critically important issue of the
arrest and surrender of the remaining three fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and relates to the enforcement of
sentences. It is therefore important that States remain
committed to meeting the relevant obligations towards
the Tribunals, continue to cooperate with them, as well
as with the Mechanism, and contribute to safeguarding
and further developing their legacy.
The activities and jurisprudence of the Tribunals
have helped to develop international law, particularly
the law of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and contributed to advancing the rule of law and
restoring peace. Indeed, the establishment of the
truth in situations of gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, the provision of
adequate and effective reparations to the victims, and
the need for institutional actions to prevent the repetition
of criminal offences are all necessary adjuncts to a true
resolution of conflicts and imperatives in regard to
the effective and politically uncompromised system of
international criminal justice.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
very comprehensive briefings.

Two decades ago, the Security Council opened a
new chapter in the history of international criminal
justice by establishing the Tribunals. The advances
made in international criminal justice are arguably the
most positive development in international relations in
the past generation. We welcome the fact that this year
marks the ICTY’s twentieth anniversary. We commend
both the ICTY and the ICTR for their valuable
contributions to the fight against impunity and the
development of key precedents in international criminal
law. We hope that the Mechanism will maintain and
build upon the achievements of the Tribunals.
Regarding the ICTY, we note that as of today
12 individuals are on trial and 13 are in appeal
proceedings, with no outstanding fugitives.
We recognize the Tribunal’s efforts in connection
with the submission of a consolidated comprehensive
plan on the completion strategy, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2081 (2012). The Tribunal
still faces challenges related to belated arrests and
the loss of experienced staff members, among others.
Nevertheless, we urge the Tribunal to continue its
efforts to promptly meet completion targets while
conforming to the principles of justice.
We share the concern of the ICTY President at
the fact that only Judge Antonetti will be available for
redeployment in October 2013 to the Appeals Chamber,
where nearly all trial activity will be centred. We
welcome the fact that the Council can now provide a
solution to such concerns in due course.
As for the ICTR, we are pleased to note that the
transition from the ICTR to the Mechanism is now well
under way. We take note of the Tribunal’s projection
that all remaining appeals but one will be completed in
2014. We look forward to the Tribunal’s completing its
final appeal by July 2015, as projected.
The relocation of acquitted persons and those who
have already served their sentences is a very important
humanitarian issue and a widely shared concern. We
commend the ICTR President on having taken a very
active role with the Registrar in that regard. We call on
the Tribunal, together with States, to continue to exert
all efforts necessary to address that problem.
We support the Council’s earlier decision in
resolution 2054 (2012) that Judge Joensen continue to
perform his functions as President of the ICTR until
31 December 2014.

13-3611215

S/PV.6977

We welcome the progress made in ensuring a
smooth transition to the Mechanism. In particular,
on 9 April 2013 the trial judgement in the ICTR case
of The Prosecutor v. Benard Munyagishari has led to
litigation before a bench of the Appeals Chamber of the
Mechanism. We hope that The Hague branch will be
fully functional on 1 July 2013, as scheduled.
Regrettably, nine fugitives are still at large. Their
arrest and prosecution remains a top priority for the
Mechanism. We note that in April, the Mechanism
duty judge replaced the ICTR warrants with those of
the Mechanism for the arrest of the three high-ranking
fugitives. We encourage the Mechanism to continue
its efforts to track down fugitives and to secure the
cooperation of States.
In conclusion, the Tribunals have decisively
contributed to the development of international
humanitarian law and to the establishment of the ICC.
We are strongly committed to providing the support
that the Tribunals and the Mechanism will need to
succeed now and in future.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Judge Meron, Judge Joensen, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow for their reports.
The prevention of mass atrocities and genocide
is both a core national security interest and a moral
responsibility of the United States. The prosecution
of perpetrators of heinous crimes is essential not only
for the sake of justice and accountability but also to
facilitate transitions from conflict to stability and
to deter those who would commit atrocities. Thus,
the United States has strongly supported the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since they began to fulfil
the dual goals of justice and prevention.
In the 20 years since the Security Council
established the ICTY, the Tribunal has made a significant
contribution to international justice. The body of work
of both the ICTY and the ICTR, established a year
later, reflects the bedrock principle of providing fair
trials for the accused and the opportunity for every
defendant to have his day in court. That has been a
hallmark of international justice since the Nuremberg
trials and remains critical to advancing the rule of law
internationally. While no system of justice is perfect,
the United States has always respected the rulings of
the ICTY and the ICTR and celebrates the progress

16

that both Tribunals have made towards completing
their work. Only three ICTY trials are expected to
continue past the end of this year, all of which are for
the late-arrested accused.
We look forward to the 1 July opening of The Hague
branch of the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals, which will handle any ICTY appeals
after this month. The Arusha branch of the Mechanism
has been open for almost a year and has taken some
consequential steps, including ordering the transfers of
three high-level accused to the courts of Rwanda when
they are apprehended. We appreciate the considerable
work by both Tribunals to share resources with the
Mechanism to reduce costs. We look forward to further
measures to streamline operations while maintaining
the highest standards of justice. At the same time, we
recognize that budgets for the next few years must
support new premises for the Mechanism’s Arusha
branch, archives for both Tribunals, accommodations
for victims and witnesses, outreach activities focusing
on reconciliation, and judicial proceedings that may
arise.
As a measure of our support for the ICTR and
the countries of the Great Lakes, as Judge Meron
and Prosecutor Jallow graciously noted, the United
States recently announced an expansion of our reward
programme for fugitives. Under the War Crimes
Rewards Program, the United States now offers rewards
of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest,
transfer or conviction of the nine ICTR fugitives, as
well as designated foreign nationals accused of crimes
against humanity, genocide or war crimes by any
international, mixed or hybrid criminal tribunal. The
list of rewards subjects now includes Joseph Kony,
two other leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army, and
Sylvestre Mudacumura, sought by the International
Criminal Court for crimes allegedly committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also note the
importance of resolving the issue of the relocation of
acquitted and released persons in Tanzania and to that
end welcome the ICTR’s new strategic plan.
What we have supported these past 20 years is
a system of justice that aims to hold accountable
those responsible for some of the most monstrous
crimes known to humankind and to prevent them
from recurring. The Tribunals continue to play an
indispensable role in establishing global respect for the
rule of law. The United States’ commitment to working

13-36112

S/PV.6977

with the international community towards peace and
justice remains steadfast.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Judge
Meron, Judge Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their reports.
Pakistan fully supports the important work of the
two Tribunals, as they contribute to procedural and
evidentiary international criminal law. Media spotlight
and scrutiny on their work has been sharp, but the
Tribunals have demonstrated composure, solemnity and
impartiality in conducting trial and appeal proceedings
and in passing judgements.
During the last six months, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) has completed
its substantive work at the trial level with respect
to all 93 accused, and it has concluded trial and
appeals judgment. The transition from the ICTR to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals appears to be on track. We are glad to note
that the Arusha branch of the Mechanism is operational
and that it provides active support and protection
to witnesses. The Mechanism’s monitoring of cases
referred to the national jurisdictions is important. Its
work on the enforcement of sentences is vital for a
smooth transition from the Tribunal to the Mechanism.
We are confident that the Mechanism will continue to
focus on State cooperation in the arrest of the remaining
nine fugitives.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), too, has concluded proceedings
against 136 out of the 161 indicted individuals. We are
hopeful that the Tribunal will conclude all trials during
2013, except for those involving the three most recently
arrested accused. We appreciate the measures taken
by the ICTY to implement the completion strategy and
to pursue its procedural reforms. Concrete steps have
been taken to commence the work of The Hague branch
of the Mechanism next month.
In the final phase of their work, the Tribunals
face challenges in the preparation of archives, the
assignment of work to judges and staff management.
Adequate resources should be provided to the Tribunals
to do their job. The lack of experienced staff would
cause additional delays. Therefore, it is logical to
consider retention incentives on a case-by-case basis.
While there are no outstanding fugitives under the
jurisdiction of the ICTY after the arrest of Ratko Mladić

and Goran Hadžić, there are individuals indicted by the
ICTR who still remain at large. We hope that with the
cooperation and efforts of the relevant Member States,
the remaining fugitives will be held accountable.
We support the efforts of the ICTR President and
Registrar to find hosts for the relocation of individuals
who have either been acquitted or have served their
sentences. We call upon States that are in a position to
do so to respond positively to the Tribunals’ requests.
Relocation of acquitted and released persons to third
States would give them an opportunity to restart their
lives and strengthen the rule of law.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
ICTY’s establishment. It is essential to preserve the
legacy of both Tribunals given their contributions to
international criminal law. The work of preparing the
archives of the ICTR must be completed according to
its approved records retention schedule. The lasting
legacy of those tribunals should be to build national
capacities for accountability to end impunity.
We hope the Tribunals will also pave the way for
the process of reconciliation and lasting peace in the
Balkans and the Great Lakes region. The Tribunals’
contribution to jurisprudence and precedents in
international criminal law is important. So is the
reconstruction of a sense of justice, which would help
affected societies move beyond the events of the 1990s
to closure and healing.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to reiterate the full support of
Luxembourg to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work
shows that international criminal justice prevails
and that, sooner or later, the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes will be held accountable. I thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow, for their comprehensive reports
(S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310) and briefings.
I also thank Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala
and his team for the effective manner in which they
have presided over the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
This biannual debate on the activities of both
Tribunals is particularly significant, as we have

13-3611217

S/PV.6977

just celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the ICTY. By unanimously adopting
resolution 827 (1993), the Council clearly voiced its
commitment to an international order based on the rule
of law, including respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law. The ICTY has paved the way
for what is now an internationally recognized principle
for fostering conflict resolution and reconciliation in
war-torn regions. Those suspected of the most serious
crimes, which affect the entire international community,
must be brought to justice.
Today, the ICTY is nearing its ultimate goal of
completing its mandate by the deadline outlined in the
completion strategy for its work. In that regard, we
welcome the entry into force on 1 July of The Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. While the Tribunal will face a
heavy workload in the Šešelj, Karadžić, Mladić and
Hadžić cases, we welcome the efforts under way to hold
the election of the sixteenth Appeals Chamber judge as
soon as possible.
The ICTY has played a key role in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting long-term stability
and reconciliation in the Western Balkans, but
its contribution goes beyond that. The ICTY’s
jurisprudence has contributed to the development of
international criminal law in areas such as individual
criminal responsibility and crimes of sexual violence.
The Tribunal has given a voice to the victims, especially
women and children.
Like the ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) has made a significant contribution
to our common goal of putting an end to impunity
for the crime of genocide. We welcome the ongoing
transition from the ICTR to the Residual Mechanism
and the fact that the transfer of judicial functions will
soon be concluded. We commend the referral of cases
to the Rwandan jurisdiction, which is an important
element of the completion strategy for the Tribunal’s
work.
However, as has already been noted this morning,
nine fugitives continue to evade justice. The Office of
the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism is rightly focusing its efforts on the
search for the three high-level fugitives, Mr. Kabuga,
Mr. Mpiranya and Mr. Bizimana. Arresting the
fugitives is an urgent priority in order for justice to be
done. We therefore urge all Member States to intensify

18

their cooperation with the Tribunal and provide all
necessary assistance so that all fugitives can be arrested
and brought to justice.
We also call for a solution to be finally found for
the resettlement of the five persons acquitted by the
Tribunal who are still living in safe houses in Arusha
under the Tribunal’s protection.
While the Tribunals are in the process of drawing
down their activities, the responsibility of States in
the region in the fight against impunity is growing,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity.
In the Western Balkans, as in the Great Lakes region,
the fight against impunity is essential to efforts to
promote national reconciliation, strengthen regional
cooperation and enable citizens to look to the future
with confidence.
At the international level, the mass atrocities
committed in the past few decades have shown that it
is imperative to create a permanent court to put an end
to impunity for the most serious crimes that affect the
international community. The two ad hoc Tribunals
have been a source of inspiration in that respect, and
their work set the stage for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, a permanent court with
universal jurisdiction.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Luxembourg to supporting all efforts
aimed at strengthening the legacy of the ICTY and the
ICTR at the national, regional and international levels,
including through enhanced cooperation between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank President Meron, President Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
This year we are celebrating the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 827 (1993), which created the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The Security Council commemorated the event on
28 May. In 20 years, the region has recovered its human
face. The political dialogue has continued to make
progress under the auspices of the European Union.
The Tribunal, guarantor of the right to the truth, the
fight against impunity and the duty to remember, has
played its full part in that evolution. It has not been
ideal, of course; the political rhetoric and denial of

13-36112

S/PV.6977

some crimes, and the lack of regional cooperation in
bringing intermediate-level criminals to trial are still
cause for concern. But the course has held steady.
The Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have anchored the United Nations in an era that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called the age
of accountability. As they prepare to bring their work
to a close, another body, this one permanent and with
a universal jurisdiction, endowed by a statute that
reflects the great juridical traditions, has already
taken up the baton. The shadow of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) continues to lengthen, with the
Rome Statute hanging like a sword of Damocles over
those who torture, recruit children or commit sexual
violence. The Secretary-General’s determined policy
in promoting human rights, avoiding contact with
those wanted by the ICC and instructing mediators
not to consider amnesty or immunity for perpetrators
of serious crimes has done a great deal to strengthen
the impact of international justice, and we salute his
efforts.
Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, I commend the efforts that it has made to stick
to its work deadlines as far as possible. I should also
confirm our concern to receive full information from the
Tribunal about the two cases that have been referred to
French jurisdiction, those concerning Mr. Bucyibaruta
and Mr. Munyeshyaka. The French authorities pay full
attention to issues raised by the Tribunal with regard to
those proceedings.
While the Tribunal works to conclude its activities,
we should remain vigilant; three high-ranking fugitives,
whose arrest is a priority, are still at large — Félicien
Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya.
They will be tried by the Residual Mechanism when
they are apprehended, and we must ensure that the
Mechanism has sufficient resources to allow it to see
that task through. I should point out that the Council’s
resolutions mandate universal cooperation with the
ICTR, and it is important that the Council remind
everyone of that obligation. Regarding assistance to
the Tribunal, moreover, the relocation of those who
have been acquitted or who have completed their
sentences after having been found guilty is a matter
that we are seriously focused on. France was among the
first to admit several individuals to its territory at the
Tribunal’s request. We hope that more States will grant
entry to such people.

The Tribunal has positioned the issue of justice
at the heart of our concerns in the region. The ICC is
continuing that work in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Today we are pleased to see the work of
international justice completed at the political level
by the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region. Its
aim is to strengthen the integration of the States in the
region and to put an end to decades of instability and
mistrust by tackling the root causes of tension.
For its part, the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia is now managing some
very complex cases, which explains the slippage in
its timetable. We hope that it will conclude its work
as soon as possible, though nothing should undermine
its capacity to see that justice is served. I should recall
that the decisions of the international criminal justice
system apply to all, something that is as true for the
ad hoc Tribunals as for the International Criminal
Court. We are also obliged to respect the victims. Every
decision of the Tribunal has confirmed that atrocities
were committed in the region of the former Yugoslavia
by all parties. The ICTY has designated the Srebrenica
massacre as genocide — soldiers were disarmed and
executed, in violation of the law, ethnic cleansing
campaigns took place and members of ethnic minorities
were persecuted.
While the international Tribunals are bringing
their work to a close, the responsibility of the States
in the region to commit to combating impunity must
now take centre stage. As I said previously, we are not
entirely convinced that the countries of the region have
mobilized to continue those efforts at the local level. And
regional cooperation remains inadequate. For France,
as a member of the European Union, full cooperation
with the ICTY, as well as regional cooperation, remains
a major consideration and an essential obligation within
the framework of the stabilization and association
process for candidate and potential candidate countries
for membership.
The historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, reached under the auspices of the
European Union, creates a new context that brings hope
for stability in the region, the future of the peoples
involved and the European prospects for those two
States. We hope that the spirit that made that agreement
possible, one that promotes justice and rejects impunity,

13-3611219

S/PV.6977

will enable them to definitively turn the page on the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Ambassador
of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on the International Tribunals, his entire team, the
representatives of the Tribunals and the staff of the
Office of Legal Affairs for their efforts in accomplishing
the transition provided for in resolution 1966 (2010).
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to reflect on the impact of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), 20 years after the Council’s
establishment of the ICTY. We are disappointed that
the Council could not agree to hold an open debate, but
we would like to thank the Tribunal Presidents, Judges
Meron and Joensen, and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their briefings today. We would also like
to thank Guatemala for its leadership of the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals.
I would like to make a number of broader comments.
The establishment of the ICTY was a watershed
moment in recognizing the relationship between justice
and peace. The establishment of the ICTR a year later
cemented that link. Of course, the investigation and
prosecution of serious international crimes cannot
by itself bring about peace or reconciliation. But
both historical experience and expert analysis have
established that, while timing is important, without
justice it is difficult, and ultimately maybe impossible,
to establish inclusive and lasting reconciliation and
peace.
We all know that both Tribunals have faced
challenges. They began their work in the context of an
ongoing conflict, in the case of the ICTY, and a fragile
peace, in the case of the ICTR. At the outset, they had
only skeletal jurisprudence to guide their efforts. With
no enforcement powers, they were dependent on States
to arrest and surrender indictees, and they had to grapple
with vast amounts of evidence. Their achievements in
the face of those challenges are truly impressive. All
161 persons indicted by the ICTY and all but nine of
the 90 indicted by the ICTR have been accounted for.
Together the Tribunals have dealt with 1,627 charges
of crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide.
In doing so, they have produced rich international
criminal law jurisprudence. Legal aid systems have
been established, protective measures for witnesses

20

developed and innovations made in forensic, ballistic
and re-enactment evidence. Assistance has been
provided to national judiciaries dealing with serious
international crimes. And at all times the Tribunals
have maintained their independence and provided fair
trials in accordance with international standards.
We welcome the considerable progress that the
Tribunals have made during the reporting period
towards the completion of their mandates, but their
work is not yet done. Some of the ICTY’s most highprofile cases are still ongoing. The ICTR’s trials may
have been concluded, but appeals continue, including
under the Residual Mechanism. The 10 people acquitted
and released in the care of the ICTR in Tanzania
must be relocated. States must assist the Residual
Mechanism track and apprehend the fugitives from the
ICTR. Australia encourages the Tribunals to continue
their efforts to implement their completion strategies
and calls on all States to continue to cooperate with
and support both Tribunals, as well as the Residual
Mechanism.
As the Tribunals near the conclusion of their work,
we should pay tribute to the thousands of dedicated
Tribunal staff and officials, the national Governments
of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the host States,
international organizations, the members of civil
society and, most especially, the victims and witnesses,
who have courageously stood up and said that we will
not tolerate impunity for serious international crimes.
Just as a democracy is not a democracy unless it
protects the most vulnerable, international criminal
justice is not justice unless it serves the victims. We
still have a long way to go to end impunity. But our
responsibility to do so must be a continuous touchstone
in the Council’s work and must guide our interaction
with all international criminal justice institutions,
including pre-eminently, of course, the International
Criminal Court.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I take
the opportunity to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We are
pleased to note the progress made by both Tribunals
in implementing their respective strategies to finalize
their work and ensure the transition to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and to

13-36112

S/PV.6977

promote the conditions necessary for the Mechanism to
effectively implement its mandate.
We welcome the measures adopted by both
Tribunals, which, while ensuring due process, have
enabled the harmonization of working methods in order
to accelerate the work pace. We welcome the fact that
such measures have enabled the ICTR to conclude its
trials of the 93 accused, issuing its final judgement in
December 2012, as initially planned. We appreciate the
fact that the Tribunal has met all announced forecasts
for the past six months in terms of both completed trials
and appeals. We welcome the Tribunal’s plans to issue
judgements in 2014 in five of the six cases before the
Appeals Chamber, and we understand why the sixth case
had to be postponed until 2015. In addition, we support
the measures to ensure the capacity of the ICTR’s
Appeal Chamber, in particular the quick replacement
of Judge Vaz. Maintaining its capacities will enable the
Tribunal to dispose of nearly all of its ongoing appeals
in 2014 according to schedule.
With respect to the ICTY, we note with satisfaction
that, in the period under consideration, 12 judgements
and 13 appeals have been completed and that the
Tribunal intends to complete all of its trials in 2013. We
support measures to strengthen the Appeals Chamber
of the ICTY, as its judicial activity increasingly
involves appeals, which will facilitate the discharge
of its mandate. We note that the ICTY has indicated
that certain judgements and arrests will be carried out
later than expected. Therefore, we must continue our
support with a view to assisting the Tribunal in finding
suitable staff.
Dialogue continues among the two Tribunals,
the Mechanism, the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, capably and effectively chaired by
Guatemala. It will continue to be the appropriate
framework to review ways and measures to overcome
any practical or institutional difficulties in carrying
out the completion strategy of both Tribunals. The
constructive discussions on the forthcoming election
of an additional judge to the ICTY Appeals Chamber
perfectly illustrate the commitment of the members of
the Security Council to continuing to support the two
Tribunals.
In that context, the important cooperation
of Member States with regional and subregional
organizations and the two Tribunals, in accordance with

their respective Statutes and the Residual Mechanism,
must be highlighted. That cooperation should involve
not only additional efforts to arrest the fugitives still
sought by the ICTR, but also the accelerated action
on communications and requests for legal assistance
from both Tribunals. Referral of matters to national
jurisdictions has greatly facilitated the programme of
work of both Tribunals and the gradual transition to
the Residual Mechanism. The ICTY’s referral of all
cases involving intermediate and lower-rank accused
to national jurisdictions, pursuant to resolution 1503
(2003) of the Council, and the referral by the ICTR of
10 cases to national jurisdictions will further enhance
complementarity in strengthening the national judicial
institutions of affected countries and promoting
reconciliation.
We welcome the announced launching next month
of the branch of the International Residual Mechanism
in The Hague, one year after the opening of the Arusha
branch. In that context, we also note the preparations
of the ICTY under way to transfer certain follow-up
and judgement matters to the Residual Mechanism, as
well as other functions of the Tribunal, including the
monitoring of sentences, requests for assistance from
national authorities and the protection of victims.
We welcome the fact that the Arusha branch is now
authorized to hear appeals filed against the Tribunal and
adjudicate requests to review the Tribunal’s judgements,
matters involving contempt and false witness and the
three major fugitives as soon as they are apprehended.
We also welcome the close cooperation between the
two Tribunals to ensure that the two branches of the
Mechanism benefit from significant administrative
support.
Activities to raise awareness among the younger
generation, including workshops and exhibits on lessons
learned from the judgements and crimes covered by the
two Tribunals, should be encouraged. Also, activities to
distribute information on both Tribunals to all national,
regional and international actors must be continued.
The significant number of judgements and arrests by
both Tribunals form an important foundation for such
awareness-raising activities.
The contribution of the International Criminal
Tribunals to international criminal justice must be
recognized and preserved. The protection of the heritage
of the two Tribunals has judicial as well as moral value.
In that spirit, it is important to continue to guarantee
access to information relating to the two Tribunals,

13-3611221

S/PV.6977

their mandates and their contributions, in order to fight
impunity, strengthen the international judicial system
and enhance reconciliation. It is also essential to take
specific measures to ensure ownership of the archives
and other commemorative symbols and documents by
the populations of those regions affected by the crimes
that have been judged by the two Tribunals.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the leadership of the
Tribunals for their briefings on their work, their
completion strategies and the transition to the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We have noted the recent trial and acquittal
in the Stanišić and Simatović case. We see in that
decision and overall in the acquittal by appeal in the
Perišić case a certain positive trend helping to remedy
the anti-Serb leanings of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We believe
that a similar potential with regard to such verdicts lies
in a number of similar cases on the Tribunal’s docket.
However, the ICTY continues to suffer from serious
judicial administration problems. The latest unjustified
extension of trial deadlines is completely unreasonable.
Despite the reasons cited, it is clear that well-organized
judicial activities should preclude instances such as the
Šešelj trial, which is now in its tenth year. We continue
to believe that the ICTY stalemate could be broken with
the help of an independent expert — in line with the
model of the Special Court for Sierra Leone — as we
proposed in December. We reiterate that only following
such expert analysis will we consider any proposals
to extend the work of the Tribunals beyond 2014, or
extend the terms of the judges or any budget proposals
going beyond that deadline. It might also be worth
considering inviting not just the ICTY President but
the ICTY’s other judges, including its senior judges, to
participate in the next debate at the end of this year.
Restoring trust in the Tribunal and its role in
national reconciliation would be boosted by a positive
decision by the Security Council with respect to Serbia’s
request to be inscribed on the list of countries where
ICTY-convicted persons can serve their sentences. We
believe that Serbia’s request is justified, both legally and
politically. The situation in that country since 1993 has
changed greatly. The country has established modern
legal institutions, has seen its civil society develop and
has strengthened the rule of law. We support Serbia’s
request, given the relevant guarantees provided by it.

22

We are disappointed by the information from
Rwanda Tribunal, which we had always considered
to be a model for responsible implementation of the
completion strategy and an example for the ICTY in
that respect. When it comes to granting an extension
in the Butare case beyond the timeline set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010), taking 18 months to translate
the file in the case into French is unacceptable. It is
hard to imagine that the problem could not have been
foreseen six months ago, prior to the December briefing
to the Security Council (see S/PV.6880), when the ICTR
promised to conclude all cases in a timely fashion. We
believe that the ICTR has the necessary capacities
and financial resources to remedy the situation by the
deadline in conformity with the time frame stipulated
in resolution 1966 (2010). I hope that we will not have
to return to the issue once more at the end of the year.
Very soon we will see the opening of The Hague
branch of the Residual Mechanism, the latest milestone
in the history of the ICTY and ICTR. We will soon see
whether the outcomes of the work of the Tribunals will
be a heritage acceptable to the whole of the international
community. In that regard, going to every length
to ensure that the history of the Tribunals ends on a
positive note, we will strictly adhere to the compromise
scheme for the completion of the work of the Tribunals
and the model of the Residual Mechanism as an organ
with a limited jurisdiction and life cycle, as set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010).
Mr. Li Zhenhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their respective briefings on
the implementation of the completion strategies of the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism of the
International Criminal Tribunals.
We have noted with pleasure that the two Tribunals
have made further headway in their work and have been
moving steadily forward with the completion strategy.
The ICTY branch of the Residual Mechanism will start
operations as of 1 July 2013, which we acknowledge as
an important milestone.
As for the work of the two Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism, I wish to make three points. First,
under resolution 1966 (2010), the two Tribunals are to
complete all the work that remains and are to be closed
by the end of 2014 at the latest. We have noted the delay

13-36112

S/PV.6977

in part of the work of the two Tribunals, as mentioned,
and we believe that the Council resolution should be
strictly followed. We hope that the two Tribunals will
continue to take effective measures to accelerate the
pace of work, while ensuring the quality of their trials,
so as to complete their work on schedule.
Secondly, the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism has been progressing well, and part of its
judicial functions have been handed over to it smoothly.
The Hague branch of the Mechanism will soon come
into operation. China hopes that the ICTY will organize
its work in various areas so as to ensure the smooth
start and operation of the Hague branch.
Thirdly, we have noted that the two Tribunals
still face some difficulties in their related judicial
activities and administration. As mentioned earlier
by the previous speakers, there are still nine fugitives
within the jurisdiction of the ICTR. Therefore, there
remain potential cases involving the arrest of fugitives
and the placement of those convicted and sentenced.
We call upon the countries concerned to continue their
cooperation with the two Tribunals and to arrest the
fugitives at large. At the same time, we also hope that
the countries able to do so will provide the necessary
assistance to the two Tribunals in areas such as the
placement of those sentenced. We also take note
of Serbia’s proposal with regard to the serving of
sentences, which we think is very important.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): We wish to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR); and Prosecutors Serge Brammertz and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow for the reports on the completion strategy
of their respective Tribunals (S/2013/308, annexes I and
II; S/2013/309, annexes I and II; S/2013/310, annexes I
and II).
Rwanda recognizes the important role played by
the ICTR and the ICTY in the international system of
justice. Both Tribunals have produced a substantial body
of jurisprudence, including definitions of the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and
forms of responsibility such as superior responsibility.
In 1998, the ICTR, through the Akayesu case,
established that a genocide had occurred in Rwanda
in 1994 — a genocide against an ethnic group, the

Tutsis. In the same vein, in 2004, the ICTY ruled in the
Krstić case that in 1995 a genocide had been committed
against the Bosnians in Srebrenica. Unfortunately,
those rulings have not prevented genocide deniers in
Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina and beyond to openly
deny the fact of the genocides, which, for us, is an insult
to the memory of the victims and to the survivors.
Nonetheless, in the case of Rwanda, one of the
tactics of the genocide deniers was to co-opt the
very terminology of the United Nations, which had
described the crime as the “Rwandan genocide”. As
a result, revisionists of all kinds, including scholars
from Western countries, were able to state that, yes,
a genocide had occurred in Rwanda, but it was one
perpetrated against a national group, that it was a
question of Rwandans killing each other.
As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide next year, we call upon the
United Nations to consider reviewing the qualification
and call the crime established by the ICTR in the
Akayesu case a genocide perpetrated against the Tutsis.
We acknowledge the efforts of the ICTY and
the ICTR to expedite the proceedings and smoothly
achieve the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
However, allow me to express the serious concern
of my Government with regard to two aspects of
the work of the ICTR. First, with regard to the time
and cost of the proceedings, the ICTR has, since its
inception 17 years ago, completed cases involving
only 75 suspects with an overall budget amounting to
billions of United States dollars.
Secondly, with respect to the decisions of the ICTR,
particularly those of the Appeals Chamber, in 1998, Jean
Kambanda, the then-Prime Minister of the Government
that was in place during the genocide, pleaded guilty to
six counts before the ICTR, including conspiracy with
other members of the Government to commit genocide.
However, the ICTR, particularly the Appeals Chamber,
has on several occasions in the past month acquitted
a number of members of that Government, some of
whom were heavily sentenced at first instance. Given
both the pace of the proceedings and the acquittals
of some of the masterminds of the genocides, it is the
feeling of our people that the ICTR did not fully live up
to the trust that Rwandans, particularly the genocide
survivors, had vested in the Court.
As stated in the ICTR report (S/2013/310), four
cases were transferred to national jurisdictions, two

13-3611223

S/PV.6977

in Rwanda and two in France. For the case of Jean
Uwinkindi, and soon the case of Bernard Munyagishari,
referred to Rwanda, we reiterate our commitment to
full cooperation with the ICTR Residual Mechanism
monitoring arrangement. However, as we had already
stated before the Council in June 2011 and in December
2012 (see S/PV.6545 and S/PV.6880), we are concerned
about the fate of the cases against Laurent Bucyibaruta
and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, transferred to France in
November 2007. Almost six years after the referral,
little has been done to try the two suspects. While
taking note of the ongoing monitoring arrangement
for the cases, we would, however, wish to request that
the status of those cases, including the reasons for
the delay, be communicated in the next report of the
Residual Mechanism.
Rwanda welcomes the call made again yesterday
by Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow to urge the States
Members of the United Nations to live up to their
obligations to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism
and the tracking and arrests of the remaining nine
fugitives, among whom the most wanted are Félicien
Kabuga, Protais Mprianya and Augustin Bizimana.
Indeed, we are deeply concerned at the lack of progress
in that regard, and we commend the Prosecution
tracking team for its tireless efforts in ensuring that
the remaining fugitives are brought to justice. In that
regard, we acknowledge the role of the United States
Government and its War Crimes Reward Program.
In the same vein, we call upon the concerned States
Members of the United Nations to arrest other genocide
suspects living on their soil, including leaders of the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
a movement with members who have committed
genocide in Rwanda or who perpetuate its ideology. In
that regard, we commend the Government of Germany
for its indictment yesterday for terrorism of the leaders
of the FDLR operating in that country. We believe that
that decision should be emulated by countries of the
region and beyond that may be tempted to support or
sympathize with that genocide force.
The Government of Rwanda once again reiterates
its request that the archives and records of the ICTR be
transferred to Rwanda upon completion of the mandate
of the Residual Mechanism. Those archives should
be transferred to Rwanda because they constitute
an integral part of our history. They are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocides and will
play a critical role in educating future generations

24

to guard against genocide deniers and revisionism.
We recall that this request was also endorsed by the
East African Community, a subregional organization
comprising Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and
Tanzania, the latter being the ICTR host country. We
are grateful to President Joensen for recognizing the
need to ensure that the ICTR’s records are readily
accessible to the Rwandan people for posterity.
To conclude, let me recall that the next April,
the world will be commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide perpetrated against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. Rwanda is today a different country,
which has achieved a great deal in the area of justice,
reconciliation and development. With the closure of
the Gacaca courts last year and the winding down of
the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism in 2014-2015,
we hope that the twentieth commemoration will be
an opportunity to turn a dark page of our history. For
that, we call upon the ICTR, the Residual Mechanism,
the Security Council, the Secretariat and all States
Members of the United Nations to accompany Rwanda
in the process along the lines of the requests and
suggestions we have expressed during this debate.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank President Theodor Meron,
President Vagn Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the reports
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) (S/2013/308) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) (S/2013/310).
Next year, we will be celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the ICTR. This year we have
commemorated that of the ICTY. The press statement
made on behalf of Security Council members on
22 May, under the Togolese presidency, to mark those
events reflected the commitment of the international
community to combat impunity. It is therefore
important to take stock, in a critical and constructive
manner, of the activities of the two Tribunals in order
to draw the best lessons from both their failures and
their successes, with a view to urging the international
community to work with greater determination to
promote international criminal justice. To that end,
Togo believes that the Council has been wise to expand
today’s debate to include more participants than usual.
The reports presented reflect the progress that
has been made towards completion of the mandates,
sometimes through the modification of procedures,

13-36112

S/PV.6977

all the while respecting the principle of due process.
The ICTR has concluded all trial court cases in a
timely manner. We urge the ICTR to keep its pledge in
terms of appeals to make two further arrests before the
end of 2013 and to hold substantive hearings without
significant delays in the six pending cases.
The ICTY, for its part, is still doing its best to stay
on schedule, despite being short of staff and appeals
judges and the workload resulting from new arrests.
In that context, the redeployment of Judge William
Sekule from the ICTR to the Appeals Chamber, at a
time when one of the ICTR judges of that Chamber has
resigned, will not be enough to respond to the persistent
difficulties at the ICTY in appointing judges to the
Appeals Chamber.
Togo takes note of the decision of the Council
whereby one of the two newjJudges will be chosen
by appointment and the other by election to bring the
number of judges to the level commensurate to the
proportions of the task and challenges to be met.
Togo wishes to stress the negative impact of
the constraints resulting from the reduction in and
departure of qualified staff on the completion strategies
of the two Tribunals as well as on the transition
towards the Residual Mechanism. We think that the
entities concerned within the United Nations should
take appropriate steps to minimize the consequences
of the problem. We are also pleased that the end of
the ICTR and the ICTY will not spell impunity for
persons still on the run, since certain cases, including
those of ICTR fugitives, have been referred to national
jurisdictions. Monitoring mechanisms still need to
be established to guarantee due process before those
national jurisdictions.
Regarding the problem of the resettlement of
persons acquitted or who have served their sentences
but who continue to be denied their liberty due to the
lack of a host country, the Council should explore
appropriate ways and means to assist the Tribunals
in that respect. In that regard, Togo welcomes the
coordination initiative with the International Criminal
Court with a view to devising possible solutions.
It is clear that this unjust constraint imposed
on persons supposedly at liberty is at odds with the
agreements with the host countries, whereby those
persons, following their trials or serving their sentences,
should no longer reside in the host territory. But that
constraint also affects the credibility of the commitment

of the United Nations to ensuring international criminal
justice in accordance with the principles of the rule of
law or the primacy of law. The Council should call
on the Secretary-General to submit to it a report on
the role that has been, or could be, played by United
Nations entities and make recommendations to guide
the Council.
The interactive informal dialogue held on 14 March
with Mr. Bongani Majola, the ICTR Registrar, and
Mr. John Hocking, the ICTY Registrar, and with the
Residual Mechanism allowed us not only to take stock
of progress made towards completion of the mandate,
but also to grasp the scope of the challenges to come
for each of the branches of the Residual Mechanism.
We welcome the transfer of activities and the assistance
from the two Tribunals to the Arusha branch of the
Residual Mechanism. That experience will help better
organize The Hague branch, which will begin its work
on 1 July.
Outreach is one of the fundamental pillars for
the Tribunals in implementing the mandates through
raising the awareness not only of the broader public
but also of States and international institutions. Thus
Togo encourages initiatives from the Tribunals, not
just to bolster the capacities of States and international
organizations, but also to sensitize individuals in
order to prevent similar crimes. However, as we stated
regarding the Special Court for Sierra Leone last
October, Togo would like to draw attention to the fact
that the impact of images can still surprise and often
backfire. Therefore it calls on the two Tribunals to
follow the appropriate educational approach to counter
the negative effect of images that could rather inspire or
encourage certain persons to replicate atrocities.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to state that my delegation
supported this being an open debate because the
subject merits this, in particular given the twentieth
anniversary of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and also because my
country is working constructively towards enhancing
and ensuring the transparency and openness of the
Council vis-a-vis the broader membership. I would like
to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Jallow and Brammertz for their presence in the Council
and welcome the presentation of the reports of both
Tribunals, including that on the activities of the Residual
Mechanism (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310).

13-3611225

S/PV.6977

Argentina welcomes the progress reported for the
ICTY, in particular given that since the November 2012
report (S/2012/847) the Tribunal has finalized five
trials, two of which were concluded after the formal
presentation of the report of the Tribunal on 23 May,
and only four trials are still pending. My country
acknowledges the efforts of the Tribunal to comply with
deadlines and time projections in a situation involving
staff reduction, including for translation services. I
would also like to recognize progress made in regard
to appeals.
Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we would also like to express our
satisfaction at the progress made towards a mechanism
for the expedited election of an additional appeals judge,
in keeping with Judge Meron’s request. Argentina
supports the Council putting that Mechanism into
practice immediately.
We also welcome the information regarding
compliance by the ICTR with the deadlines and time
projections for trials and appeals, and the fact that the
transition to the Residual Mechanism continues to
accord with such projections, including the handover
of archives by the end of 2014. I would also like
to underscore the importance of the Ngirabatware
appeal, the first appeals case that will be resolved by
the Mechanism. Finally, I would like to highlight the
importance of arresting those individuals still at large.
We recall that resolution 955 (1994) of the Security
Council establishes the obligation of all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal.
As regards the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
recognizes the progress made towards its being fully
functional and the fact that the Arusha branch has
been operational since July 2012. We are also pleased
by the opening on 1 July of the Hague branch, which
will assume the same responsibilities with regard to
the ICTY as those already undertaken by the Arusha
branch with regard to the ICTR.
Argentina would like to commend the work of
the Mechanism in monitoring cases referred by the
Tribunal to Rwandan national courts. We also welcome
the attention given to the normative continuity between
the Tribunals and the Mechanism, which is necessary
to ensure due process at this transitional stage.
Resolution 827 (1993) marked a milestone, because
50 years after Nuremberg, it shows that impunity for the
most serious crimes is unacceptable. On this twentieth

26

anniversary of the ICTY, it is pertinent that the
international community recognize the progress made
by the ICTR and the ICTR in fighting impunity and
its important doctrinal contributions to international
law, in particular international humanitarian law. It
is also relevant to recognize the role and importance
of international criminal justice. The legacy of both
ad hoc Tribunals regarding the reaffirmation of the
international community’s awareness that no sustainable
peace can emerge without justice is undeniable. That
legacy was consolidated in a definitive manner with the
establishment of a permanent international tribunal,
the International Criminal Court, that today is central
to the international criminal justice system of the
international community.
It is not de jure or de facto amnesties that provide
relief to victims of atrocities, but, rather, it is when
justice is seen to be done through impartial and
independent courts. Argentina reiterates its support for
the work of the ICTR and the ICTY and pays tribute, on
this twentieth anniversary of the ICTY, to both of them
for their significant contribution to the fight against
impunity.
The President: I shall now make a statement as
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to express the United Kingdom’s
thanks to President Meron, President Joenson, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow,
for their reports today. We would like to congratulate
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) on its 20 years of service. It has
been instrumental in helping to tackle impunity and
delivering justice to the many victims of the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia. On behalf of the United
Kingdom, I would like to thank the ICTY for all of
its work and for what it has accomplished since its
establishment 20 years ago.
We are pleased that verdicts have been delivered
in the Stanišić, Simatović and Prlić cases which are
milestones for the ICTY. It is important that everyone
respect those verdicts. We welcome the continued
cooperation of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. State cooperation is essential for the
completion of the ICTY’s mandate. We note, however,
that there has been limited progress in investigating
the support networks that helped Mladić and Hadžić
evade capture. Investigating those networks remains a
priority.

13-36112

S/PV.6977

We welcome the signing of a protocol covering
the exchange of evidence between Bosnia and
Serbia. That is a positive step that will help improve
cooperation between the two States. However, as the
Prosecutor’s report (S/2013/308) states, the capacity of
domestic institutions to conduct effective war-crimes
prosecutions remains a concern. We encourage all
parties to consider this point and to explore ways to
improve the capacity of domestic institutions.
It is disappointing to see that the judgement in the
Karadžić case is now expected in July 2015. Repeated
delays to this trial are disheartening. We urge the
Tribunal to take all necessary steps to minimize any
further delays, given the importance of the timely
completion of trials.
Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased to see that the Tribunal
has completed all of its trial work and that the transition
to the Residual Mechanism is progressing well.
Capturing the remaining ICTR fugitives remains a
priority. The Tribunal’s work cannot be fully completed
until all of those individuals are apprehended. We
encourage all Member States to provide their full,
unequivocal support and cooperation to ensure that the
fugitives are captured.
At the same time, we encourage the ICTR
to cooperate with States to facilitate the national
prosecutions that relate to individuals accused of
genocide. Those actions will help ensure that all
accused of genocide face justice. We note that host
States for the acquitted individuals in Arusha have
still not been found. This is disappointing, and we
encourage all parties to work together to find a solution
to this problem as soon as possible.
We regret to see that staff retention continues to
be an issue for both of the Tribunals. There is no easy
solution to this problem, and so we encourage both
Tribunals to prioritize their resources as rigorously as
possible.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I remind those speaking under rules 37 or 39 that
they should also keep their remarks to five minutes or
less.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Selaković, Minister of Justice and Public Administration
of Serbia.

Mr. Selaković (Serbia): Let me begin by expressing
my satisfaction over this opportunity to participate in
the proceedings of this body.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals and of the
International Residual Mechanism for presenting their
reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/310, S/2013/309).
The Republic of Serbia has accorded continued
and undivided importance to its cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). As confirmed in the most recent
report (S/2013/308) of the President and the Chief
Prosecutor of the ICTY, that cooperation has yielded
significant results. In July 2011, my country completed
its cooperation with respect to all indictees whose
transfer had been requested by the Tribunal.
We note that the Prosecutor and the President of
the ICTY have positively assessed the results that the
Republic of Serbia has achieved in its cooperation
with the ICTY. They pointed out that there were no
outstanding or unmet assistance requests, that all
summonses had been served on time, that ICTY orders
had been carried out in a timely fashion and that
witnesses had attended the Tribunal without delay or
difficulties.
The Republic of Serbia has also shown its full
commitment to cooperation with respect to access to
documentation, archives and witnesses. Further, it
refused no access request by either the ICTY Prosecutor
or defence teams. Waivers were granted to all witnesses
for whom they had been requested, which made it
possible for them to testify before the Tribunal.
At the same time, 398 persons have so far been
tried in the courts of the Republic of Serbia for criminal
offences committed against international humanitarian
law. Consequently, the Republic of Serbia showed
a firm commitment not only to complying with its
international obligations, including punishing those
responsible for committing crimes, irrespective of their
ethnicity, but also to establishing the whole truth about
crimes committed during the armed conflicts in the
territory of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The Republic of Serbia is convinced that
it is thereby contributing to the establishment of justice
and the process of regional reconciliation.
This meeting is being held 20 years after the
establishment of the ICTY under resolution 827 (1993).

13-3611227

S/PV.6977

The painful memories of the tragic events of the 1990s
still gnaw at the sensitivities of many in the countries
of our region. Yet time and again those countries have
demonstrated their resolve to proceed along the road of
good-neighbourliness, cooperation and reconciliation.
Therefore, I must point out that the Republic of Serbia
places great importance on the initiative that would
enable persons sentenced by the ICTY to serve their
sentences in the countries that emerged on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia whose nationality they hold.
The basic motivation for that initiative is my country’s
determination to assume responsibility for overseeing
prison sentences handed down to its nationals by The
Hague Tribunal.
On a number of occasions, the Republic of Serbia
has shown its readiness to allow its own nationals, as
well as other willing persons tried by the ICTY, to
serve their sentences in Serbia. It is also prepared to
provide full security guarantees regarding the locations
in which those sentences would be served.
I would like to emphasize that on 20 January 2011,
the Republic of Serbia signed an agreement with the
International Criminal Court on the enforcement of its
sentences. Under that agreement, persons sentenced by
the Court for the commission of war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide may serve their prison
sentences in the Republic of Serbia. I would also like to
stress that Serbia is the first country in Eastern Europe
to have signed such an agreement with the International
Criminal Court; the only other countries to have done
so before Serbia are the United Kingdom, Austria,
Belgium, Denmark and Finland.
Bearing in mind that punishment is also intended
to encourage resocialization of the persons sentenced,
my country believes that that goal becomes more
elusive if prisoners serve their sentences in countries
whose languages they do not speak or understand,
which further hampers their ability to communicate
with their surroundings. Furthermore, it should not be
forgotten that most of the countries in which sentences
are being served are geographically far from Serbia,
which makes family and relatives’ visits much more
difficult and, in some cases, impossible. That is the
main cause of complaints addressed to the Government
of the Republic of Serbia by prisoner families.
Let me also point out that all the results of my
country’s years of cooperation with the Tribunal
indicate, writ large, the seriousness of the Republic

28

of Serbia and its readiness to accept international
supervision of sentences being served and to provide
firm guarantees that sentenced persons will not be
paroled without the requisite decisions of the ICTY, the
International Residual Mechanism or some other organ
or body of the United Nations to be charged with those
issues in future.
The countries that emerged on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, including the Republic of Serbia,
are not in a position to conclude agreements with the
Tribunal on the enforcement of sentences, even though
ICTY President Theodor Meron said in his report
that the Tribunal had signed such agreements with
17 countries and emphasized the need for continued
efforts towards signing a number of new agreements
sufficient to enable successful completion of the
Tribunal’s mandate. President Meron also noted in
his report that those States that had concluded such
agreements were praised in resolution 1993 (2011) and
urged those that had not done so to conclude them.
Since 2009, the Republic of Serbia has insisted on
signing an agreement on the enforcement of sentences
and is actively working on the initiative to have those
sentenced by the Tribunal serve their sentences in
their own country. Serbian officials of the highest
rank have repeatedly appealed to United Nations and
ICTY officials, but there has , regrettably, been no
breakthrough of scope or significance in that regard.
The Republic of Serbia believes that the main
reason for the stalemate is the Secretary-General’s
May 1993 recommendation to the Council to the
effect that “the enforcement of sentences should take
place outside the territory of the former Yugoslavia”
(S/25704, para. 121). Even if that position could have
been considered justified in 1993, when the winds of
war ripped through the former Yugoslavia, it is clear
that it long ago lost its validity.
Today the Republic of Serbia is a democratic
country. It has on numerous occasions demonstrated
its commitment to, and capacity to comply with, its
international obligations, including the punishment of
those responsible for crimes as well as the enforcement
of sentences in accordance with European standards.
I wish to point out that, as it has done in the past, the
Republic of Serbia will continue to comply with its
obligations, both in its cooperation with the ICTY and
with the International Residual Mechanism, the ICTY
branch that is expected to begin its work on 1 July 2013.

13-36112

S/PV.6977

To conclude, let me say that the Republic of Serbia
would be grateful if the members of the Council would
re-examine the recommendation made by the then
Secretary-General 20 years ago and would allow Serbia
to be placed on the list of countries that have indicated
to the Council their willingness to accept convicted
persons under the full supervision of the Tribunal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals and express my gratitude
for their reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310)
and briefings today. I would like to underline the great
contribution made by all of the staff of the Tribunals and
commend their efforts for the successful completion
of the Tribunals’ mandates. My thanks also go to the
Guatemalan delegation for its work as chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
Just this past month, we celebrated 20 years
of the existence and 19 years of the operation of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) — anniversaries whose importance
goes beyond the two ad hoc Tribunals. In reality,
their significance stands as testimony to and a living
embodiment of the spirit and promise of Nuremberg,
carried forward into the twenty-first century. The
triumph of justice over vengeance was the legacy of that
post-Second World War tribunal. It complemented The
Hague and Geneva Conventions through the principles
and precedents it established, eventually serving as an
inspiration and foundation for both the Tribunals and
the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the establishment
of the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as a legal framework to ensure
accountability and bring to an end a tragic period for all
of the peoples living in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Tribunal’s determined message, namely, that crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia will be punished
consistently and without exception, has been heard loud
and clear. The same can be said about the ICTR and its
contributions to reconciliation and sustainable peace in
its region.
In accordance with what I have just said,
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
consistently and constructively cooperated with the

Hague Prosecutor and the Tribunal since the end of
the war. That cooperation has been positively assessed
in the relevant periodic reports and noted in the latest
report of the Prosecutor. However, we take note of all of
the other assessments and concerns that the Prosecutor
has raised and remain fully aware that a great deal still
remains to be done. I wish to recall that Bosnia and
Herzegovina carries the greatest burden of prosecutions
for war crimes. Still, since 2005, when the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina became fully operational,
measurable progress has been made in processing war
crimes, and over 200 cases have been successfully
concluded. However, according to the relevant statistics
of domestic and international actors, there are a large
number of war crimes to be prosecuted in domestic
courts.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that the National
Strategy for War Crimes requires an improved
approach to implementation and to meeting deadlines.
The capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina system
to process war crimes cases fairly and in line with
international and national standards is not in question.
However, stronger efforts need to be made to effectively
increase the overall pace of the processing of cases at
both the State and the entity levels. As the Tribunals
are steadily heading towards their closure, the duty to
continue the fight against impunity and enhance the
reach of justice falls more fully on credible national
prosecutions. To that end, let me assure the Council
that our common goal remains that of ensuring that
all crimes committed are investigated and prosecuted
and the perpetrators appropriately punished. Given
our unfortunate first-hand experience, Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains resolutely faithful to those
principles.
As regional cooperation plays an additional
important role in that respect, we are certain that the
Protocol on the exchange of evidence and information
on war crimes, recently signed between the respective
Prosecutor’s Offices of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and Croatia, will give an impetus for strengthening
communication and further enhancing coordination.
My country remains dedicated to the further promotion
and intensification of regional cooperation, given that
that is in the joint interests of the countries in the region.
Moving to the issue of the completion of the work of
both Tribunals, we note the exceptional efforts that the
Tribunals continue to make to successfully complete
their work and make the full transition to the Residual

13-3611229

S/PV.6977

Mechanism, fully mindful of the highest standards
of due process. It is our hope that further delays will
be avoided by progressively fulfilling the remaining
judicial functions. Victims and their families have
waited long enough, and some are still waiting for the
opportunity for redress and closure. Further delays
only undermine the solemn promise that justice will
unconditionally be served.
Finally, it is our hope that some lessons have been
learned. In that regard, I wish to remind the Council
of the words of Prosecutor Robert H. Jackson at the
Nuremberg trials, warning that: “The wrongs which we
seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated,
so malignant and so devastating that civilization cannot
tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive
their being repeated”. That is a message we need
to carry with us in these turbulent times. As for the
Tribunals, one of their ultimate contributions will be to
demonstrate that administering justice can contribute
to reconciliation, in the Balkans and elsewhere. We can
only hope that the pioneering role of the two Tribunals
will be confirmed and expanded worldwide by the ICC.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): We appreciate the
comprehensive reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309,
S/2103/310) of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunals on the work of the Tribunals
during the reporting period, on the status of the cases
before them, as well as on measures undertaken in
the implementation of the completion strategy. The
recent twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) certainly presents an appropriate
opportunity for a more comprehensive assessment
and stocktaking of past activities, lessons learned and
overall achievements of the Tribunals. In that context,
we thank you, Sir, for having opened this debate up to
the broader membership, albeit not in the format of an
open debate.
It is a well-known fact that Croatia advocated
for the establishment of the ICTY from the very
beginning. We wholeheartedly supported the strong
determination of the international community to
finally, once and for all, put an end to the culture of
impunity that had for so long accompanied wars and
armed conflict. The establishment of the Tribunals
was a clear indication that a new era had arrived — an

30

era in which it was not important any more how highranking or influential perpetrators of grave breaches
of international humanitarian law were, but what the
record of their actions was. It is not an exaggeration to
say that precisely the establishment of the Tribunals,
whose work we are discussing today, forever changed
the landscape of international criminal justice and
introduced a whole new system with the International
Criminal Court at the head.
With high hopes and expectations at the time
of its creation, Croatia also strongly supported the
main purpose of the ICTY — the prosecution and
punishment of the individuals most responsible for acts
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as well as delivering justice for the victims of those
crimes. Equally so, Croatia supported the Tribunal’s
more global functions aimed at the restoration and
maintenance of peace and stability in the region, as
well as the promotion of justice and reconciliation.
Those are goals and hopes that we have supported and
nourished at the time of the Tribunal’s establishment
20 years ago and that we support and nourish even more
today.
Croatia welcomes the results achieved by the ICTY
to date and, in particular, the fact that all those indicted
by the Tribunal have been arrested and transferred to
its custody. It is encouraging to know that a number
of high-level perpetrators of the most heinous crimes
in our region have met their destiny in The Hague
Chambers and are now coping with it in prisons around
the world.
At the same time, it is only fair to say that the
road towards the noble and ambitious goals that the
Tribunal set for itself was neither straightforward
nor easy. Being a pioneer in the interpretation and
application of international humanitarian law, as well
as international criminal law, the Tribunal unavoidably
encountered a number of substantive and procedural
questions, the answers to which were not always clear
or immediate. In that context, let me simply mention
here the oft-criticized very long judicial processes,
which have in some cases seriously undermined their
own purpose. Although late justice is certainly better
than no justice at all, such delays have interfered
with the rightful expectations of the victims, but
equally so with the rights of the accused to a fair and
swift trial. Furthermore, the frequent modifications
of the Tribunal’s Rules of Procedure certainly did

13-36112

S/PV.6977

not contribute to legal confidence, nor the clarity or
simplicity of the procedures.
Finally, according to article 7 of its Statute, the
main task of the Tribunal is to establish the individual
responsibility of the accused. However, introducing
new and untested concepts as criteria for determining
that responsibility, artificially applied to this legal field
and significantly altering the traditional command
responsibility concept, and also introducing those
new concepts only in the later stage of the Tribunal’s
proceedings, resulted, in our opinion, in a weakening
of the Tribunal’s authenticity and led the Tribunal to
delve into political and historical assessments and
interpretations with doubtful success.
In that context, and as we stated in our previous
interventions, let me add that Croatia follows with
particular attention the new jurisprudence emerging
from the Tribunals’ work and its potential to shape
future criteria for, inter alia, the lawful use of force
and waging legitimate military action, including the
general responsibility of military and political leaders.
There is no doubt that the ensuing legal interpretations
of that jurisprudence will have a serious impact on any
future conduct of hostilities, as well as on noble efforts
aimed at preserving or fostering international peace
and security.
Let me now turn to the reports of the ICTY’s
President and Prosecutor (S/2013/308, annexes I and
II), which we have in front of us today. We are pleased
to note that, in paragraph 42 of his report, Prosecutor
Brammertz has once again recognized Croatia’s
full and unequivocal cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and stressed that “the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to rely on Croatia’s cooperation
to efficiently complete trials and appeals.” We will
indeed continue to cooperate as recorded and render
our full support to the Tribunal. It is also a pleasure to
inform you, Mr. President, that Prosecutor Brammertz
visited Croatia between 22 and 24 May for the annual
conference of prosecutors from the former Yugoslavia
held in Brijuni, where they continued their discussions
on issues of mutual relevance.
Croatia is aware that the cooperation of the
States in the region remains crucial for the successful
accomplishment of the Tribunal’s mandate and, in
that context, stands ready to lead by example. At the
same time, enhanced regional cooperation in the area
of war crimes and related issues represents one of the

important legacies of the Tribunals. We are ready to
continue mutual cooperation in that important area,
according to the generally accepted principles of
international criminal law and with the full respect of
relevant national jurisdictions and competencies.
Finally, let me conclude by saying that my country,
although not always necessarily pleased with all the
procedures, rulings or decisions of the ICTY, has at
all times cooperated with the Tribunal to the best of
its abilities, fully respecting its decisions and never
challenging them outside the stipulated procedures.
And that is exactly what we are going to do until
the final fulfilment of the ICTY’s mandate and that
of International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.
We would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors for their reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309,
S/2013/310) and briefings. They illustrate the
unwavering commitment and tireless efforts of both
Tribunals in support of the fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes.
We remain steadfast in our support for international
criminal justice. Ending impunity for serious crimes
is indispensable to building sustainable peace and
reconciliation. Victims of mass atrocities deserve
justice and rehabilitation, and those who commit the
most serious crimes must know that they will be held
accountable.
The achievements of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
represent a landmark in that regard. The case law from
the ICTY and the ICTR has contributed greatly to the
development of international criminal law. Moreover,
the Tribunals were a catalyst for the negotiations on the

13-3611231

S/PV.6977

Rome Statute and the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. We pay tribute to the Tribunals’
achievements and contributions to the fight against
impunity.
Since its establishment 20 years ago, the ICTY
has made a remarkable contribution to peace and
reconciliation in the Western Balkans, as well as to
the development of international criminal justice. It
has given a voice to the victims, especially women and
children.
The ICTY has also set new standards for providing
assistance and support to victims, as well as for capacitybuilding and outreach. Those projects are important for
the Tribunal’s legacy. The European Union contributes
to the ICTY Outreach Programme for 2013 and 2014.
Progress has been more uneven in the transition
to national war crimes prosecutions. Regrettably,
some Western Balkan countries continue to face
difficulties in prosecuting war crimes cases. Some
also suffer from significant backlogs. The European
Union has repeatedly emphasized the importance of
local ownership and that remains essential. Building
the necessary national capacity and increasing public
awareness are important elements in that respect, and
further efforts are needed.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has made an invaluable contribution to our shared
goal of ending impunity for genocide crimes and has
played a key role in strengthening the rule of law and
promoting long-term stability and reconciliation. The
apprehension of the remaining fugitives must, however,
remain a priority. We reiterate our calls for the effective
cooperation of all States concerned, particularly those
in the Great Lakes region.
We welcome the transfer of cases to the domestic
Rwandan courts for prosecution. To be successful, that
process requires the ongoing commitment of both the
Rwandan authorities and the international community.
More progress must be made in reforming the genocide
ideology law, while promoting a future based on
genuine reconciliation. If the Rwandan courts are seen
to be conducting fair, impartial trials, that will be a
significant step forward in the country’s transitional
process and a major lesson for other countries engaged
in transitional justice reform and peacebuilding.
In order to preserve the important achievements
and legacy of the ICTY and the ICTR, we support the

32

process establishing the Residual Mechanism of both
Tribunals in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010). In
that regard, we welcome the launch of the ICTY branch
of the Residual Mechanism in The Hague, which will
begin to function on 1 July.
We will continue to strongly support both the
principle and system of international criminal justice
and its integral role in the reconciliation process, and
we call on all States to do the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The initiative
to request today’s debate originated with the
Accountability, Coherence, Transparency Group
(ACT), which is dedicated to enhancing the Security
Council’s working methods. While we appreciate this
opportunity to speak, we find it unfortunate that Council
was not able to accede to the request of 17 States to
hold this important discussion in the context of an open
debate, especially given the twentieth anniversary,
in late May, of the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
This is a good opportunity to reflect on the work and
impact of the ICTY, on the Council’s future work on
accountability and on the lessons that the experience
with the ad hoc Tribunals has taught us.
I have the honour to speak today on behalf of
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Uruguay, as well as my
own country, Liechtenstein.
The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
was a milestone in the history of international criminal
justice. In that way, the Council acknowledged for
the first time that accountability for the most serious
crimes under international law is an integral part of the
maintenance of international peace and security. In so
doing, it asserted itself as the key player it is today in
the area of accountability, including through its referral
power under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The ad hoc Tribunals, in turn,
made history through their judicial work, for example,
with the first trial against a former head of State before
an international tribunal, as well as through ground-

13-36112

S/PV.6977

breaking cases such as the Akayesu verdict, which
established sexual violence as a form of genocide. The
Tribunals have also been important for victims, whose
sufferings have been acknowledged and whose dignity
has, in some measure, been restored. The International
Criminal Court built on that experience and enhanced
the capacity of the Court by ensuring victims a
participatory role in its proceedings.
Without any doubt, the experiences and lessons
learned from the ad hoc Tribunals are of great
significance to the work of other international
tribunals, as in the case of the ICC. However, it is
too early to assess the full legacy of either Tribunal,
given that some of the most prominent cases are still in
the trial phase. At the same time, especially in recent
months, their work reminds us that the worst crimes
under international law are difficult to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt, and that every defendant has the
right to due process. If some aspects of the work of the
Tribunals continue to be the subject of controversy, that
should not cloud our overall judgement or diminish
their historical importance.
We firmly believe that the Council should continue
to be a key player in ensuring accountability for the
most serious crimes under international law. Part of
that work will be carried out pursuant to the Council’s
referral power under the Rome Statute, but there are
many other ways in which it — and, indeed, other
United Nations organs — can work effectively to
ensure accountability, particularly by enhancing the
capacity of States that are willing to fight impunity
through their national judiciaries. It is very likely, and
in our view desirable, that the era of ad hoc Tribunals
will soon come to an end. The Council has moved on
to different types of accountability work and should
continue on that path. But it is essential that we draw
some key conclusions from the chapter written by the
ad hoc Tribunals.
First, international criminal justice requires
diplomatic support and follow-up on the part of the
relevant States and institutions. That is particularly
important where arrests of indictees are concerned,
since they can be carried out only by Member States
and will not happen unless States muster the political
will and join forces to do so. The history of the ICTY
illustrates very clearly that arrests do not happen unless
States decide to put their political weight behind the
enforcement of arrest warrants. With regard to the
International Criminal Court, the Council acknowledged

this in adopting its most recent presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2013/2). In concrete
cases, however, such follow-up is still often insufficient
or lacking altogether.
Secondly, there must be a solid financial basis for
international criminal justice mechanisms. The fact that
all States Members of the United Nations were obliged
to fund the ad hoc Tribunals, for which we have all paid
just about $4 billion, was an indispensable part of their
functioning. The experience with other international
criminal justice mechanisms clearly shows that
voluntary funding models do not work. Not only are
such tribunals pretty much constantly in financial
difficulties, which can delay judicial work, but the
voluntary funding can also lead to questions concerning
their judicial independence. Any serious accountability
work undertaken by the Council in the future should
therefore have a solid financial foundation. That
means in particular that future ICC referrals should be
financed by the United Nations membership as a whole,
especially given that those costs are significantly lower
than they would be under any new ad hoc mechanism.
Thirdly, for international criminal justice to be
effective, there must be ownership in the affected
countries. The best way of achieving that is to
strengthen national capacities where countries are
willing to fight impunity themselves, but lack the
means to do so. The experience of the past 20 years has
shown that the international community has numerous
possible ways to help national justice processes in
countries seeking to come to terms with past crimes.
They range from hybrid tribunals of the sort employed
in Sierra Leone and Cambodia to entities that work
entirely within the affected country’s legal system,
such as Guatemala’s Commission against Impunity and
the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If a permanent
effect is intended, as it should be, investing in national
mechanisms also gives the best return for the money
invested. International justice and local solutions are
not mutually exclusive. Indeed, given the principle of
complementarity, such solutions can even be used in
conjunction with an ICC referral or in cases where the
Court already has jurisdiction, to the benefit of both
the ICC and the national processes. This would allow
the Court to step in should the local or hybrid solution
prove to be unsatisfactory, or indeed unavailable.
Finally, from the perspective of the Council’s
working methods, the existence of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals is noteworthy. It is

13-3611233

S/PV.6977

an important space in which to discuss the interaction
between the Council and the international justice
mechanisms it has created. We believe, however, that
the Security Council should take a broader approach
and establish ways of discussing other accountability
issues, be they in a purpose-designed working group
or in the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Tribunals, not least in the light of the institutional
linkages between the Council and the ICC. Given the
high importance that the Council appears to attach to
issues of accountability, they should also be reflected
more prominently in the mechanisms through which it
communicates with the public, in particular its annual
report, the most important tool in that respect. A better
reflection on the website would also be helpful. Having
the necessary mechanisms in place is one prerequisite
for the Council to continue effective accountability
work — political will, of course, is another.

The work of the two Tribunals has almost come to an
end.

The creation of the ICTY 20 years ago was the
dawn of the age of accountability. At the heart of this
age of accountability is also a realization that issues are
intricately linked with international peace and security.
We therefore hope that the Security Council will
draw the necessary lessons from the past 20 years and
continue to make accountability for the worst crimes
under international law a priority in its work.

The ICTY has been equally successful. All of
the indicted have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. It has contributed
substantially to the penalization of grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and the further
development of customary laws of war.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Den Bogaard (Netherlands): The
Netherlands thanks you, Sir, for the opportunity to
speak today at this meeting of the Security Council on
the International Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia.
We align ourselves with the statements made by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Liechtenstein.
The great interest of States in the debate is
an unmistakable sign of the importance that the
international community attaches to both Tribunals and
their goals. Twenty years ago, the Council recognized
that mass slaughter and ethnic cleansing amount to a
threat to international peace and security. By creating
both Tribunals, the Council courageously undertook
to address the most serious international crimes. The
result has profoundly changed the international debate.
Impunity is no longer acceptable, and the international
community has entered into an age of accountability.

34

The Netherlands today wishes to pay tribute to the
Council for having adopted the two relevant resolutions;
to the international community for its support; and
to those at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their work in
making the vision of the Tribunals come true.
The ICTR has significantly broadened international
criminal jurisprudence by being the first court to
prosecute suspects for the crime of genocide, by
demonstrating that rape may be an act of genocide and
by considering the criminal responsibility of the media.
It contributed significantly to developing the law
regarding criminal responsibility in non-international
armed conflict.

The Netherlands is proud to host the ICTY and the
Appeals Chamber of both Tribunals, and has always
been a staunch political supporter of both Tribunals.
At the celebration of ICTY’s twentieth anniversary
held in The Hague last month, in the presence of King
Willem-Alexander, various speakers emphasized how
crucial the continued political pressure on all parties
concerned to cooperate with the Tribunal has been in
enabling it to carry out its mandate effectively.
Allow me therefore to seize this opportunity to
stress the importance of political, diplomatic and
financial support to those and other tribunals. The
Council, by being instrumental in establishing them,
has a solemn responsibility to ensure that they can do
their work. International justice cannot and should not
be limited because of lack of political backing from the
international community, nor should it be hampered
by financial constraints resulting from a system of
voluntary financing that threatens the delivery of
justice to the communities concerned. There must be
a solid financial basis for international criminal justice
mechanisms and their residual mechanisms.
The establishment of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is essential to ensure

13-36112

S/PV.6977

that there will be no impunity for remaining fugitives
and that appeals will be completed and witnesses
protected, well after the closure of the Tribunals.
The historical importance of those two United
Nations Tribunals cannot be underestimated. Their
legitimacy and their legacy are beyond dispute and will
continue to shape international relations for many years
to come. The Tribunals have confirmed the principle of
accountability for the most serious international crimes
by imposing punishment on those responsible and
giving victims unprecedented access to justice. They

have demonstrated the prevalence of the rule of law in
communities affected by such heinous crimes.
The Netherlands remains firmly committed to the
fight against impunity for the most serious international
crimes, both domestically and internationally. We count
on the Security Council to do the same.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

13-3611235
