A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/147
22 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 111
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/600)]
54/147. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/126 of 9 December 1998,
Recalling also the provisions of its resolution 2312 (XXII) of 14 December 1967, by which it adopted
the Declaration on Territorial Asylum,
Recalling further the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of
refugee problems in Africa of 19691 and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,2
Recalling the Khartoum Declaration3 and the Recommendations on Refugees, Returnees and Internally
Displaced Persons in Africa4 adopted by the Organization of African Unity at the ministerial meeting held
at Khartoum on 13 and 14 December 1998,

1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
2
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
3
A/54/682, annex I.
4

Ibid., annex II.

00 29500

/...

A/RES/54/147
Page 2

Welcoming decision CM/Dec.459 (LXX) on the situation of refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its seventieth ordinary
session, held at Algiers from 8 to 10 July 1999,5
Commending the First Ministerial Conference on Human Rights in Africa of the Organization of African
Unity, held at Grand-Baie, Mauritius, from 12 to 16 April 1999, and welcoming the attention paid to issues
relevant to refugees and displaced persons in the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by the Conference,
Recognizing the contributions made by African States to the development of regional standards for the
protection of refugees and returnees, and noting with appreciation that countries of asylum are hosting
refugees in a humanitarian spirit and in a spirit of African solidarity and brotherhood,
Recognizing also the need for States to address resolutely the root causes of forced displacement and
to create conditions that facilitate durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons, and stressing in this
regard the need for States to foster peace, stability and prosperity throughout the African continent,
Convinced of the need to strengthen the capacity of States to provide assistance and protection for
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and of the need for the international community, within the context
of burden-sharing, to increase its material, financial and technical assistance to the countries affected by
refugees, returnees and displaced persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation that some assistance is already rendered by the international
community to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and host countries in Africa,
Noting with great concern that, despite all the efforts deployed so far by the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and others, the situation of refugees and displaced persons in Africa,
especially in the West African and Great Lakes regions and in the Horn of Africa, remains precarious,
Stressing that the provision of relief and assistance to African refugees by the international community
should be on an equitable, non-discriminatory basis,
Considering that, among refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons, women and children are
the majority of the population affected by conflict and bear the brunt of atrocities and other consequences
of conflict,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General6 and of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees;7
2. Notes with concern that the declining socio-economic situation, compounded by political
instability, internal strife, human rights violations and natural disasters, has led to increased numbers of
refugees and displaced persons in some countries of Africa, and remains particularly concerned about the

5
6
7

See A/54/424, annex I.
A/54/414.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/54/12 ).
/...

A/RES/54/147
Page 3

impact of large-scale refugee populations on the security, socio-economic situation and environment of
countries of asylum;
3. Notes the commemoration in 1999 of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Organization
of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969,1 appeals
to African States that have not yet done so to accede to the Convention, and calls upon States parties to the
Convention to reaffirm their commitment to its ideals and to respect and observe its provisions;
4. Notes also the commemoration in 1999 of the fiftieth anniversary of the signature of the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949,8 and, bearing in mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes of
forced displacement in Africa, calls upon States and other parties to armed conflict to observe scrupulously
the letter and spirit of international humanitarian law;
5. Notes the need for States to address the root causes of forced displacement in Africa, and calls upon
African States, the international community and relevant United Nations organizations to take concrete action
to meet the needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons for protection and assistance and to contribute
generously to national projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight;
6. Notes also the link, inter alia, between human rights violations, poverty, natural disasters and
environmental degradation and population displacement, and calls for redoubled and concerted efforts by
States, in collaboration with the Organization of African Unity, to promote and protect human rights for all
and to address these problems;
7. Encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue to
cooperate with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, within their respective mandates, in the promotion and
protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in
Africa;
8. Notes with appreciation the positive outcome of all mediation and conflict resolution efforts carried
out by African States, the Organization of African Unity and subregional organizations, as well as the
establishment of regional mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution, and urges all relevant parties
to address the humanitarian consequences of conflicts;
9. Expresses its appreciation and strong support for those African Governments and local populations
that, in spite of the general deterioration of socio-economic and environmental conditions and overstretched
national resources, continue to accept the additional burden imposed upon them by increasing numbers of
refugees and displaced persons, in compliance with the relevant principles of asylum;
10. Expresses its gratitude to the international community and to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for the humanitarian assistance they have continued to render to refugees and
displaced persons and to countries of asylum;

8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
/...

A/RES/54/147
Page 4

11. Expresses its concern about instances in which the fundamental principle of asylum is jeopardized
by unlawful expulsion or refoulement or by threats to the life, physical security, integrity, dignity and wellbeing of refugees;
12. Calls upon States, in cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take
all necessary measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in particular, to ensure
that the civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is not compromised by the presence or the
activities of armed elements;
13. Urges States and all other actors to take all necessary measures to protect activities related to
humanitarian assistance, to prevent attacks on and kidnapping of national and international humanitarian
workers and to ensure their safety and security, and requests organizations and aid workers to abide by the
national laws and regulations of the countries in which they operate;
14. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the Organization of African Unity, subregional
organizations and all African States, in conjunction with United Nations agencies, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing
partnerships and forge new ones in support of the international refugee protection system;
15. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international community and other concerned
entities to intensify their support to African Governments through appropriate capacity-building activities,
including training of relevant officers, disseminating information about refugee instruments and principles,
providing financial, technical and advisory services to accelerate the enactment or amendment and
implementation of legislation relating to refugees, strengthening emergency response and enhancing
capacities for the coordination of humanitarian activities;
16. Reaffirms the right of return and also the principle of voluntary repatriation, appeals to countries
of origin and countries of asylum to create conditions that are conducive to voluntary repatriation, and
recognizes that, while voluntary repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and thirdcountry resettlement, as appropriate, are also viable options for dealing with the situation of African refugees
who, owing to prevailing circumstances in their respective countries of origin, are unable to return home;
17. Notes with satisfaction the voluntary return of millions of refugees to their homelands following
the successful repatriation and reintegration operations carried out by the Office of the High Commissioner,
with the cooperation and collaboration of countries hosting refugees and countries of origin, and looks
forward to other programmes to assist the voluntary repatriation and reintegration of all refugees in Africa;
18. Reiterates that the Plan of Action adopted by the Regional Conference on Assistance to Refugees,
Returnees and Displaced Persons in the Great Lakes Region, held at Bujumbura from 15 to 17 February
1995, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/149 of 21 December 1995, continues to be
a viable framework for the resolution of the refugee and humanitarian problems in that region;
19. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the spirit of solidarity and burdensharing, to the third-country resettlement requests of African refugees, and notes with appreciation that some
African countries have offered resettlement places for refugees;

/...

A/RES/54/147
Page 5

20. Welcomes the programmes carried out by the Office of the High Commissioner with host
Governments, the United Nations, non-governmental organizations and the international community to
address the environmental impact of refugee populations;
21. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and financial assistance for the
implementation of programmes intended for the rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected
by refugees in countries of asylum;
22. Expresses its concern about the long stay of refugees in certain African countries, and calls upon
the Office of the High Commissioner to keep its programmes under review, in conformity with its mandate
in the host countries, taking into account the increasing needs of refugees;
23. Emphasizes the need for the Office of the High Commissioner to collate statistics, on a regular
basis, on the number of refugees living outside refugee camps in certain African countries, with a view to
evaluating and addressing the needs of those refugees;
24. Urges the international community, in a spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing, to
continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into
account the substantially increased needs of programmes in Africa, to ensure that Africa receives a fair and
equitable share of the resources designated for refugees;
25. Requests all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to pay
particular attention to meeting the special needs of refugee women and children and displaced persons,
including those with special protection needs;
26. Calls upon States and the Office of the High Commissioner to make renewed efforts to ensure that
the rights, needs and dignity of elderly refugees are fully respected and addressed through appropriate
programme activities;
27. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons in Africa, calls upon
States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement and to meet the protection and assistance
needs of internally displaced persons, takes note in this regard of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement,9 and urges the international community, led by relevant United Nations organizations, to
contribute generously to national projects and programmes aimed at alleviating the plight of internally
displaced persons;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the situation of refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session, taking fully into
account the efforts expended by countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations

9

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/147
Page 6

High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions”, and to present an oral report to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive
session of 2000.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
