VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/48.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to American
Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in American Samoa, 10
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of American Samoa,
Welcoming the active participation of the administering
Power in the related work of the Special Committee and
expressing the hope that this co-operation will be strengthened further so as to accelerate progress towards the full
implementation of the Declaration with regard to American
Samoa,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission dispatched to the Territory in July 1981, 11
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of American Samoa and
stressing the necessity for diversifying the Territory's economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence
on fluctuating economic activities,
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to American Samoa and endorses the observations,
conclusions and recommendations contained therein; 12
2. Also approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 13
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to the
Territory;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Visiting Mission for the constructive work accomplished
and to the administering Power and the Government and
people of American Samoa for the co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;

• Ibid., chaps. III and XXVlll.
10
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras.
1-8.
11
A/AC.109/679 and Add.I.
12
A/AC.109/679, paras. 344-370.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-~-ixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev.l), chap. XXVlll.

199

6. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the freely expressed wishes of the
people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration;
7. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the people of American Samoa
are kept fully informed of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
8. Reaffirms also the responsibility of the administering

Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to take all possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy of
American Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of
assistance and economic development for the Territory;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to foster
close relations and co-operation between the people of the
Territory and the neighbouring island communities:
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected representatives of American Samoa,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the people
to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and
maintain control over their future development;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/49.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 35/26 of 11 November 1980,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970
(XVIII),

Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter and the action taken by the
Committee in respect of that information, 14
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the question, 15
'

4

Ibid., chap. Vil.

" A/36/563.
