A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/159
28 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 26
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.59/Rev.1)]
50/159.

The situation in Burundi

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General of 11 October
1995, 1/
Noting with satisfaction the beneficial role played by the SecretaryGeneral, and welcoming the mission carried out by his Special Representative
for Burundi,
Noting also the praiseworthy efforts made by the Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity and his Special Representative,
Welcoming the holding at Bujumbura from 15 to 17 February 1995 of the
Regional Conference on Assistance to Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons
in the Great Lakes Region, pursuant to resolution CM/Res.1527 (LX) of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity,
Reaffirming its resolution 48/118 of 20 December 1993, which stresses
the necessity of mobilizing assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa,
Recognizing the importance of the missions carried out in August 1994
and February 1995 by representatives of the Security Council and of the

1/
96-76957

A/50/541 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/50/159
Page 2

statements by the President of the Security Council of 9 March 1995 2/ and
29 March 1995 3/ on the situation in Burundi,
Recognizing also the efforts being made by the Organization of African
Unity and by its current Chairman to assist Burundi in regaining peace,
confidence and stability,
Recognizing further the important role played by the Organization of
African Unity Mission in Burundi, and stressing the need for the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity to coordinate their efforts in
dealing with the situation in Burundi,
Welcoming the agreement signed on 22 September 1994 by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Government of Burundi on
the implementation of a major programme of technical assistance and advisory
services in the field of human rights, the various components of which form
part of preventive action supported by the international community,
Appreciating the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to promote and protect human rights in Burundi, in particular by
setting up an office of the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat and by
mobilizing international cooperation in the quest for peace and security in
Burundi,
Reiterating the special importance of the Convention on Governance
signed on 10 September 1994,
Welcoming the constructive negotiations between the parties signatories
to the Convention on Governance, which resulted in the formation of a
coalition Government on 1 March 1995,
Expressing great regret at the subversive acts, acts of violence and
looting perpetrated by armed terrorist groups and armed militias against
innocent populations which seriously jeopardize civil peace,
Welcoming the joint message of the President and the Prime Minister of
Burundi addressed to the Secretary-General, and condemning the inflammatory
broadcasts transmitted by the radio station "La voix de la démocratie - Ijwi
Ry’abanyagihugu", as well as those transmitted by other radio stations which
incite ethnic hatred in Burundi,
Stressing the importance of cooperation between all parties in Burundi
in order to achieve national reconciliation and respect for human rights,
Taking note of the declaration on Burundi adopted by the Eleventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from 18 to 20 October 1995, 4/

2/

S/PRST/1995/10.

3/

S/PRST/1995/13.

4/

See A/50/752-S/1995/1035.
/...

A/RES/50/159
Page 3

Welcoming the establishment, by Security Council resolution 1012 (1995)
of 28 August 1995, of the International Commission of Inquiry in Burundi, as
mandated in paragraph 1 of that resolution,
Welcoming also the Declaration adopted at Cairo on 29 November 1995 by
the heads of State of the Great Lakes region 5/ with the assistance of
President Jimmy Carter, President Julius Nyerere and Archbishop Desmond Tutu,
1.
Congratulates the political parties of the Mouvance présidentielle
and of the Burundian opposition on the outcome of their dialogue and their
concerted action, which led to the formation of a coalition Government
representing the different shades of opinion;
2.
Calls upon all the guarantors of the Convention on Governance to
ensure its full and impartial implementation for the benefit of all;
3.
Again encourages all the parties to that Convention and its
additional protocols to abide strictly by them;
4.
Urges all political parties, military leaders, the media and civil
society to dissociate themselves from extremist forces, to reject all
extremism and all ethnic or political fanaticism, to settle disputes through
negotiation and dialogue and to unite in order to bring about national
reconciliation and respect for human rights;
5.
Expresses its conviction concerning the need to increase
preventive action in Burundi without delay, in particular through the presence
of human rights experts and through human rights training programmes, in full
cooperation with the Government of Burundi;
6.
Strongly urges all the people of Burundi to cooperate with the
coalition Government and with the security forces to promote national
reconciliation and to fight all forms of extremism, in particular by armed
terrorist groups and armed militias;
7.
Condemns all those from within or outside the country who are
attacking innocent populations, arming extremists, heedlessly violating human
rights and seriously undermining national peace and security;
8.
Calls upon all parties to create the conditions for the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons;
9.
Also condemns the militia attack on the Organization of African
Unity Mission in Burundi which took place on 14 June 1995 in the province of
Cibitoke and resulted in the death of a military observer of that
organization;
10.
Endorses resolution CM/Res.1582 (LXII) on Burundi, adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its sixty-second
ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 21 to 23 June 1995; 6/

5/

S/1995/1001, annex.

6/

See A/50/647, annex I.
/...

A/RES/50/159
Page 4

11.
Endorses also the declaration on Burundi adopted at Cartagena de
Indias, Colombia, on 20 October 1995 by the heads of State or Government of
non-aligned countries;
12.
Requests the States Members of the United Nations and
international organizations to cooperate with the Government of Burundi and
other Governments of the region in the identification and dismantling of radio
stations which incite hatred and encourage acts of genocide;
13.
Invites all political partners to organize, in accordance with the
Convention on Governance, a national debate on the country’s basic problems
with a view to the conclusion of a national covenant and the adoption of a
constitution adapted to the current socio-political requirements;
14.
Supports the role assigned to the International Commission of
Inquiry in Burundi, as mandated by Security Council resolution 1012 (1995), as
an important step towards the eradication of impunity;
15.
Encourages the international community and the Government of
Burundi to implement the various recommendations of the Plan of Action adopted
by the Regional Conference on Assistance to Refugees, Returnees and Displaced
Persons in the Great Lakes Region, held at Bujumbura from 15 to 17 February
1995;
16.
Appeals earnestly to the States that signed the Cairo Declaration
on the Great Lakes Region of 29 November 1995 to abide faithfully by the
commitments embodied in that declaration and designed to provide appropriate
solutions in order to eliminate the socio-political conflicts currently taking
place in that part of Africa;
17.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his contacts with a
view to an early convening of the Regional Conference on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region of Central Africa, under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the collaboration of the Organization of
African Unity and with the participation of all the countries of the region;
18.
Reiterates its urgent appeal to the international community to
continue its efforts to mobilize political, diplomatic, human, economic,
financial and material resources with a view to assisting Burundi in
definitively overcoming the crisis which it has been facing for more than two
years;
19.
Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity to continue their
respective and complementary missions aimed at securing effective national
reconciliation in Burundi, and welcomes in particular the positive role played
by the Organization of African Unity Mission of observers;
20.
Expresses the hope that the Secretary-General of the United
Nations will undertake consultations, following the usual procedure, with the
Government of Burundi for the appointment as soon as possible of a special
representative possessing all the qualifications, particularly an in-depth
knowledge of the socio-political situation in Burundi;

/...

A/RES/50/159
Page 5

21.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "The situation in Burundi".
98th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
