l'lil

R 7' Y - 1'H 1 R 1) Y If A R
th
MEETING:

NEW

15 NOVEMBER

1978

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
. . , . _. . . . . . . , . .

1

. . . , . . +. . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2099)

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 7 November
to the United Nations

(S/12918) ,...,,.,

. . . , . . , . , . . , . .

1978 from the Permanent
Representative
.jf Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security
Council

.,....,..

(.....,.,...,.,.,

... ........

S/W.2099

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records 01 the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiorls and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2099lh

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. LCon N’DONC (Gabon).
Prfscnt: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Kepublic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2099)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 7 November 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 29 18)
The meeting was culled to order at 5. IO p.m

15 November

1978, at 3 pm.

3. On behalf of the Council I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. Rolandis, who is the first
speaker for this afternoon: I now call on him.
4. Mr, ROLANDIS (Cyprus): Last week the question of
Cyprus was brought once more before the General Assembly. I spoke1 on behalf of the people of my country.
But my voice was not that of a foreign minister or a
diplomat. I could not mould my words to take the shape of
the language normally used by a technocrat. In the political
spectrum of Cyprus, there is no room for technocracy any
more. In the Cyprus of the present day there is room only
for resistance against injustice and brutality, And my voice
reflected this spirit, which I am certain is also the spirit and
credo of the Security Council, because I do not think that
there is even one person in this room who would tolerate
having his country shamelessly described by its aggressor as
“no
more than a geographical expression”. Yes, honourable
members of the Council, the representative of Turkey had
the cynicism and the audacity to say in his statement
before the Assembly that “there is no Republic of Cyprns,
there is no Government of Cyprus, and the word ‘Cyprus’ is
no more than a geographical expression”.2

Adoption of the agenda
The apnda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 7 November 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12918)
1, The PRESIDENT (itztcrpretatiun jhrt? French): 1 have
received letters from the representatives of Cyprus and
Greece in which they request to bc invited to participate in
the discussion Following the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure,

2. The PRESIDENT (itlterprctation Jiarn Frcrzclr): I wish
to draw the attention of members of the Council to
document S/l2924 containing the text of a letter dated 14
November 1978 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Secretary-General, which transmits the text
of General Assembly resolution 33/l 5, entitled “Question
of Cyprus”.

5. The astonishing and repulsive thing about this statement is that it was made before a body all the members of
which fully recognize the Government of Cyprus and the
State of Cyprus as a Member of the United Nations. Shall I
then call this statement an indiscretion? Shall I call it
disrespect’! Shall I call it provocation of the international
community’? Shall I call it contemptuous and barbaric
treatment of the civilized by the uncivilized?
6. The representative of Turkey accused us of trying to
fool the members of the Assembly. l-lc said that we “cannot
fool all the people all of the time”.” But the Assembly gave
him a staggering blow by way of all answer. By a whopping
majority of 115 votes to 4 he was told that the one who
was attempting to fool the Assembly and the world was
nobody else but he, He was told [hat his statements had no
credibility. He was told that 96.6 per cent of those who
voted considered his sophistries and his crocodile tears and
theatrical absurdities flat lies. He was told that 96.6 pel
cent of the world believed that Cyprus was under occupation and that Turkey had committed disgraceful and
criminal conduct by turning a beautiful island into a ruin.
I-Ie was told that 96.6 per cent of the world believed in

had their share of waiting, Along the lines of the same
poem, the people of my country had the misfortune to see
the things to which they gave their lives broken, and they
stooped and built them up with worn-out tools. However,
for how long should we be subjected to injustice? Are
members of the Council prepared to let us be indefinitely
the victims of the insatiable Ottoman appetite‘? Or is it not
rather the right moment for them to consider some severe
action against Turkey?

justice and that they considered Turkey’s actions unjust
and unethical, We must not forget this figure: 96.6 per
cent. But what is even more important is the fact that 84
countries have recommended that, if necessary, measures
under the Charter should be adopted against Turkey. Only
seven countries voted against that paragraph of resolution 33/l 5. Measures “under the Charter” cannot mean
anything other than measures under Chapter VII. Not only
has Turkey been found guilty, but a recommendation has
been made for her adequate and just punishment.

12. I submit that it is the duty of the Governments of the
States members of the Security Council to heed the
remarks of Mr. Waldheim in the introduction to his 1976
report on the work of the Organization, which reads:

7. I do not think that there is realty any need each time to
rebut the Turkish lies, There is no need to waste the
valuable time of the Council for the purpose of disproving
what it has already taught us so many times by its vote that
it does not believe,

“The responsibilities of Governments do not cease
when a resolution is adopted; indeed resolutions usually
require determined action by Governments, in addition to
the parties directly concerned, if they are to be translated
into reality.“4

8. I have no doubt that the Turkish representative and the
Turkish Cypriot leaders will now put on a theatrical
spectacle in an effort to justify crime. They will tell us
about the plight of the Turkish Cypriots, who have actually
been the victims of nobody else but Ankara and the
Turkish Cypriot leadership for the last 20 years. They will
produce some newspaper clippings, which may be in their
favour, whilst there are thousands of clippings in our
favour. After all, over a period of 20 years there is no
subject which has not been presented and criticized in all
possible ways by the press. But they will not, of course,
produce General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
in their favour; they do not have them. They wilt not
produce non-aligned declarations; they do not have them.
They will not produce reports of the Commission on
Human Rights; they do not have them, Such reports and
decisions of objective international organs are anathema to
Turkey; the Turks try to hush them up, They try to hide
them in well-locked drawers. 1 do not think that it would
be an exaggeration to say that a good part of the diplomatic
service of Turkey is laboriously busy covering up the crimes
committed by their country, which are exposed in intcrnational forums, books, true-story films and so on.

The message of Mr. Waldheim is crystal clear, When a
country does not comply with resolutions, action is
required by all Governments to bring about results.
13. We know that the tendency of the Security Council is
to avoid ordering enforcement measures. We know that in
its 33-year history such measures have been ordered by the
Council only very few times. We know that many other
countries have not managed to press effectively for measures. But I believe that the situation in Cyprus is so grave
and the attitude of Turkey so contemptuous and provocative that I am fully entitled to ask members of the Council
for the first time in the history of the question of Cyprus in
the United Nations to consider measures under Article 41
of the Charter.
14.. I should like it to be on record that the Cyprus
Government is asking the Security Council to consider
measures against Turkey under the aforementioned Article
41 on the basis of paragraph 8 of General Assembly
resolution 33/15. It is now the responsibility
of the
Council, not only towards Cyprus but also towards the
whole world and in accordance with its own specific
responsibilities under the Charter, to consider how to
entertain this well-founded request of the Cyprus Government.

9. So the substance of the Turkish crimes against Cyprus
was established by a 96.6 per cent majority vote last week,
It was also established that the Cyprus problem constituted
a serious threat to international peace and security.
Furthermore, the Assembly recommended that measures
against Turkey should be considered within a time-frame.

15. I turn now to another subject. During the last 48
hours, an attempt has been made to magnify certain
suggestions concerning the resumption of the intercommunal talks. These suggestions, which do not take the
form of proposals, were communicated late last week to the
Secretary-General, to my Government, to the Turkish
Government and to the Turkish Cypriots. The attempt has
been to create the impression that because of these
suggestions no decision regarding the implementation of its
resolutions is required by the Security Council. I consider
that I owe it to the members of the Council to explain and
to clarify what the true situation is.

10. In this connexion, I further remind members of the
Council that, by its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974. the Council endorsed General Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX), which urged, Mar alia, the speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed forces from the Republic of
Cyprus. That resolution has been reaffirmed nine times
since then, but, of course, Turkey nine times has turned a
deaf ear to the call of the Council. Thus, not only have
Assembly recommendat iuns been defied by Turkey: Council resolutions also have been defied,
11. Cyprus and its people have been patiently waiting for
a long time for the implementation of Security Council and
Gcncral Assembly resolutions: and, although Kipling in his
famous poem “If suggests that WPshould “wait and not be
tired by waiting”, I humbly submit that the Cypriots have

16. Tt has always been my Government’s position that we
welcome any initiatives, from whatever source, that are

2

aimed at a solution of the Cyprus problem through the
implementation of United Nations resolutions, as long as
those initiatives arc taken within the framework of the
United Nations. Flowever, I wish to make it equally clear
that such suggestions---which, if acceptccl, would bc in the
context of resumed intercommunal nCgotiilli0Ils. under the
auspices of the SWr~til~y-Gf2IlfZld,
as provided for in
paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 367 (1975) -.
concern only the internal aspect of the Cyprus problem,
nnmely, the constitutional and territorial issues ilItC1 not the
external aspect, namely, the question of aggression and
foreign interference. Thcsc aspects are dealt with in Council
resolutions. Consequently, there is no inconlpatibility
between the adoption by the Council of the draft resolution we are proposing /S/lZY7/,
OII the UIIC IliInd,
and the
resumption of the ~~terco~~~~~~~Inal
talks under resolution
367 (1975), on the other hand. aesides, it is neitllcr fair nor
correct that this body’s proceedings should hc impeded by
tile
etistence of something that is fill3 short of being an
acccptcd proposal, let alone a solution. If that were not the
case, then any country
might intcrferc with the functioning
of the Council by presenting idcns ilt any moment of their
political choice.

Light industry, agriculture, tourism and trade produce
sufficient revenue to secure an easy and enviable life for all
Cypriots in a unified economy. What is today a dormant
volcano in the eastern Mediterranean might have been, and
shouId be, an idyllic valley of peace. I wish to pledge my
country’s support for any efforts which will bring about the
necessary metamorphosis. But I wish to ask tnembers one
question Do they believe for a moment that an army of
occupation can ever contribute to the solution of such a
probIem? I know that the answer is in the negative,
because it has already been given, in the Assembly five days
ago, in very categorical language, If that is the case, may I
suggest that members should proceed in a decisive way and
adopt the necessary measures to bring about a firm and
final solution to this problem Get the foreign army of
occupation out of Cyprus and free its people from a
nightmare which they do not deserve.
19. Do not forget that volcanoes erupt from tinic to time.
Of course we know (hat we, the Cypriots, would be the
direct victims of such an eruption, but most certainly
mankind would take a very big step backwards. And what is
nccdcd very badly by the world today is steps forward.
20. I urge the Council
to act in a bold and dynamic way,
while a positive spirit of goodwill and conciliation exists
among our people
and before it changes decisively to
indignation and despair, because, as mcmbcrs know very
well, nothing in this world is more dangerous than to push
people to the point of desperation.

17. I submit that the appropriate time for the Security
Council to consider the question of Cyprus is now. In my
statement before the Council on 16 June 1078, I said:
“The Security Council is meeting today . . . in order lo
consider the operation of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus on the basis of the SccrctaryGeneral’s report of 3 1 May. TI1csc six-monthly meetings
tWe
in practice provitlcd tile OCCilSiOll,
ilpiu’t
from the
rellcwal
of the mandate 3s proposed by the SecrctaryGeneral and as required by tho circumstances, for a
review
of the situation with regard to the substantive
aspects of the Cyprus problcni in the light of the
developments sot out in the report. While this practice has
bCeI1 both
useful ilIlJ Icgitiniatc, certain misgivings h;\VC
been expressed by members of’ the (‘ouncil X. to the
appropriatcncss of making the renewal of the UNFICYI’
mandate dependent 011 the substantive aspects of the
Cyprus problem For my part, I see the validity of these
misgivings. I bclicve that thcsc substantive aspects of the
Cyprus problem, which is in its cssencc un intcrnationat
problem constituting :I threat to international t>catX and
security and thcreforc, under the Charter, fully within tllc
jurisdiction of the Council, should IX fully considered
and dealt with at ;I separate meeting of the Council.”
[2081st mctirig, para. 1 (I./

21 , The PKESIDENT (intspwtatim
Jiorrr Frcwdr):
now on the representative of Greece.

I call

22. Mr. I’AI’OULIAS (Greece): Mr. President, it gives me
great plcasure to extend to you my warmest and most
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. Your prestige and the
important role your country and you personally have
played in the affairs of the United Nations and in the
non-aligned movement, as well as your authority and you1
well-known diplomatic skills, give us great confidence that
this debate will bc concluded successfully. It is particularly
gratifying for my delegation that you represent a country
which is linked with my country by close ties of friendship.

i

23. I would also thank you and the members of the
for allowing me to participate in this discussion.

COUIUA

“24. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus,
Mr. Rolandis, has already, and in a very convincing manner,
given the Council the reasons which have prompted the
Government of Cyprus to have recourse to the Council.

It is in line with the above promise, which was at the time
welcomed by the members of {hc Council, that we have
asked for a meeting of the Council today so as to avoid the
discussion of matters of substance under conditions of
pressure when the Council meets for the renewal on 15
December of the mandate of the United Nations Force.

25 We feel that the action
taken by the Government of
Cyprus is not only fully justified by the facts but also
constitutes the appropriate follow-up of resolution 33/l 5.
which was adopted by the General Assembly by an
overwhelming majority Indeed, through its resolution, the
Assembly has once more expressed the frustration felt by
the international community at the tolal lack of progress
on Cyprus and the non.in~pIement~Ilio~~ of the United
Nations resolutions on the problem. This feeling of frustration is shared equally by the Secretary-(;cncral$ who, in his

1% The only objcctivc of the people of Cyprus is to be
hlle
to ho
in peace. WC are ;I sn~all country, and 0111
ambitions are not and cannot be greater than our size. We do
not want to play and we cannot play any role of substance
in international power politics. Our cou’ntry has suft’icicn t
resources to offer a very coInfort:lble lift (0 iLlI its citizens.
left

c

3

Mr. Zai’misalsosaid:

report on the work of the Organization, has not hesitated
to state: “The past year has been highly frustrating as far as
efforts to find a solution to the Cyprus problem are
concerned .“s in his report on the question of Cyprus dated
2 November 1978 the Secretary-General has also said:
“Resolutions 3212 (XXIX), 3395 (XXX), 31/12 and 32/15
have yet to be fully implemented.“6

“Settlers are still beingimplanted in the occupied areas
with the aim of changingtheir demographicstructure.“a
“Finally, the resolutionscall for the urgent resumption
of negotiations between the representativesof the two
communitieson the basisof comprehensiveand concrete
proposals, with the help of the good offices of the
Secretary-General,Thesenegotiationsmust aim at reaching an early settlementof the problemof Cyprus.“9

26. Consequently it is fully understandable that the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus deemed it necessary
again to place this serious problem before the Security
Council, a problem which, in the terms of resolution 33/15,
continues to constitute a serious threat to international
peace and security and which, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report,5 remains a threat to stability and good
relations in the eastern Mediterranean.

Yet, asMr. Zai‘miscontinued:
“Six rounds of intercommunaltalks brought no result.
We can now hardly seehow a seventh round could be
arrangedon the basisof proposalslike those which were
put forward by the Turkish side last April, for they
deviate totally from the spirit of the resolutionsof our
Organization. They also deviate from the guidelineslaid
down in February 1977 in talks between the late
PresidentMakariosand the leaderof the Turkish Cypriot
community in the presenceof our Secretary-General.“’ e

27. I will not enter into a lengthy elaboration of my
Government’s position on the Cyprus problem as that has
already been done repeatedly in the past and, more
recently, in a very clear and unequivocal manner by the
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Greece,
Mr. Zai’mis.

,

28. In view of the fact that the crucial question of the
non-implementation of the United Nations resolutions is
closely related to the present debate in the Council, 1 shall
confine myself-and
1 think this is amply adequate-to
quoting pertinent passages from Mr. Zai’mis’s speech in the
General Assembly on 9 November. MC said:

29. The representativeof Turkey, in his statement at the
samemeeting,referred11 to the part of my statementof 15
December 1977 in the Security Council which reads as
follows:

“The United Nations has adopted an impressive number
of resolutions on Cyprus. Since 1974”-when
Cyprus
became the victim of invasion-“the
General Assembly
has been called upon four times to express itself on this
problem, while the Security Council has dealt with the
matter 19 times. Resolution 3212 (XXIX) of the General
Assembly was even adopted unanimousIy.

“For our part, we wish againto stressthat, in order to
have a chance of success,these negotiations must be
carried out in a substantiveway on the basisof concrete
proposals covering all major aspectsof the problem,
including territorial and constitutional questions.I need
not remind the Council that the concreteproposalsmade
by the Greek Cypriot negotiator on those questionsare
still awaiting a reply from the other side.” [2054th
mee tilg, para. 72.1

“What do these resolutions recommend and what, if
anything, has been done in order to implement
them? . . .

30. While drawing particular attention to the obvious
meaningofthe last sentenceof that statement,I wish to say
today that I fully abide by that statement, for, I should
emphasize,we are still awaiting proposalsthat will make
possible the speedy resumption of the intercommunal
dialogue on a mutually agreed basis by the two
communities.

“The resolutions call upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus. One can hardly speak of the
territorial integrity of a country when approximately 40
per cent of the territory is under alien administration, a
fact which is incompatible with the concept of sovereignty.

31I On the other hand, aswe have repeatedIy declared,the
Greek Government has always given, and will continue to
give, its support to the Secretary-General’smissionof good
offices. I certainly shall not let this opportunity pass
without expressingonce more to Mr. Waldheim and his
collaborators our deep appreciation of and sincerethanks
for their untiring efforts in the interest of a peaceful
settlementof the Cyprusissue.

“The resolutions urge the speedy withdrawal of all
foreign armed forces and foreign personnel from the
Republic of Cyprus. Yet a strong foreign force, backed by
heavy armaments, is still occupying a sizeable part of the
island . . .
“The resolutions recommend that all refugees return to
their homes in safety, yet all the refugees continue to be
kept away from their ancestral homes. This constitutes
per se a gross violation of human rights.“7
5 Ihid., Tllirty-third
6 A/33/348,

32. Today the Security Council is seizedof the request of
the Cyprus Government to deal with the effective imple8 Ihid., para. 34.
9 Ibid., para.49.

Session, Supplcrncnt No. 1 np. 4.

para.

19.
Records of the General Assembly.

IOlbid.,
para.51..
I1 Ihid., para.106.

7 of]iCiQl
Thirty-third Session,
Plenary Meetings, 48th meeting,
paras.44-48.
4

mentation of United Nations resolutions on Cyprus. This is
absolutely consonant with General Assembly resolution
32 12 (XXIX),
endorsed by Security Council resolution
365 (1974). Further, paragraph 4 of resolution 367 (1975),
as well as all subsequent resolutions on the subject, calls
specifically for “the urgent and effective implementation of
aI1 parts and provisions”--and
1 wish to underline these
words-“of’Gencra1
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)“.
33. I am sure no one will dispute the fact that such
implementation is long overdue. That is precisely the spirit
and the meaning in which the General Assembly adopted

resolution 33/ 1.5 It is a call to all not to tolerate any longer
the violation of Unjted Nations resolutions.
34. We are confident that the Security Council. in which is
vcstcd the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, will in its wisdunl adopt a
resolution on the agenda item that will ensure the effective
implementation of its own decisions and of General
Assembly resolutions, in conformity with the will of the
overwhelming majority of Member States as reflected in
resoIution 33115.
The tneetirzg rose ot 5.45 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
deposit&es
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressex-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenEve.
ICAK

IIOJIYYZITb

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

HBAAHIill

OPl-AHM

PUBLICACIONES

3A4HZI

DE LAS

OWJiEAMHEHHMX

NACIONES

HAl&ElH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other currencies)

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

7&7000$-March

1980-2,200

i
