VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Expresses grave concern at the serious and farreaching consequences of the massive presence of refugees
in the country on its security, stability and development,
as reflected in the report of the inter-agency mission;
5. Also expresses grave concern at the shrinking resources available for refugee programmes in the Sudan
and the serious consequences ofthis situation on the country's ability to continue to act as host and provide assistance to refugees;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in following up on
the report of the inter-agency mission and furthering the
integration of developmental and refugee aid, to take steps
to ensure that continued joint inter-agency expert planning for the Sudan takes place, as suggested by the mission
in its report;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financia! and material assistance for the full implementation of ongoing projects in the areas affected by
the presence of refugees;
8. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the
international financia! institutions to provide the Government ofthe Sudan with the necessary resources for the implementation of development assistance projects in regions affected by the presence of refugees;
9. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential
services to the refugees in their settlements;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/140.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/106 of 14 December 1984
and 40/136 of 13 December 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, 129
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the drought
and the invasion of locusts and predators, which are compounding the already precarious food and health situation
in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons as a result of the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
who are victims of the war and of natural disasters,
l. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad concerning emergency assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;

129 A/41/531.

195

2. Reiterates its appeal to ali States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the efforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-second session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/141.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, in particular resolution
40/ 133 of 13 December 1985, as well as ali those of the
Economic and Social Council, on assistance to displaced
persons in Ethiopia,
Taking noteofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 130
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 90
Recognizing the increasing number of voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopia,
Deeply concerned at the situation of displaced persons
and voluntary returnees in the country, which has been
aggravated by the devastating effect of the prolonged
drought,
Aware of the heavy burden placed on the Government of
Ethiopia in caring for displaced persons and victims of
natural disasters, as well as for voluntary returnees and
refugees,
1. Commends the efforts made so far by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other organizations of the United Nations system, as well
as by the specialized agencies, in mobilizing humanitarian
assistance to assist the elforts of the Government of Ethiopta;
2. Appeals to Member States and to international organizations and voluntary agencies to render adequate
material, financia) and technical assistance to the Government and people of Ethiopia in their elforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced persons, voluntary
returnees and refugees in Ethiopia;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts in mobilizing
humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and
re~ettlement of voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopta:

11

º A/41/516.
