LQWTED NATIONS
SECURITY

COUNCPL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2575”

MEETING:

17 APRIL

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional agenda (WAgendal2575)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

,,,...,......................

1
1
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...................
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the !kcmvy-General
on the United Nations Interim
Lebanon (s/17093) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...*..*...................

Force in
I

WPV.2575 and Corr.1
..

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbo1 S/ , . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supphents of the @?Wl Recod of the &u&y Council The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
?be mohuiono of the Security Council, numbered in nccardanee with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohtions and Decidotts of the
Sect&y Cuuncti The new system, which has been applied ntroactivcly to resolutions
adopted before I January 1%5, became fully operative on that date.

2575th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 17 April 1985, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Javier ARIAS STELLA

(Peru).

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
porn Spmish):
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for the period from 10 October 1984 to 11 April 1985 [s/17093]. Members of the
Council have also received document s/17100, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in Council
consultations. I wish to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/17062, which contains the text
of a letter dated 27 March from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General, and S/17067, which contains the text of a letter dated 29 March from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
ProvisIonal agenda (S/Ageada/2575)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (s/170931

4. I understand that the Council is prepared to proceed
to vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless 1 hear any
objection I shall now put it to the vote.

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

A vote was taken bv show of hands.

Express&n of thanks to the rettrtngbestdent

In fivow: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): As
this is the first meeting of the Security Council for the
month of April, I should like first to pay tribute on behalf
of the Council to Mr. Blaise Rabetafika, representative of
Madagascar and President of the Council for the month of
March, for the wisdom and great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the business of the Council last
month. I am sure I express the feelings of all members of
the Council in sincerely thanking Mr. Rabetzdika for his
work as President.

Again&

Abstuinbtg: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
l’lte draft resolution was adopted by 13 vutes to none, with
2 abstentions iresolution 5661 (198511.

Adoptkm of the age&
The age&

None.

5. Mr. WOOLCOTT
(Australia): Mr. President, since
this is the first meeting of the Council in April, it gives me
great pleasure. as the representative of a fellow Pacific*an
country, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency. I am confident that you will guide our
deliberations with your well-known skill. Equally as the
representative of an Indian-Ocean country, I salute the
very great skill with which the representative of Madagascar guided the Council during the month of March.

was adopted.

llu?tiItmtIonIrltheMldflIeEastl
ReprtofdEsecretaly.GeneraIontheU~Nadoas
lntetim Forcein Labaaoa(s/17093)
2. The PRESIDENT
(htterpretotiort ftonr S’sh):
I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of L&non
in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion without the
right IO vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

6. My delegation has voted in favour of the draft resolution just before the Council. Australia has been a strong
supporter of the peace-keeping role of the United
Nations. It has been a generous and willing contributor of
funds for UNIFIL operations. That support will continue.
7. --_
We recognize the dangers and difii,c;uii~
tin&i
which UNIFIL operates. These difftculties have been outlined clearly in the last report of the Secretary-General

AI the invitation of the PleJldent, Mr. Fakhoury (L.&tnon) took a place at the Council table.
I

and in the letter to hint from
tries [.%//7&V,
unn6~J.

the troop-contributing

coun-

and security, in Lebanon
south of the Iitani
River aftcl
the Israeli withdrawal
wo~rld bc itI1 ortlcrly
takeover
from
the Israeli forces. with the ultimutc
aim of rchtoring
the
complctc
authority
of thr I .cbanchc (iovcrnmcut
aid army
in that arca. As is strcshcd by thr Sccrct;lr~-<icllcr;rl.
this
rcquircs
sonic
form
of conaultati\c
~I’E~~III~WI
WICI
[Jnitcd
Nations
auspices, and Denmark
urgch both prtics
to rcsumc talka as ~,WIII as poshiblc in order to achicvc this
purpose.

H. Wc dcplorc
all acts of violcncc
iii Lcbanoi~.
cspccidly
thohc which
make dill’icult
the cffcctivc
operation
of I~NII:ll.
;IIKI
which cndangcr
civilian
lives.
9. The resolution
which the Council
has just adopted
reitcratcs
that lJNII:IL
should fully implement
its mandate
as delined
in the resolutions
of the Council.

17. My Govcrnmcnt
belicvcs
that IJNIFIL
shot~ld hc
assigned
important
tasks in the process.
taking
into
account the legitimate
security interests of all parties concerned and thus linally allowing
the Force to play the role
originally
envisaged
for it in Council resolutions
425 ( 1978)
and 426 (1978).

IO.
It remains
Australia’s
hoF
that the parties
concerned can create the conditions
necessary
for the eftbctive
operation
of UNIFIL.
In this context,
WC look forward
to
Israel’s complete
withdrawal
from Lebanon
and the return
of the sovereignty
of the Lebanese
Government
over its
territory,
both
of which
Australia
holds as important
objectives.

18. In this connection,
it should bc borne in mind that
even under the most adverse circumstances
the Force has
in the past amply demonstrated
its ability to rcducc considerably violence: in the area of opcrution
and even to bring
complete
quiet to the area when all partics supported
and
co-operated
with it.

I I. Clearly,
in the months ahcad the Council
will need to
consider
what future role may be open to UNIFIL.
This is
particularly
important
given the present critical
phase in
IJNIFIL’s
operations.
It will be necessary
for the Council
to consider
in a timely
manner
how it will address the
important
issues involved.
The
Australian
delegation
stands ready to contribute
constructively
to this work.

thus fully understands
and shares IIIC posi19. Denmark
tion and concerns about the future role of IJNIHI.
\\hiuh
the troop<ontributing
countries
expressed
in their Icttcr OI
28 March
[ibid.].
We join in their urgent call II~W~ the
Governments
of Israel and Lebanon
to meet the rcquircmcnts necessary
to ensure security lbr all conccrncd
in the
area in the wake of the complete
lsracli withdrawal.

It.
We note that the Secretary-General
has foreshadowed
the need for some new consultations
between
the
two parties to consider
UNIFIL’s
future role as the Israeli
forces withdraw
from southern
Lebanon.
Australia
would
support
any such co-operation
with the Secretary-General
and would hope that the two countries
concerned
would
agree to participate
in such discussions.

20.
We owe it to the troop-contributing
Governments,
and indeed to the very concept of United
Nations
peacckeeping
forces, to secure at least the minimum
conditions
from the elrective
future work of UNIFIL
as outlined
by
the Secretary-General
in his report.

13. Mr. HERRING
(Denmark):
First of all. I should
like to congratulate
you, Sir. on your assumption
of the
presidency
of the Council
for the month
of April.
It has
just bexxi demonstrated
that the Council
is able to do constructive
work
under your wise guidance.
I also want to
pay tribute to the representative
of Madagaascar.
Mr. Rabetaftka.
for the gentle, good-humoured
and extremely
skilful way in which he guided the work of the Council
during
the busy month
of March.

We interpret
the resolution
just adopted
by the Coun21.
cil as endorsing
further
action by the Secretary-General
along the lines described
in his report.
Like him, we do not
believe that it is in the interest of any of those conccrncd
to
allow a situation
to arise in which violence
is likely to
continue
and escalate and in which UNIFIL
will tind itscll
once again in a position
of embarrassment,
inelt’ectivencss
and even danger.

14. It is indeed gratifying
to note that our decision
today
to prolong
the mandate
of UNIFIL
coincides
with the
process finally under way of Israeli withdrawal
from Lebanon. Thus the moment
seems appropriate
for reflection
on
the role of UNIFIL
in this process and in the wake of the
complete
withdrawal
of the Israeli forces, to which the
Government
of Israel has committed
itself.

22.
Finally,
I should like to pay tribute to General
Calla&an.
his stalT, the ofticers and the men of UNIFII.
and
the military
observers
of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO)
for their continued
dedication to their
task and courage
in extremely
diflicult
circumstances,
as well as to the Secretary-General
and the
Secretariat
for their untiring
eli’orts in oromotinn
peace in
Lebanon.

15. Developments
in southern
Lebanon
during
the last
months
have clearly
demonstrated
that violence
breeds
violence.
The threat or use of force will not bring genuine
peace and stability
to the area. On the contrary,
it will only
engender
counteraction,
which
is bound
to lead to a
further
deterioration
of the situation.
This cannot be in the
interest of any of the parties concerned.

23.
Sir John THOMSON
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. Prcsident, may I offer congratulations
to Peru. It is a mark 01
your
country’s
international
achievements
and of the
wealth
of talent in Peru that two Peruvians
should
bc
sitting together
at the head of this horscshtr
table today.
We know your own talents and your own achicvcmcnts.
Sir. and we wclcomc
you to the presidency.

16. In his latest report on IJNIFIL
the Sccrctary-Cicncral
rightly
points out that the best means of achieving
peace
2

24. The month of March wus a particularly arduous one,
and this makes us all the more grateful to our colleague ol
Madngascar
for the patient, skilful and etl’cctive way in
which he guided our activities in that month.

29. At the same time, steps will need to be taken to
ensure that UNIFIL is able to carry out safely and etfiytively the role entrusted to it. We have the utmost sympathy for the concerns of the troop contributors as
expressed in their letter of 28 March. All concerned, particularly the Lebanese and lsracli authorities and the population of the area, have a duty to ensure UNIFIL’s ell’ective
operation. An important step towards achieving this
would be, as the Secretary-General has suggested, to arrive
at a clear understanding that no armed military or paramilitary personnel of any kind other than UNIFIL and the
Lebanese army should be allowed to operate in UNIFIL’s
area and that all parties and elements should give UNIFIL
their explicit support and co-operation.

25. My dclcgation set out the British Government’s
views on the situation in southern Lebanon when the
Council met to consider the matter last mongh [2570/11
nfee@l. These views have not changed. Regrettably, since
that time there has been no improvement in the situation.
The withdrawal of Israeli forces has continued, but it has
been accompanied by a further escalation of violence and
retaliation which has solved nothing and only added to the
sult’erings of the civilian population. Outsiders have been
sucked in too. Several of my count1 ymen have been kidnapped. One of them, Mr. Alec Collett. who was working
for the United Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in Lebanon, is still being
held. I appeal in this forum for his release.

30. My Government is fully aware of the difficulties in the
way of achieving a diplomatic solution on these lines. The
situation is both complex and inflamed by the escalating
violence, Today’s events in Lebanon serve to underline
these difficulties. But in our view they only strengthen the
need for a diplomatic solution in southern Lebanon. The
restoration of peace, security and normality there will be of
benetit to the whole of Lebanon. The Secretary-General
must continue his efforts in pursuance of the resolution just
adopted, and the Governments concerned must give him
their full co-operation. Delay will only make matters worse.

26. The overriding need now in southern Lebanon is for
the cessation of violence on all sides. The first essential
towards achieving this is the continuation and completion
of the long-overdue withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all
Lebanese territory. In the mean time, until its forces have
withdrawn south of the border, Israel should scrupulously
observe both the letter and the spirit of the Geneva conventions. A continuation of its “iron Iist” policy will serve only
to fan the flames of violence and make it more difficult to
achieve the security which it seeks for northern Israel.

31. In the mean time, we are continuing to provide UNIFIL with substantial help over logistics and have given our
support to the renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate for a further
six months. In doing so, we note that the SecretaryGeneral has left open the possibility of reporting again to
the Council in the near future. We believe that this is right
and that the Council should be prepared during the next
six months to give further thought to UNIFILS mandate
as soou as there is an opportunity for making progress.
For the time being, the Force can continue to play a help
ful role in the area while a way is sought for it to fulfil its
original mandate. It is a troubled and difficult role to ask
of the Force and the troop-contributing
Governments
They richly deserve the continuing gratitude and support
of the international community, especiaily since, as the
Secretary-General has once again been obliged to point
out, the Organization is increasingly far behind in their
reimbunement.
We look to the Israeli and Lebanese
authorities to ensure that the major financial and political
contribution which most of the international community is
making is keeping UNIFIL in place is not wasted.

27. The Secretary-General has given us his considered
views of the present situation in the observations contained
in his latest report. My Government fully supports the
efforts hc has been making and the views and recommendations contained in the report. We had hoped that by this
time agreement might have been reached on havirs UNIFIL deploy to the international border in fulfilment of its
original mandate. We continue to believe with the
Secretary-General that the Council’s objectives must be to
secure a speedy, orderly and complete withdrawal of
Israeli forces, to establish international peace and security
in the area and to restore effective Lebanese authority and
sovereignty up to the internationally recognized border.
These words should be given their full and precise meaning. Thus they exclude completely any residr*nl Israeli presence or some kind of “security zone” controlled by groups
unauthorized by the Lebanese Government.
28. The Secretary-General has said that he believes the
best means of achieving these objectives would be an
orderly take-over from the withdrawing Israeli forces by
UNIFIL together with units of the Lebanese army. We
agree. We share his concern that unless some orderly way
is iound to achieve this. the situation is iikeiy io coniinue
to deteriorate to the grave disadvantage of all concerned.
Some consultative mechanism is therefore essential to the
process. as the Secretary-General has pointed out. We welcome the Secretary-General’s offer to convoke a new conference of Israeli and Lebanese military representatives for
this purpose, We urge both sides to accept this offer and to
find means of co-operating
IO reduce the possibility

on security
in the border
of further
violence.

32. In closing. I should like once again to pay a sincere
tribute to General Callaghan and all the personnel of UNIFIL and UNTSO for the courage and skill which they
continue to bring to their task. Their dedication is an
example to us all. We for our part must now work. as I
have jusi descri’bed. for iilr psfui
suiiiiiuii iiiai wiii siioiv
that their efforts have not been in vain.
33.

Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics)
(inretpr~rurion from RI&U@: First, I congratulate you. Sir. on your assumption of the post of President
of the Council
and at the same time express the conviction
that. under your highly enlightened
guidance.
the Council
will be able to cope successfully
with the very responsible

area

3

tasks which are now before it. Like the repre cntative ot
Australia, I can welcome you also as the represcntativc of
a country whose shores, like those of the Soviet Union, are
on the Pacific. We wish you every success.

roristic war in the southern part of Lebanon against the
local civilian population, one which they have ollicially
dubbed “the iron-fist policy”. At the same time, the Israelis have systematically flouted the most elementary norms
of international law and the fundamental provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949’. An cxamplc
of this is the recent decision taken by the occupying
authorities that more than 1,100 prisoners hc transfcrrcd
from Ansar concentration camp to Israeli territory, which
runs directly counter to aruclcs 49 and 76 of thr aforcmcntioned Convention.

34 I should like to take this opportunity also to express
our profound gratitude to the representative of Madagascar, Mr. Rabetafika, for the exemplary way in which he
performed the timctions of President of the Council during
the month of March. That period turned out to be an
extremely heavy one for all members of the Council, but of
course the main burden fell squarely on the President’s
shoulders.

40. We must focus separately on the Israeli occupiers’
arrogant attitude towards UNIFIL personnel. WC fully
share the concern voiced on this score by the SccretaryGeneral and those States which have supplied contingents
to UNIFIL. As the report makes abundantly clear, thcrc
have been frequent instances when forces belonging to
Israel, which is a Member of the United Nations, and their
henchmen opened fire on UNIFIL personnel. Obstacles
continue to be placed in the way of the normal functioning
of United Nations forces, making it impossible for them to
fulfil the tasks entrusted to them by the Security Council.

35. Last month marked seven years since UNIFIL was
established. This is the seventeenth time now that the
Council has had to extend that Force’s mandate for a
further period of six months. ‘ihese figures in themselves
indicate quite eloquently that the presence of the interim
forces in Lebanon has beccme a oiotracted one.
36. The reasons for such a situation are well known. After
the invasion of i&anon in March 1978, Israel, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, transferred the regions bordering on southern Lebanon to its puppets among the local
mercenaries and in that way virtually refused to leave Lebanon. Then, as a result of further acts of aggression by Israe:
in June 1982. the United Nations forces found themselves
far behind the occupying forces. Since then, Tel Aviv has
been systematically and stubbornly refusingtocarryout
the
clear-cut demands of the Council and the entire intemational community for the unconditional withdrawal of its
troops from all Lebanese territory. In the light of that fact,it
is Israel’s fault that to this day UNIFIL has no opportunity
to perform the functions entrusted to it-the main one
being to monitor the withdrawal of the aggressor’s forces
behind the international frontier. This fact is quite properly
underlined in the report of the Secretary-General which is
now before the Council.

41. The Soviet delegation emphasizes once again that it is
the bounden duty of the Council to ensure respect for the
United Nations flag and for UNIFIL. The Council should
brook no intervention in its activities, as it has directly
insisted in past decisions, particularly in resolution 523
(1982). We think it would also be desirable for the
Sefretary-General to continue his practice of informing the
Council of any ir.stances when the forces arc not in a
position to perform their functions.
42. With reference to the situation in the southern part
Lebanon, we cannot fail to advert to the fact that the
lawless activities of the fsraeli authorities in that part of the
world have twice-in September 1984 and March 1985-been considered in the Council. In both instances the discussion led to an identical outcome: a veto cast by the
United States against the Lebanese draft rcolutions
[ s/f6732 und S/IXBXIJ, which asked that Israel merely act
in accordance with the decisions of the Council and that it
cease its terrorism against the civilian population in the
occupied areas of Lebanon. That position taken by the
United States has been assessed, quite rightly. not only as a
political cover for its junior partner in the strategic alliance
but also as a direct encouragement of that patiner to
pursue its inhuman policy towards Lebanon.

37. For almost three years now, Israel has continued to
hold sway on Lebanese soil, Virtually isolating the southern part of tebanon, the oc.cu+s have turned it into a
realm of violence, and daily they perpetrate new crimes
there. Shooting, mass searches, arrests, demolition of
houses, collective punishment and derisive treatment of the
Arab population are the characteristic signature of those
who only recently, without a hint of embarrassment,
affhmed that they had brought 40 years of peace to the
people of Lebanon.
38. Israeli -ion
has been particularly stepped up in
recent months after the initiation of the forced relocation of
the aggressor’s forces under the pressure of the liberation
struggie t-hat has been unieashed by the Lebanese patriots.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, in the
period from February to the beginning of April of this year
alone the occupiers carried out 32 major punitive operations against villages in the southern part of Lebanon as a
result of which large segments of the population suffered

43. The Soviet Union is firm in condemning the ongoing
Israeli a-ion
in Lebanon and reaffirms its solidarity
with the people of that country who are struggling for their
legitimate rights against the Israeli occupation.
44. The key to a sol*ltion of the Lebanese problem has
been clearly set forth in Council resolutions SOB(1982) and
509 (1982). the latter demanding the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from the entire territory of Lebanon. Those resolutions must be acted npon. It
is essential to guarantee respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the State of Lebanon and to put an

39. We are therefore completely justified in stating that
the Israeli military has unleashed nothing less than a ter4

end to the mistreatment of the civilian population, inciuding the Palestinian refugees in the camps. The withdrawal
of Israeli forces to the internationally rccognized boundaries of Lebanon would, of course, also create conditions
that would cnahle UNIFIL linally to have an opportunity
properly to pcrlorm the functions entrusted to it.
45. In the light of the foregoing and of the request of the
Government of Lebanon, the Soviet delegation has
decided not to object to the renewal of the UNIFIL mandate for a further term. At the same time. we should like to
reiterate and reconfirm our fundamental position with
regard to that Force, including the method by which it is
financed. It is our understanding that, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report, should any fresh trends emerge
as the situation develops, he will submit a further report to
the Council, which would then, if necessary, meet again to
take any necessary decisions.
46. Mr. KEMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation from
French): It is my pleasure to jcin my colleagues in paying a
tribute to you, Sir, and to wish you a presidency free from
any untoward crises. Your first remarks have amply
shown that you possess the necessary experience and skills
for your task, and, like my colleagues, I am certain that the
Council is in good hands this month. Let me also take this
opportunity to say that relations between my country and
yours are warm and that they have been so for many long
years. I am particularly gratified, therefow. to express my
esteem to you.
47. I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
BIaise Rabetafika, who in difftcult circumstances gave
proof both of great human qualities and of diplomatic
skills-to which I would add the fact that he never lost his
good humour, an element I deem extremely important to
the good work of the Council, whatever the problem we
may be considering.
48. Once again, through its vote in favour of the renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL, France has expressed its support for the Force’s activities and role. Indeed, my country
considers that, in spite of the many obstacles, both de&to
and dpjure, placed in the way of its activities, the effect of
IJNIFIL has been a positive one. No one can challenge the
fact that despite the difficulties it has encountered on many
sides that have particularly affected-as all here knowthe French contingent, UNIFIL has been able to limit the
scope of the incidents that have occurred within its zone of
operation. I should like to take the opportunity provided
by today’s meeting to pay a special tribute to all the
members of UNIFIL under the command of General Callaghan, to whom I extend a warm greeting here today. In
._ MC
.. I-Ulbc
c
._ _ as VJO,,
._- ii3
__ j-Jo&:e. lx pit in a
any WC‘IL,
,,wst.
position fully to carry out its mandate as set forth in resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
49. As members of the Council know. France has spared
no efforts to make its presence in the UNIFIL count and
to ensure that the troop strength of the French contingent
continues at the high level that has hitherto been maintained. In our view, however, we must constantly see to it

that UNIFIL plays the most useful role possible in the
interests of Lebanon and of the civilian populations of thal
region, which continue to endure such harsh trials.
50. In voting in favour of the renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate, France has wished once again to demonstrate its
commitment to the unity, territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon. However, my country would express
the strong wish that during this new six-month period the
Secretary-General, whose report has received our full
attention, will continue to an even greater degree to study
and, if need be, to foster all necessary measures to ensure
the full discharge of UNIFIL’s mandate.
51. Mr. SCHIFTER (United States of America): I too
want to join our colleagues in extending congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the oRice of Resident of
the Council for this month. Indeed, I would like to say that
1 associate myself with the remarks made by the representative of the United Kingdom concerning Peru’s representation at this table. I would also like to extend our thanks
to Mr. Rabetafika for the truly outstanding manlier in
which he conducted the Council’s proceedings during the
month of March.
52. The United States has voted in favour of extending
the mandate of UNIFIL because we believe that UNIFIL
can help create stable conditions in southern Lebanon in
the months ahead. We are of the view, however, that such
a contribution to stability can be made only if all the parties involved agree to co-operate in UNIFIL’S mission. It
is for that reason that we support most strongly the
Secretary-General’s suggestion that a consultative mechanism be created under United Nations auspices-such as
perhaps renewal of the Naqoura talks-whose purpose it
would be to effect the needed cooperation of the parties so
that constructive results can indeed be attained.
53. As the Secretary-General has noted, UNIFIL was
able in the early years of its operations to bring about a
significant reduction of violence in its zone of operation. In
doing so, it served valiantly in dangerous and volatile circumstances. More recently, UNIFIL has provided protection and humanitarian assistance to the residents of the
area of its operation, serving as a focus of civil order
respected by the population and thus continuing to contribute to efforts to achieve stability in the area. However,
as many parties, most particularly the troop contributors,
have pointed out, UNIFIL has in recent years faced
increasingly anomalous conditions, which have pointed up
the fact that the Force’s present restricted role is both
inappropriate and unsatisfactory.
-.
34. This appraisai of present conditions ieads us to ihe
conclusion that a clarifmtion
of UNIFIL’s role, agreed
upon by the parties concerned, must be achieved soon to
adapt to a situation which will arise as Israel completes its
withdrawal.
Neither the troop contributors,
nor the
Secretary-General, nor the Council, can be expected to
continue supporting the mission of the Force unless such a
clarilication is agreed upon in the months ahead. The present extension of the mandate. for which we vo!ed because

of our strong commitment to UNIFIL’s potential role in
Lebanese peace-keeping, could well be the last interim
extension that the international community would bc prepared to support.

among the ranks of those forces. as well as the increasing
security risks with which they are confronted; it conscquently calls for the full co-operation of all parties concerned and for the cessation of threats and acts of violence,
from whatever source. The civilian population of Lebanon
also has sul%cred more than can bc justified in any
circumstances.

55. As the Secretary-General stated in his report, we ah
owe to the cause of peace and stability, the troop contributors and the United Nations itself, our best efforts to
ensure that UNIFIL’s present highly unsatisfactory situation does not continue. We therefore urge all parties to
redouble efforts during the coming mandate period to
achieve an agreed role for UNIFIL, a role that utilizes its
potential and assigns to it an important task in the continuing international effort to restore Lebanese sovereignty
and peaceful conditions in southern Lebanon.

62. My Government wishes at this time to express its
appreciation
to those countries which have provided
troops to UNIFIL. We regard their contribution as a Vangible commitment to uphold the ideals and principles ot
the Char*er of the United Nations, WC wish also to compliment the Secretary-General on his succinct report on
UNIFIL. More important, we wish to commend his continuing efforts to obtain the agreement of the parties
involved in order to ensure the smooth functioning of
UNIFIL in southern Lebanon.

56. As to the comments offered by our colleague from
the Soviet Union concerning the votes cast by the United
States on the two draft resolutions to which he referred, let
me say simply that our reasons for voting as we did were
fully explained at the time these votes were cast. We regret
that the Soviet Union considered it necessary to use this
occasion to direct criticisms at us once again. We do not
believe that the comments require any further elaboration
on our part.

63, The Government of Trinidad and Tobago reiterates
its support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence of Lebanon, and supports the extension of
the mandate of UNIFIL which expires on 19 April 1985,
for a further period of six months. Let me take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to the patience, courage and
dedication of the olllcers, men and staff of the Force, who
serve in the most taxing and complex conditions. Such
commitment demands, on our part, nothing but our
unstinting support. They are prepared to make the
supreme sacrifice; we can do no less than to support them
in all matters and in every manner we can.

57. Mr. ALLEYNE (Trinidad and Tobago): It gives me
great pleasure to convey my congratulations to you, Sir,
on your accession to the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. Given your well-known abilities, wc look
forward to a continued period of wise and efficient guidance under your presidency.

64. The PRESIDENT (Inrerprer&on/rom
SpOnish): The
next speaker is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I
now call.

58. May I also take this opportunity to convey to your
predecessor, the representative of Madagascar, our appreciation for the skilful and enicient manner in which he
conducted the business of the Council during the month of
March.

65. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) (inrerprerorion /roWI
Arabic): Let me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
assure you of our confidence in your ability and long
diplomatic experience, which guarantee that the work of
the Council will be well guided.

59. My Government ftrmly believes that the presence of
UNIFIL in southern Lebanon can be an essential factor of
stability in the region, contributing to the maintenance of
L.&anon’s territorial sovereignty and integrity and to its
political independence; it can also help to ensure the return
of effective State authority in the area. However, in order
that the peace-keeping operation of the Force may attain
the objectives of its original mandate as laid down in rese
lution 425 (1978). certain conditions must be fulfilled.

66. I wish also to thank your predecessor, Mr. Blaise
Rabetalika, representative of Madagascar, for his activities
and endeavours, and for the ability and statesmanship he
displayed during his term as President of the Council last
month.

60. First of all, the terms of the relevant resolution must
be fully implemented. In this regard, we have welcomed
the decisions of the Government of Israel to withdraw all
its forces from Lebanon. Their withdrawal to the interna.: ---,,.. 1n~gr8hhu
_^^^^ L-3 UVLUCGS
L--A-- a:- 0h1
-- -8mu
_----.:-1 yvmxpwtr
----- .: .- iu
c,vrmo,,J
peace, We have noted that the initial steps taken by the
Government of Israel to translate this decision into reality
are already in force.

67. Five newly elected members have joined the Council
this year, and I wish to extend my sincere congratulations
to the representatives of Autralia, Denmark. Madagascar,
Thailand and Trinidad and Tobago. I wish them success in
ihrll i&s arKi iuuk forward io ihrir cwperaiion
wiih
colleagues on the Council towards the attainment of the
objectives for which it was established. I ati confident that
they will discharge the great responsibility associated with
membership of the Council.

61. Next, the security of all the members of the peacekeeping forces and of all United Nations personnel operating in the area must be safeguarded. My Governmerlc
views with concern the high number of casualties suffered

68. After witnessing the Council adopt the draft resolution to renew the mandate of UNlFIL for six months and
hearing the statements of some members of the Council. I
6

must express the thanks of the Lcbancsc Government and
the Lcbancsc dclcgation for the Council’s responsivcncss
to Lebanon’s request and the recommendation
of the
Secretary-General contained in his report. We extend
thanks and appreciation to him for the report, which in
our view portrays a painful reality and retlects his concern
and that of the troop-contributing
countries about the
future status of the Force.
69. That concern is the inevitable result of Israel’s disruption of the Naqoura talks and its insistence on refusing to
implement Council decisions calling for it to withdraw
fully from Lebanese territories and enable UNIFIL to
deploy along the international borders, making southern
Lebanon a zone of security and peace. Israel’s insistence
on establishing a security belt in Lebanese territory,
excluding UNIFIL and the Lebanese army, is a llagrant
deliance of the Council, a deliberate flouting of its resolutions, a cynical disregard for the international Organizalion and its forces and an undermining of the endeavours
of the Secretary-General and his assistants-especially the
efforts made by the Under-Secretary-General
for Special
Political Affairs, Mr. Brian Urquhart. and Mr. JeanClaude Aim&, on the instructions of the Secretary-General.
70. In this regard, I should like to express to Mr. Urquhart the appreciation of the Lebanese Government for his
endeavours and its confidence in him, in the hope that
those endeavours will continue with a view to attaining the
full implementation of the resolutions of the Council.
71. 1 must also express the thanks and appreciation of
the Government of Lebanon to the troop-contributing
countries and to the Commander of the Force, General
Callaghan. its ollicers. soldiers and staff. The demeanour
and actions of the Force and the fact that it has withstood,
under difficult circumstances, various pressures and practices whose source is well known to the Council deserve a
generous tribute. The Secretary-General devoted part of
his report to those pressures and practices and enumerated
acts of aggression against some UNIFIL units by the
Israeli army during the past six months. He also enumerated some Israeli prac! -, against Lebanese cities and villages, and the arbitrao . measures taken against Lebanese
civilians.
72. We regard the Council’s adoption of the draft resolution as further aflirmation of its commitment to its previous resolutions and its insistence on implementing them
in order to enable UNIFIL to discharge its assigned tasks
of securing full Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territe
ries. assisting the Lebanese State to exercise its sovereignty
anti auihuriiy over aii tbdncx
irrriiui-y u)i iu iiir: ;iiirl ,)ationally recognised borders and transforming the south
into a zone of peace and security.
73.

In my letter of 27 March this year to the SccretaryGeneral
[S/1706Zj,
I defined
Lebanon’s
position
with
regard
to UNIFIL
and Lebanon’s
understanding
of the
role it is required
to play. That position
and understanding
are consistent
with the Secretary-General’s
report.
on the

one hand, and, on the other harm, with the letter dated 28
March to the Secretary-General from the rcpresentativcs
of the troopcontributing
countries [S/17067. annex].
74. First, the IJNIFIL area of deployment extends from
the Litani River southward as 18; as the internationally
recognizd boundaries of Lebanon. Secondly, the whole of
this region should be under the exclusive authority of the
Lebanese army, assisted in Its task solely by the United
Nations Force, since Lebanon does not accept any role for
any military force which is not a legal force. Thirdly. Lcbanon is in no circumstance prepared tc accept the creation
of what are known as buffer zones or of security belts of
any kind inside its territory, something that by implication
has been rejected by all the resolutions of the Council that
provided for the withdrawal of all Israeli forces beyond the
internationally recognized borders of Lebanon. Fourthly,
the area of deulovment of UNIFIL should not become a
disengagement z&e between illegal armed forces within
Lebanese territory. Fifthly. UNIFlL’s posts and area of
deployment will be determined by agreement with the Irbanese Government alone.
75. While my Government is convinced that UNIFII.%
presence is an essential and basic factor for stability in
southern Lebanon, it is also convinced that the provision
of a minimum degree of security for the work of the Force
is also basic and necessary. Therefore, Lebanon is still
ready to co-operate with the Security Council, the Secretariat and UNIFIL to the greatest extent within the scope of
its understanding of the ?titurc :ole of the Force and in
accordance with its position wit:] regard to the Force,
which is fully in support
of the provisions of the Council’s
resolutions.
76. Israel, which has consistently refused to assign any
role to UNIFIL. must abide by those resolutions to allow
UNIFIL to undertake the tdsks man&ted tc, it.
77. The PRESIDENT
(imerprerarlon from Sputdsh): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Israel in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice. I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
II

WI

60 decided.

78. The PRESIDENT
(imerprerorion from Spcmish): 1
invite the representative of Israel to take a place at the
Council
table and to make his statement.
79.

Mr. NETANYAHU

(Israel): I should like first to

congratulate
you. Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council
for this month.
We have seen your
wise counsel here. and we have confidence
in your stewardship. I should
like also IO congratulate
the representative
of Madagascar
for the successful
completion
of last
month’s
prcsidenq.

X0. My ~iovc‘rnnicnt
has made its policy on I.cbanon
cluitc &ilV
in various
SliWNlCilts.
including
those
that I
have madc hcrc. I do uot WUIII IO ttikc up the Council’s
time OII this; I went II> make a few hricfpoints
on Lebanon
that
~rti\lll
lo todiiy’s
discussion
and then to respond
to
one of the swakcrs
in particular.
81.
The first point is this. We welcome the Secretary<icncral’s
call lo reconvene
a forum of consultations.
We
were not the ones who broke the talks in Naqoura.
We
sufttired,
1 would .say, great pains of frustration
because WC
were unable to lind a serious interlocutor
i;, Naqoura.
I am
sure I represent
the feeling of my Government
when I say
tlrat we arc delighted
to hear :5’: expression
of a new willingness
on the part of the Lebanese
to reconvene
at
Naqoura,
and we will bc very happy
to return to those
talks or to another
thrum
to discuss ways of establishing
peace and tranquillity
in the south of Lebanon.
82.
The second point is this. What is the problem
we arc
tilting’!
We arc facing the problem
of how to stop crossborder
attacks once Israel completes
its withdrawal.
The
reprcsentativc
of Lebanon
has talked about the the Lebanese army, as have others here. Well, which army are we
talking
about?
Is it the army
that is regrettably
unable
today to keep the peace in Beirut, where dozens of people
are being slaughtered,
or in Burj Al-Barajneh,
or in Sidon?
This is an army that cannot keep peace in its own backyard, and it is being asked to police a very large area. for
which, to be realistic,
we believe it is not equipped.
That is
my second observation,
and I make it, I must say, with
regret.
83.
The third point relates to the suggestion
that UNIFIL fuliil this function.
I think
there is a confusion-a
confusion
in good faith-among
some of the rcpresentatives on the difference
between
peace-keeping
and peaceenforcing.
The task of policing
a border
strip against the
infiltration
of terrorists,
against rocketing
and shelling,
is
not merely
a peace-keeping
function;
it is a peaccenforcing
function,
which an international
force, by its
very nature and inherent
structure.
is not organizcd
to
carry out. Having
spoken with quite a few of the representatives of the troop-contributing
countries,
I know there is
growing
recognition
that that is the ca$e here,
84.
This leads to my fourth point. namely,
that the security of northern
Israel and the prevention
of terrorist
attacks
is something
that Israel does not expect others to
take upon
them.ulvcs.
The Israel Defence
Forces
will
assume that function
from our own lines, from our side 01
the borders.
And however
difficult
a task that may be. it
will not be assisted by the introduction
of forces that are
really unsuited
or unable to perform
that function.
~5.
from

My next remarks
relate
the Sobiet reprLwntative.

to the words we heard here
He chose to lecture US OE

the evils of occupation.
He spoke or puppets
and local
mercenaries,
of a realm of violence
imposed
on the occupied country,
of shootings
and muss searches. of collective
punishment,
of rcprcssion.
of a terroristic
war against the
civilian
populiition.
I lind this very encouraging.
Ill0 tone
was condemnatory.
and I find that encouraging.
I would
like to ask if this indicates
a change of heart or merely a
scnsc of guilt.
86.
<In I3 March
IYXS. the llnited
Nations
Commission
on Human
Rights approved
the report’
of its Special Rapportcur,
Felix Ermacora,
on the situation
of human rights
in Afghanistan.
Thr report
states that “gross violations
of
human
rights”
have occurred
in Afghanistan.
It lists a host
of abuses committed
during the Soviet occupation,
including the maiming
of children
by booby-trap
toys, the wholcsalt destruction
of agriculture
and the deliberate
bombing
of hospitals.
The report cites Alkhan
witnesses and talks oi
four specific
examples
when massacres
of civilians
took
place between
1982 and 1984. It says, for example,
that on
I2 October
1983. in villages in the province
of Kandahar,
“360 people wcrc cxccutcd
in the village square, including
20 young girls and about 20 old people”.
The Soviets, the
report says, have both “spread
the extent of the violence”
in Afghanistan
and “brought
about a selective
suppression” of people who oppose communist
policies.
It says
that, after the Soviet forces joined
the combat,
hostilities
reached
unprccedcntcd
proportions
involving
“systematic
bombardment
of a number
of villages”
and terror directed
against civilians.
The result of all these activities
is that
more
than
half
of the pre-invasion
population
of
Afghanistan-approximately
I7 million
people--Cave
been forced to become refugees, tither
in another
country
or as internal
refugees
within
Afghanistan.
87.
So what ia the Soviet record
in Afaanistan?
It is a
record of daily random
bombings
and maimings
and killings of children
and civilians;
it is a record of the destruction of schools, hospitals
and mosques;
it is a record of the
destruction
of crop lands and irrigation
systems, of the use
of chemicals.
of the burning
of thou.xands
of acres of
forest; it is a record of imprisonment
and torture.
It is, in
short, a record
dlat at the very least should
direct the
Soviet representative
to ashamed
and painful
silence.
88.
The PRESIDENT
(interpre~urionJ?otn
Spanish): The
Council
has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration
of this agenda
item.
llre

meeting

rose al

IL50

p.m.

L.&o in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-6l43~Junc

I+1925
