S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support; Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations,
in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Chergui is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Montreal.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the developments that have taken
place in Burundi since February, when Special Envoy
Michel Kafando last briefed members in the Chamber
(see S/PV.8465). I will also share some details on
his last visit to the East African subregion and to the
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa. I take this
opportunity to acknowledge the important presence at
this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
His Excellency Mr. Albert Shingiro, Permanent
Representative of Burundi, and His Excellency
Mr. Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The following are some notable developments in
Burundi since February this year. The Government’s
attention is focused on the conduct of the 2020 general
elections and it continues to mobilize its citizens to
contribute towards their preparation. The National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) continues
2/22

14/06/2019

its efforts to sensitize the population on democratic
values, in pursuit of peaceful and credible elections.
The meeting of CENI, initially scheduled for 14 June
to announce the calendar of the general elections,
has been postponed. On 20 March, the Congrès
national pour la liberté, of Agathon Rwasa, after
great difficulty, was authorized to conduct its first
ordinary congress, which enabled the political party
to designate its national representatives. On 17 April,
the electoral code was adopted by a large majority of
the National Assembly and unanimously endorsed by
the Senate on 24 April. Some opposition members
denounced the process surrounding the adoption of
the electoral code. In their view, the process lacked
the widespread consultation and consensus that is
required for the legal framework for the organization
and conduct of the elections in 2020.
Against the backdrop of those developments, the
human rights situation remains worrying in view of
many violations of fundamental civic and political
freedoms, as reported by political actors, some
media and civil society organizations. Increases
in unemployment and the rise in prices of basic
commodities and services have negatively affected
economic and sociocultural rights.
The humanitarian situation has remained largely
unchanged since the most recent briefing of Special
Envoy Kafando. Despite relatively satisfactory
agricultural production this year, nearly 1.8 million
people remain at risk of food insecurity due to recurrent
and devastating climatic hazards.
As of 30 April, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimated the number
of refugees hosted in the subregion to be approximately
352,000. We encourage the Government of Burundi to
work closely with its partners to ensure that assistance
reaches those most in need in a timely manner. We
also encourage international partners to increase their
contributions, as the humanitarian response plan,
requiring $106.4 million, is currently only 24 per cent
funded, while the regional refugee response plan,
requiring $296 million, is only 17 per cent funded.
Council members will recall that the 20th Ordinary
Summit of Heads of State of the East African Community
(EAC), held on 1 February in Arusha, renewed the
mandate of the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda. The Summit also received the final report of
the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of the
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

United Republic of Tanzania. The report is a synthesis
of the five sessions of the inter-Burundian dialogue as
well as the facilitator’s road map to support Burundi
ahead of the 2020 general elections. The Summit agreed
to continue to consult on the way forward.
In that context, from 10 to 22 May, Special Envoy
Kafando travelled to the African Union headquarters
and to the countries of the East African subregion
to consult with regional leaders. In Addis Ababa,
Special Envoy Kafando held consultations with His
Excellency Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, and His Excellency
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security. In Dar es Salaam, Special Envoy
Kafando held separate engagements with the former
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, former
President Benjamin Mkapa, before meeting with His
Excellency Mr. Palamagamba Kabudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania.
On 16 May, Special Envoy Kafando was received by
His Excellency John Pombe Magufuli, President of the
United Republic of Tanzania.
The Special Envoy then travelled to Bujumbura but
did not meet with the Burundian authorities due to their
busy schedules. Nevertheless, he used the opportunity
to meet with some ambassadors accredited to Burundi
as well as the United Nations country team. In Kigali,
the Special Envoy met with Mr. Richard Sezibera,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, on 21 May.
During his interactions at the African Union
and in the subregion, with a view to stimulating
discussions, including on the United Nations continued
partnership with the EAC and the African Union in
our collective efforts to support Burundi, Special
Envoy Kafando suggested three possible courses of
action for the consideration of stakeholders. Those
were: first, the possibility of convening a meeting of
the guarantors of the Arusha Agreement, with a view
to reaffirming its centrality to Burundi’s political
stability; secondly, support to the African Union and
the subregion in the context of the elections in the
subregion; and thirdly, the continuation of the joint
technical working group, which comprises the EAC,
the African Union and the United Nations, in support
of region-led efforts on Burundi.
Throughout those consultations, the Special
Envoy’s interlocutors underscored the need to respect
the sovereignty of Burundi. They also stressed the

S/PV. 8550

importance of continued cooperation among the United
Nations, the East African Community and the African
Union in support of the country, especially in the
context of the upcoming 2020 elections. They thanked
the Special Envoy for the opportunity to reflect on
his suggestion to them. In that regard, Special Envoy
Kafando will return to the region to engage with the
mediator on how best the African Union and the United
Nations can support regional efforts.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the
interlocutors of the Special Envoy for their constructive
engagement. The Secretariat encourages leaders of
the region to continue consultations with the Special
Envoy, especially during his upcoming trip to the
region. Once the consultations of the Special Envoy
are duly concluded, the outcomes will be the basis
upon which the Secretary-General could define and
recommend the way forward to the Security Council,
including options in support of the EAC-led and African
Union-endorsed inter-Burundian dialogue ahead of
2020 elections, as indicated in his latest report to the
Council (S/2018/1028).
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the
brotherly State of Kuwait, for all that you have been
doing to restore and maintain peace and security around
the world. I also thank you for the invitation to address
the Security Council and participate in this afternoon’s
meeting to provide the Council with an update on the
situation in Burundi.
(spoke in French)
The African Union remains committed to restoring
peace and security in Burundi. Since the crisis broke
out in 2015, the African Union has been firmly
convinced that only an inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue can lead to a lasting solution to the political
crisis. It is with that understanding that the African
Union has stood staunchly behind the mediation efforts
of the East African Community, led by His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda, and
the facilitator of the inter-Burundian political dialogue,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of Tanzania.
I would like to publicly thank both of them today for
all they have done to support the Burundian parties in

19-177243/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

finding a consensus-based and peaceful solution to the
situation that prevails in their country and to agree on a
road map for the holding of credible elections in 2020.
Nevertheless, despite the mediation efforts, the
inter-Burundian dialogue, the fifth round of which took
place in October 2018 and was considered a failure,
has not made any progress. Faced with that situation,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, sent a letter to President Museveni
and the leaders of the region, who act as guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
in which he expressed his regret and serious concern
at the ongoing deadlock in the inclusive dialogue,
which was jeopardizing the gains under the Arusha
Agreement. The Chairperson underscored the historic
responsibility borne by the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement at this critical juncture in the history of
Burundi and encouraged them to redouble their efforts
to encourage the Burundian parties to overcome the
challenges and safeguard the gains achieved in terms of
security and reconciliation.
There is no alternative: the inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue must resume as quickly as possible, as it is
undoubtedly the only way to promote and strengthen
national cohesion and thereby make it possible to
re-establish an enhanced climate of trust and pave the
way for renewal in Burundi.
With regard to the presidential elections, there
is a pressing need to speed up the putting in place of
conditions that would favour the holding of free and
transparent elections in a peaceful climate, leading to
a brighter future for the Burundian people. In other
words, the elections in 2020 should not be a source of
further division among the people of Burundi.
As Council members are aware, at the Nouakchott
summit in July 2018, the Heads of State and of
Government of the African Union welcomed the
announcement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that he
would not seek re-election in 2020. They also called
upon the African Union Commission to support the
Burundian Government and all political parties to help
them to work together to ensure that the upcoming
elections take place smoothly.
Against that backdrop, I led a listening mission to
Burundi from 5 to 7 November 2018 to explore the best
ways by which the African Union could assist Burundi,
especially in preparing for the elections scheduled for
2020. In that regard, we welcome the measures adopted
4/22

14/06/2019

by the Burundian Government to begin preparing
for the elections, in particular the establishment, on
31 August 2018, of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, in line with the Burundian electoral code.
I think it is also worth noting that the opposition parties
have complained of arbitrary arrests of their members
and of steps being taken to hinder their political
activities on the ground. Burundi is in need of measures
to be taken to ensure calm and, as 2020 approaches, to
ensure that the political climate does not become too
fragile and that we can guarantee inclusivity, which
will be so essential for the smooth holding of elections.
It is crucial that speedy progress be made in those areas,
as Burundi faces other new challenges.
In terms of governance, despite a notable decrease
in the levels of violence, in particular in the capital,
Bujumbura, we are still receiving reports of ongoing
cases of human rights violations in the country’s
provinces.
On the humanitarian front, the plight of refugees
and internally displaced persons remains a source of
concern. The voluntary repatriation organized for
Burundian refugees currently abroad in the subregion
and other countries of the continent continues. The
number of refugees repatriated from Tanzania and
Uganda in 2017 stood at 13,176. It had dropped to 9,825
by April 2019. It is worth recalling that the majority
of those repatriated between September 2017 and April
2019 entered the country from Tanzania, with a smaller
number coming from Uganda, and are residing in all 18
provinces the country.
The situation on the economic front remains
precarious, while combating poverty as part of the
national development plan requires urgent attention.
We reiterate our determination to continue to
support all efforts aimed at finding a lasting and
consensus-based solution to the situation at this critical
juncture, so as to assist Burundi in organizing free and
transparent elections. It is in that context that the Peace
and Security Council called upon the African Union
Commission, jointly with the East African Commission
and in coordination with the United Nations and all
the relevant partners, to agree to additional efforts
that could further support Burundi in the search for
lasting peace and security and increased reconciliation,
in particular through peaceful, inclusive and credible
elections in 2020. We are exploring the possibility of
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

reconvening the group of guarantor countries under the
2005 Arusha Agreement.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without paying
tribute to President Michel Kafando for his commitment
and close cooperation with the African Union.
At the very beginning of the year, we looked on
with admiration at the peaceful transfer of power in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The people of
Burundi also have the absolute right to hope for the
same and to consolidate stability in that region of the
continent, which has been so sorely tested.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Chergui
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
inform the Security Council today about my recent trip
to Burundi, which I undertook in my capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) from 5 to 10 May. As per established
practice, this statement has been approved by the 54
members of the PBC configuration, including Burundi,
the country concerned.

S/PV. 8550

Honourable Jocky Chantal Nkurunziza. In addition, I
met with the Mr. Edouard Nduwimana, Ombudsman;
representatives of the opposition parties; representatives
of the Office of the Special Envoy of the United Nations
and His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy. Finally, I met with Mr. Huang Xia, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region; Mr. Basile Ikouebe, Special Representative
of the African Union for the Great Lakes Region;
representatives of the private sector, civil society and
the diplomatic community; bilateral and multilateral
donors; and, of course, the United Nations country
team. I want to thank Ambassador Albert Shingiro,
Permanent Representative of Burundi, and United
Nations Resident Coordinator Garry Conille, and their
teams for their efforts to organize my programme.
My visit to Burundi confirmed the impression
that the upcoming elections in 2020 are already
attracting considerable attention. I therefore considered
it important to hear the views of a wide range of
interlocutors on the electoral process, given its
implications for peacebuilding.

In line with the priorities identified together
with the members of the configuration, I focused on
the following issues during my recent visit: first, the
political situation and possibilities for supporting
Burundi on the path towards free, fair, inclusive and
peaceful elections in 2020; secondly, the socioeconomic
dimension and engagement between Burundi and
international partners around the priorities identified
in Burundi’s national development plan for 2018-2027;
thirdly, national reconciliation and local-level conflictresolution initiatives; and, fourthly, the immediate and
longer-term needs of the Burundian people, including
with regard to the voluntary return and sustainable
reintegration of refugees.

The authorities informed me that all instruments and
processes required for a successful holding of elections
are in place and that Burundi will finance the elections
with its own resources. The electoral code was adopted
by the members of the National Assembly, including
the leader of the new opposition party Congrès national
pour la liberté, Agathon Rwasa, by 105 of 108 votes.
The authorities reiterated that His Excellency President
Pierre Nkurunziza would not stand as a candidate in the
elections. With regard to preparations for the peaceful
conduct of the elections, the need for technical support
was mentioned — for instance, in the areas of police
training and security sector reform. I was informed that
the Independent National Electoral Commission would
invite observers to the elections from international and
regional organizations.

In Bujumbura, I met with His Excellency
Mr. Ezéchiel Nibigira, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Martin Nivyabandi, Minister for Human Rights,
Social Affairs and Gender; the Permanent Secretaries
of the Ministries of Finance and Defence, as well as the
Assistant to the Minister for Public Security. I also met
with Lieutenant General Silas Ntigurirwa, Permanent
Secretary of the National Security Council; Mr. Pascal
Nyabenda, President of the National Assembly, who
was accompanied by the two Deputy Speakers, the
Right Honourable Agathon Rwasa and the Right

The interlocutors I met from some of the opposition
parties reiterated their intention to participate in the
2020 elections. They highlighted the advanced state of
preparations for the elections and underscored the need
for an inclusive process. A number of interlocutors
voiced concerns over difficulties encountered by
members of the opposition parties to gather freely.
Some interlocutors expressed concerns over recent
measures against of two foreign media outlets that
allegedly violated national regulations, according to the
national authorities.

19-177245/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

During my stay in Bujumbura, the authorities
confirmed that the security situation in the country was
calm and stable. They highlighted that the situation in
the country did not pose a threat to international peace
and security. No security incidents were reported during
my visit, and the streets of Bujumbura were busy with
people and activity. However, a number of interlocutors
voiced concerns about alleged violent incidents and
human rights violations that were not being properly
investigated and prosecuted.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Bujumbura was closed at the end of February
at the request of the authorities. The Minister for
Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender confirmed
Burundi’s readiness to engage with international
human rights bodies on technical cooperation and
highlighted the ongoing work on the implementation
of the recommendations from the Universal Periodic
Review of Burundi in the Human Rights Council.
The Independent National Commission on Human
Rights, under new leadership since April, expressed its
readiness to cooperate with relevant partners in order
to promote and protect the full spectrum of human
rights in Burundi.
My visit to Burundi also provided an opportunity
to follow up on the socioeconomic dialogue with the
Government and Burundi’s international partners,
which has been a priority for the configuration over the
past years. The authorities expressed their satisfaction
with the successful outcome of the high-level side event
on nutrition organized by the Ministry of Finance, with
bilateral and multilateral partners, on the margins
of the spring meetings of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in Washington, D.C., in
April. With regard to the implementation of Burundi’s
national development plan for the period 2018-2027,
the authorities expressed the intention of mobilizing
external resources to complement internal funds
and indicated that preparations were under way for a
substantive dialogue with bilateral and multilateral
partners regarding the development plan.
A field trip to a project supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, which is jointly implemented
by UN-Women, the International Organization for
Migration and the United Nations Development
Programme, highlighted the important work carried
out by a group of women mediators to mitigate tensions
and resolve conflicts at the community level. The
powerful testimonies shared by the women showed
6/22

14/06/2019

the importance of supporting mediation efforts with
income-generating activities in order to strengthen
resilience and empower women to take on their role in
the consolidation of peace and to participate fully in the
political sphere.
As compared to the previous year, some
improvement was noted with regard to meeting the
immediate and longer-term needs of the population.
However, important funding requirements persist,
including for the humanitarian response plan. A
concern expressed by some interlocutors was the need
to ensure that the implementation of programmes and
projects would not suffer delays as the Administration’s
focus turns increasingly to the elections. The important
role of non-governmental organizations in the delivery
of assistance was highlighted, as was the need to enable
them to operate freely, in line with relevant national
legislation and international standards.
I also had an opportunity to follow up with
Government representatives and with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the return of refugees to Burundi from
neighbouring countries. UNHCR is assisting refugees
in Burundi, as well as people who voluntarily repatriate
to Burundi, primarily from Tanzania. Protection and
assistance for refugees and the sustainable reintegration
of internally displaced persons and those who choose
to return remain a core concern. Funding requirements
continue to be acute in those areas.
Based on the experience of my recent visit, my
conclusions and recommendations are as follows.
First, free, fair, inclusive and peaceful elections in
2020, the results of which would enjoy high legitimacy
both domestically and internationally, are crucial to
ensure favourable conditions for lasting peace and
stability, as well as for continued partnership and
cooperation around Burundi’s development priorities. I
encourage the Government of Burundi, political parties
and other stakeholders, with the support of the member
States of the subregion and while building on previous
efforts, to create the conditions that support that
outcome. I furthermore encourage the Government of
Burundi and international partners to rapidly identify
what forms of assistance are desirable and feasible with
a view to supporting the preparation and conduct of the
2020 elections.
Secondly, the electoral period should not lead
to a slowdown in the socioeconomic development
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

of the country. I encourage the Government and its
international partners to pursue a substantive dialogue
on the implementation of the national development plan
and build on the successful partnership that was formed
around the event on nutrition held in Washington, D.C.
I also encourage bilateral and multilateral partners and
the Government of Burundi to continue their dialogue
with a view to creating conducive conditions for the
resumption of suspended assistance.
Thirdly, I encourage Member States, United
Nations partners and Burundi to work together to create
a conducive environment for the full realization of all
human rights, including by exploring opportunities for
further engagement and support at all levels.
Fourthly, initiatives to promote reconciliation
and dialogue among all stakeholders, including at
the community level, play a crucial role in reducing
tensions during the electoral period, strengthening
resilience beyond the elections and helping to preserve
the gains achieved through the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. Building on insights gained
from programmes such as the women mediators’
network to support local-level initiatives, in particular
with regard to the empowerment of women and youth,
should be continued and even expanded.
Fifthly, the orderly and voluntary return of
Burundian refugees remains a key issue, which requires
additional funding in order to enable the voluntary
and dignified return of refugees and support their
sustainable reintegration. UNHCR and its partners
engaged in that important effort should be given
adequate resources, accompaniment and support by the
international community.
A written report of my visit has been shared with
the members of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and discussed at the latest
meeting of the configuration, just two days ago.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continuous support to the
configuration and for their interest.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Lauber
for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line

S/PV. 8550

with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, African Union
Commissioner Smaïl Chergui and Ambassador Jürg
Lauber for their important briefings.
I shall be brief, in keeping with the President’s
request so that we have enough time for consultations. I
would like to highlight three points: Burundi remains at
a crossroads one year out from the elections; the region’s
mobilization is crucial; and the United Nations must
remain fully committed to supporting regional efforts.
First, Burundi will be able to restore stability only
through the holding of free and inclusive elections in
2020, as has been mentioned. The elections are in one
year’s time, which is practically tomorrow. It is crucial
that Burundi move forward and ensure that those
deadlines are prepared for in the best possible way. We
welcome President Nkurunziza’s commitment not to
stand for re-election and the recognition of the main
opposition party in February. Further action is needed,
including ensuring free access to Burundian territory
for all parties and respecting the rights of opponents.
France calls on the Burundian authorities to fully
respect their international human rights commitments
and will continue to monitor the humanitarian and
human rights situation with great attention.
Secondly, the mobilization of the region is crucial.
The statement delivered by the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union before the Council
is especially welcome. I would like to commend the
African Union’s efforts and encourage it to continue its
commitment in that direction, with a view to supporting
Burundi and the efforts of the East African Community
(EAC). Through the mediation entrusted to the EAC,
the States of the region have supported the quest for
a lasting solution to the political crisis that broke out
2015. In that regard, I welcome the commitment of the
mediator, President Museveni, and the contribution of
the facilitator, former President Mkapa. The Presidents
of Kenya and Tanzania were invited by their peers to
also contribute to the process. Today it is important to
assess the work being done in the region. Let us therefore
all remain engaged — the Community of East African
States, the African Union and the guarantors of the

19-177247/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement — in order
to support Burundi on its path towards stabilization.
Thirdly, it is important in that regard for the United
Nations to remain fully committed to supporting
regional efforts. One year prior to the elections,
given that certain balances envisioned in the Arusha
Agreement are being reconsidered and that concerns
are being raised by the presence of hotbeds of tension
in the region, the Security Council cannot become
disengaged on the situation in Burundi. Moreover, the
work of Mr. Kafando and his teams is more necessary
than ever. It enables support for the mediation efforts
of the Community of East African States and to work
with all stakeholders to develop confidence-building
measures in order to create a climate conducive
to political dialogue and facilitate an inclusive
reconciliation process. I thank Mr. Kafando for his
efforts and encourage him to continue his consultations,
in order to quickly present options on the role that the
United Nations could play in support of regional efforts
to move towards the normalization of the situation
in Burundi.

14/06/2019

At this juncture, however, South Africa considers
it prudent to highlight the need for the Council to
continuously coordinate the Council’s positions with
those of the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council when dealing with African issues. Africa has
very clearly defined regional organizations, which deal
systematically with issues related to African peace and
security. In the case of Burundi, the EAC is charged with
the responsibility of overseeing the Burundi process.
South Africa had hoped that there would be greater
appreciation for allowing the processes of the region to
run its course, which would then enrich discussions in
the Security Council. Allowing for regional processes
to unfold is a key factor in Africa owning the solutions
to its own problems and achieving enduring peace. We
therefore look to the direction of the leadership of the
East African Community and the African Union to
chart the course on Burundi with the assistance of, and
in coordination with, the United Nations.

Ms. Marais (South Africa): We thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings on the
evolving situation in Burundi and their unwavering
commitment to the process. We would also like to
thank Ambassador Smaïl Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his briefing
in that regard.

South Africa maintains that it is only through an
inclusive dialogue that we can address any political
impasse in Burundi. This requires the international
community to lend support to the initiatives of the EAC.
In this vein, we also call on the Government of Burundi
to create a conducive environment that facilitates
dialogue with the key stakeholders of the East African
Community-led process. As a guarantor of the Arusha
Agreement, and as part of Mandela’s legacy, South
Africa always stands ready to support the Government
and the people of Burundi as they democratize their
country, opening more political space for all political
parties and allowing the media to play its role in
informing society and spreading tolerance.

South Africa fully supports the continued facilitation
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, with the support of the African Union and
the United Nations. We welcome the designation of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda as the mediator
of the process, with the support of President Uhuru
Kenyatta of Kenya and President John Magufuli of
Tanzania. In this regard, the work of former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania was invaluable. We also
acknowledge the critical role played by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, former President
Michel Kafando, as well as the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission under the able
leadership of Ambassador Jürg Lauber.

With regard to the political developments in
Burundi, we continue to be encouraged by the stable
security situation in the country. We congratulate the
Government of Burundi on initiating a number of
preparatory process for the elections, especially the
establishment of an Independent National Electoral
Commission, which is now fully operational. We
welcome the adoption of the Burundian electoral code
and their commitment to the 2018 Kayanza road map,
which lays the foundation for peaceful elections in
2020. We commend the decision by the Government
of Burundi to finance the elections with their national
budget and we encourage Burundi to work closely with
the East African Community and the African Union to
create an environment conducive to free, fair, peaceful,

8/22

19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

democratic and inclusive elections in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.
South Africa also welcomes President Pierre
Nkurunziza’s commitment to not stand as a candidate for
the presidential election in 2020 and we look forward to
the Government and political parties working together
to hold inclusive and peaceful elections. Burundians
must be the beneficiaries of democratic elections
that can deliver democracy and development with the
assistance of the region. All parties must be permitted
to canvass for support countrywide, without hindrance.
There should be no no-go areas for any political party
or politician.
South Africa commends Burundi’s contribution to
international peace and security through its deployment
of more than 6,000 Burundian men and women in
various peacekeeping operations, mostly in the Central
African Republic and Somalia, making Burundi one of
the top troop-contributing countries.
We call on the international community to support
Burundi in strengthening their peacekeeping capacity,
as it is of critical institutional value to the county. As
a member of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, Burundi is congratulated on remaining
committed to the promotion of peace and security by
contributing to silencing the guns in Africa by 2020.
South Africa is gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Burundi. We urge the
Security Council and the international community to
do more to alleviate the socioeconomic challenges and
humanitarian situation facing the people of Burundi.
We call on its partners to support the implementation of
the ten-year national development plan for the benefit
of the Burundian people. In this vein, we reiterate the
call by the AU during its thirty-second Summit for the
European Union to lift the unilateral sanctions imposed
against the Republic of Burundi.
We are encouraged by the ongoing voluntary
repatriation movement of Burundian refugees,
which saw 67,710 refugees voluntarily repatriated
to Burundi, mainly from Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, between
August 2017 and May 2019. The increased return of
refugees is a manifestation of the return to peace and
stability in the country. We urge the international
community to support these efforts and call on
them to provide assistance for the repatriation and
reintegration of returnees.

S/PV. 8550

Finally, we appeal to the Security Council and the
international community to support the Government
and the EAC mediation process to lay the foundation
for an environment that is conducive to the holding of
democratic elections and to support a peaceful transfer
of power, in order to ensure peace and stability beyond
2020.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Commissioner Smaїl Chergui and
Ambassador Jürg Lauber for their briefings.
On Wednesday, my delegation had the opportunity
to address the Peacebuilding Commission regarding
our concerns about the human rights situation and the
socioeconomic situation in Burundi, as well as our
readiness to engage in dialogue with the Burundian
authorities.
Today, I would like to underscore, first and
foremost, the importance of the 2020 elections. If we
want to prevent any subsequent disputes, the electoral
process must be sufficiently transparent and inclusive.
This requires a consensual road map where the
principal stakeholders can agree on the preparations
and modalities of the elections, as well as the conditions
necessary to guarantee peaceful elections.
In that regard, I would like to make a triple
appeal to all Burundian actors, as the requirements
for credible elections are, indeed, threefold: first,
the political and media space must not be closed off
ahead of the elections; secondly, the elections must
not be boycotted; and thirdly, they must be able to be
independently observed.
Inclusivity also implies the participation of the
many peaceful political actors that have been exiled
in recent years. Respect for the letter and the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement is, of course, a prerequisite
for any solution. If these conditions are met, I think it
is important to reflect on the support we can provide
throughout this process, both at the bilateral level and at
the level of the United Nations system. In that context,
Belgium welcomes the adoption of a new electoral
code with wider political support, as well as the recent
announcement by the Independent National Electoral
Commission that it will invite international and regional
observers to attend the 2020 electoral process.
Belgium is convinced that as the 2020 elections
approach, an opportunity is arising to find a lasting

19-177249/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

solution to some of the causes and consequences of the
2015 crisis, which are unfortunately still relevant today.
We salute Uganda, which, through President Museveni,
plays a key role as mediator. We are confident that
Uganda will be able to take over the recommendations
of former facilitator President Mkapa, with a view to
bringing them to fruition. We welcome the commitment
of the Kenyan and Tanzanian Presidents. In addition,
the regional repercussions of the situation in Burundi,
as reported by the Group of Experts, further highlight
the need for high-level regional engagement.
The African Union continues to play an important
role in this matter. We believe that in terms of
mediation, the activities of the African Union as well as
the guarantors of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi could complement and
strengthen the initiatives currently being undertaken
by the East African Community.
In parallel, the United Nations and the Office of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi
must continue to support the efforts of the subregion
and the region. The United Nations remains a partner of
Burundi and must make every effort to help it to solve
its political and socioeconomic difficulties, which must
involve full cooperation and mutual respect. Belgium
commends the continued commitment and substantial
work undertaken by the Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy
for Burundi. His mandate is absolutely essential to
direct and coordinate the political support of the
United Nations. We are now awaiting the proposals of
the Secretary-General regarding the possible roles of
the United Nations in Burundi, after consulting key
partners. In the meantime, the Council must continue
to contribute to this discussion.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support, for the high quality of his
briefing on developments in Burundi. I also welcome
Mr. Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
I also welcome the participation in this meeting
of Mr. Smaïl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, whose useful insight
gives us perspective on the tireless efforts made by
that pan-African institution to promote lasting peace
and stability in Burundi. I would also like to welcome
10/22

14/06/2019

the presence among us of my brother and friend, Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with great interest the generally
stable sociopolitical environment in Burundi. We
welcome the good offices of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as the determination of the
Heads of State and Government of the East African
Community to continue direct consultations with all
Burundian parties, as reaffirmed at their summit held
on 1 February in Arusha.
My country remains convinced that only the
establishment of an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, and supported by the
international community, including the United Nations
and the African Union, will enable the brotherly
country of Burundi to face the many challenges
that are waiting to be overcome. Consequently, Côte
d’Ivoire calls for the resumption of a bold dialogue
between all active Burundian forces, in order to create
a peaceful environment, which is indispensable for the
holding of transparent, free, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020.
The resolution of the humanitarian issue, as well as
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
must, as much as the political and security challenges,
remain at the heart of the concerns of the international
community. In that context, the Humanitarian Response
Plan for Burundi deserves our full support in order to
facilitate the return of internally displaced persons
to their region of origin as well as that of refugees,
estimated at 352,000 by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call for dialogue between
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Burundian authorities, in order to dispel the
clouds of misunderstanding and mistrust, and to address,
together, concerns relating to the closure on 28 February
of the field office of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi. Côte
d’Ivoire also hopes for continued constructive cooperation
between Burundi and the Peacebuilding Commission to
forge a shared vision of current challenges and solutions
for economic and social development in Burundi. The
initiatives of the East African Community aimed at
relaunching the inter-Burundian political dialogue must
be fully supported by the United Nations and the African
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

Union. It seems to us that in that respect, the East African
Community has a significant comparative advantage.
I would like to conclude by renewing my country’s
support for the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando; Mr. Smaïl
Chergui; and the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg
Lauber. My delegation encourages them to persevere
in their mediation efforts and good offices for peace
and stability, in close cooperation with the Burundian
authorities and the authorities of the East African
subregion.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Oscar FernándezTaranco, Mr. Chergui and Mr. Lauber for their valuable
briefings.
The Dominican Republic notes that the security
situation in Burundi has remained stable despite an
atmosphere of tension between the Government and
the opposition. We are concerned about the tense
relations that persist between Burundi and the East
African Community, and which have affected the
inter-Burundian dialogue. We understand that dialogue
is the most important tool to achieve the smooth
unfolding of the electoral process, scheduled for next
year.
Therefore, we urge the Government of Burundi
to fulfil its commitment to end the political crisis. We
call on the East African Community to extend its good
offices to the situation. In that regard, we reiterate that
it is essential to guarantee the protection of all civilians,
including journalists and human rights defenders,
guaranteeing their safety and free movement in the
exercise of their functions in Burundi. Therefore, we
regret the closure of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi.
Women and girls continue to be reported as the
main victims of cruelly perpetrated acts of sexual and
gender-based violence. They also continue to be victims
of ethnic or political hate speech. They are also the
most affected among refugees, and the lack of access to
education impacts their opportunities to develop skills,
resulting in increased vulnerability to exploitation and
abuse. Therefore, we advocate that the return of the
refugees take place through transparent refugee status
determination procedures.

S/PV. 8550

In addition, we are pleased that the Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission visited Burundi from 5 to 10 May to
learn first-hand about the impact of the support of
the Peacebuilding Fund in Burundi through the joint
project launched in October 2018 by UN-Women,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
International Organization for Migration to strengthen
local mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution
in Burundi. It is also very positive that he met with the
network of women mediators in the country.
In that context, we highlight the role of the network
in enabling women to be part of the dialogue in their
communities and to play a role in peacebuilding.
However, we also recognize the challenges facing them,
such as developing capacities through an exchange of
experiences with other women who work in conflict
resolution in other countries, as well as communication
and transport barriers, in facilitating dialogue in
communities and raising awareness among other
women with regard to peacebuilding. It is therefore
vital that women have the necessary financial support
to further develop their activities.
In a spirit of fraternity and solidarity with the
Burundian people, with whom we recently established
diplomatic relations, the Dominican Republic calls on
the authorities to implement and respect international
standards to ensure and protect freedom of expression,
freedom of the press and access to information. We
believe it important that the recent measures impeding
the freedoms of expression and the press through media
and social networks be reconsidered and brought into
line with the demands of today’s society.
We are also extremely concerned about reports of
persecution of religious minorities. We therefore urge
the State to fulfil its obligation to support, respect and
guarantee religious freedom and non-discrimination on
the basis of religion and to promote recognition of the
importance of the inclusion of minorities in social and
public life. The exodus of those communities from their
homeland has triggered a series of tragic events that
violate the rights to freedom of movement, education
and food, among others, not only of adults but also of
children. In addition, the State must guarantee the safe
return of those who, owing to the terrible situation,
have sought refuge.
With a view to promoting State cooperation with
international bodies and non-profit organizations that

19-1772411/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

are working to improve the situation in Burundi, the
Dominican Republic urges the Burundian authorities
to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, which is currently undertaking preliminary
examinations of cases of killings, imprisonment,
enforced disappearances, torture, gender-based and
sexual crimes and violence against civilians and human
rights activists.
Finally, we underline the need to cooperate with
humanitarian actors, whose main objective is to
bring relief to a population affected by the difficult
humanitarian and human rights situation. Those actors
have been restricted in carrying out their work, to the
extent of having to leave the country, while others have
become victims of arbitrary arrests.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support,
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings updating us on the
situation in Burundi.
We appreciate the efforts and work of Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
whose final report was presented at the East African
Community regional summit, which coincided with the
end of his term of office. We hope that that work will
be continued by His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
President of Uganda, current Chair of the East African
Community, so as to maintain support for the inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue in the run-up to the next
elections, which are scheduled for 2020.
As we have often said, we believe and are convinced
that respect for the constitutional order of each
country defines and upholds what constitutes modern
States today and therefore guarantees their stability
and plurality. We appreciate the efforts made by the
stakeholders involved in the inter-Burundian dialogue,
which led to the signing of the Kayanza road map for
the 2020 general elections and the appointment of the
new members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We encourage the Government and all
those involved to continue promoting inter-Burundian
dialogue with a view to the Burundians themselves
taking ownership of the process and the holding of
transparent, peaceful and inclusive elections.
12/22

14/06/2019

In that context, we must acknowledge that today in
Burundi there is a return to normalcy after the attempts
at destabilization that followed the 2015 elections.
Today Burundi has democratically elected institutions
across the nation. They will be renewed in the same
way in the 2020 elections, the preparations for which
are taking place in a peaceful and calm atmosphere.
We should at this point express our satisfaction at the
strong political will the Government of Burundi has
shown by fully financing the electoral process that will
culminate in the 2020 elections, thereby demonstrating
its desire to take ownership of the electoral process.
Our delegation therefore congratulates the
Burundian Government on its very high level of
political will to bring about and entrench the calm and
political stability that prevail in that brotherly country
of Central Africa today. Our delegation is not the only
one to express such congratulations to the Burundian
Government. The 32nd Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa
at the beginning of the year, praised the efforts of the
Government of Burundi to prepare for free, democratic
and peaceful elections in 2020 by setting up appropriate
mechanisms in accordance with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement of 2000.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
appreciation for the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance
that currently prevails in Burundi following the return
from exile of five political leaders, including former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya and former Second
Vice-President Alice Nzomukunda, among others, at
the invitation of the authorities and with guarantees
for their security and protection of their land, and the
recognition of the Congrès national pour la liberté, a
new opposition party led by Agathon Rwasa.
Those facts, along with the release last year of more
than 3,000 prisoners, including insurgents who took part
in the violent demonstrations of 2015, the contribution
by Burundi of more than 6,000 troops to peacekeeping
missions and the return of 210,000 refugees from
2016 to date, together represent real and tangible
demonstrations of the very positive development of the
situation in this Central African nation.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is greatly
encouraged by that very positive development in the
situation in Burundi. The peace and calm that prevail in
the country today should lead the Security Council to
seriously consider removing Burundi from its agenda
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

and allocating the United Nations resources currently
allotted to that situation to other countries facing major
crises that need greater United Nations support.
Equatorial Guinea aligns itself with the efforts
of the international community in the search for a
peaceful end to conflicts and its commitment to the
construction and consolidation of stable, peaceful and
prosperous societies that prioritize the national interest
and the internal coexistence of just, transparent and
inclusive sociopolitical and cultural institutions. To that
end, any attempt to build peace, restore international
legitimacy and champion the negotiated and peaceful
end of conflicts will always enjoy the total support of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
The election of Burundi as a member of the African
Union Peace and Security Council at the thirtysecond Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union, held
on 10 February in Addis Ababa, was a true reflection
of the current situation in the country. We therefore
reiterate once again the need for the Security Council
to remove Burundi from its agenda, since the current
situation in the country no longer represents any threat
to international peace and security.
The launch and implementation of the national
development plan for Burundi are critical to the
development of Burundi in the framework of the goals
of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
We believe that if we are to achieve the Africa we want
by 2063, we must join forces to facilitate mechanisms
to relieve States of the obstacles to their development.
To conclude, the international community must
continue resolutely to support the Government and
the other parties directly involved in the promotion
of confidence-building measures so as to ensure
an environment conducive to peaceful elections;
commitment to the Constitution and the road map to
the peaceful transfer of power in an atmosphere of
peace and national concord; and, above all, support
for the Government in the reintegration of refugees,
who are returning to the country voluntarily and en
masse. It is therefore important that the Government of
Burundi step up its collaboration with the international
community and the African Union in particular.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I should like to begin
by thanking all of our briefers this afternoon.

S/PV. 8550

The United Kingdom shares the ambition expressed
by other speakers today for inclusive, peaceful and fair
elections next year and an end to the humanitarian,
human rights and political crisis in Burundi. However,
since our last meeting on this item (S/PV.8465), there has
been no progress in securing a solution to the political
crisis that could enjoy the support of all Burundian
parties ahead of the elections. We regret in particular the
lack of progress in the inter-Burundian dialogue set out
by African Union Commissioner Chergui today. If the
political situation is not resolved, there remains a real
risk of violence, an increase in human rights violations
and an escalating humanitarian crisis, which threatens
peace and stability within Burundi and the region.
We have seen before, through the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, that it is possible to find a
solution through unified and effective leadership from
both the region and Burundi. We therefore call on the
region, especially the East African Community, the
African Union and Burundi, to demonstrate leadership
again, with the support of the Special Envoy for
Burundi. We underline the United Kingdom’s support
for the efforts of Special Envoy Kafando and emphasize
that any solution must be in line with the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement. The United Kingdom remains
ready to review its approach to Burundi, including
its support for measures taken through the European
Union once tangible steps have been taken to improve
the current political and human rights situation.
Next year’s elections in Burundi represent a
critical juncture for its political development. There is
an opportunity for a democratic transition of power in
Burundi for the first time in 14 years. We take note of
the administrative preparations that have been made,
as outlined by Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco this afternoon, but we remain concerned by
wider restrictions on the political freedoms that are
essential to the conduct of free and fair elections.
In particular, since the last Security Council briefing
in February, the Government of Burundi has made the
disappointing decision to revoke the BBC’s operating
license. Concerning comments have also been made
by officials within the National Independent Electoral
Commission, proposing restrictions on the Burundian
media. We call on the Government of Burundi to engage
with the BBC to reinstate its operating license and to
commit to enabling an independent media environment
within Burundi.

19-1772413/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

Finally, I would like to underline the United
Kingdom’s concern about the humanitarian situation
in Burundi and stress the importance of maintaining
international support for humanitarian efforts. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimates that 1.8 million Burundians — some
15 per cent of the population — will need humanitarian
assistance in 2019. As of 31 March, some 125,000
Burundians remained internally displaced. I would like
to particularly draw attention to the fragile situation
faced by refugees and pay tribute to the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which is assisting 350,000 refugees through
the Burundian refugee response plan.
In conclusion, with elections next year taking place
amid this fragile political and humanitarian situation, it
is vital that the Security Council remain seized of this
issue and engage to support efforts to find a solution
and build stability in Burundi.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank all
of the briefers for their remarks today. We particularly
welcome African Union Commissioner Chergui’s
perspective and vision for possible ways forward,
which he outlined this afternoon.
The United States has been disappointed by the
lack of progress since the twentieth ordinary Summit of
Heads of State of the East African Community (EAC),
on 1 February. It does not appear that any steps have
been taken by regional leadership since the Council’s
last meeting on Burundi in February (S/PV.8465), even
though Burundians continue to flee the country under
political pressure.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees reports that, although 8,253 Burundian
refugees were assisted in returning voluntarily from
January to April, during that same time period another
2,569 people fled Burundi for the first time. With this
continuing displacement in mind, we call upon the EAC
to reinvigorate talks. It is important that all parties
commit to the EAC-led process and reach an agreement
ahead of the 2020 elections.
Civic and political space is critical to free and fair
elections. Unfortunately, continued reports of human
rights violations cast a shadow over Burundi and its
electoral preparations. Extrajudicial arrests, beatings,
intimidation and kidnappings, especially by the
Imbonerakure ruling party youth wing, pose a grave
threat to the country’s peace and security.
14/22

14/06/2019

A free press is indispensable to democracy. We
urge the Burundian Government to respect freedom
of expression and to allow journalists to operate
independently without fear of violence or a forcible
shutdown because of their reporting. We also urge
the Government of Burundi to address persistent and
reliable reports of illicit arms transfers, combatant
recruitment and armed group activity in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo that are tied to
Burundi. Now is the time for all of the parties to the
2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
to live up to their commitments of non-interference in
the internal affairs of neighbouring countries and to
deny support or safe harbour to armed groups.
The Great Lakes region has a chance to transform
into an interconnected hub of peace and prosperity. By
resolving its domestic political crisis and strengthening
its respect for human rights, Burundi could play a
central role in that effort.
Finally, we note our continuing support for
resolution 2303 (2016), in which the Council requested
that the Secretary-General report on the situation in
Burundi every three months. We are concerned by
the United Nations failure to submit timely reports as
requested by the Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco, African Union Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Lauber for their briefings. China welcomes
Ambassador Lauber’s recent visit to Burundi, which
will contribute to enhancing mutual understanding and
cooperation between Burundi and the United Nations
and the international community as a whole.
In recent years, the political and security situation
in Burundi has remained stable and the Government
has been making efforts to implement the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in order to
promote reconciliation among the country’s various
ethnic groups and maintain domestic stability. It has
formulated a 10-year development plan for the period
from 2018 to 2027, and has been actively cooperating
at the international level on the economic and social
fronts. In the past four years, more than 60,000
Burundian refugees have voluntarily returned home
from neighbouring countries, in a demonstration of
the continued improvement in Burundi’s situation and
the strong aspirations of its Government and people for
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

peace and development. However, peace, stability and
development in Burundi cannot be achieved without the
support and assistance of the international community.
China believes that the international community
should prioritize its efforts in two areas. It must
first show genuine respect for Burundi’s ownership
and leadership and create an external environment
conducive to ensuring the country’s peace and stability.
At the end of last year, the Burundian Government kickstarted preparations for the 2020 elections. Through
consultations with various political parties in the
country it has formulated a road map for the elections,
established the Independent National Electoral
Commission and committed to raising all the necessary
funding for the elections, in a full demonstration of the
ability and resolve of the Burundian Government and
people to take care of their own problems.
Since elections are the internal affairs of any
country, it is important to ensure that the international
community fully respects Burundi’s ownership and
leadership of its elections and provides assistance
in accordance with the Government’s needs. The
Burundian Government has said many times that
its situation does not pose a threat to regional peace
and security and that the Burundi issue should not
remain on the Council’s agenda. The Council should
pay serious heed to Burundi’s views and make
timely and appropriate adjustments in the light of the
latest developments.
Secondly, in order to continue scaling up their
humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to
Burundi, we hope that the international community
and international partners will deliver on their
commitments in a timely manner, support the
continuing return of Burundian refugees and help the
country with its socioeconomic recovery. The relevant
international organizations and agencies should resume
their economic cooperation with Burundi as well as
their development assistance. China appreciates and
supports the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations country team in providing
continued and constructive assistance to Burundi. As
an active supporter of Burundi’s political process and
national reconstruction, China has been doing what
it can to render assistance in many sectors, including
agriculture, education and infrastructure development.
We stand ready to continue to contribute to peace,
stability and sustainable development in Burundi.

S/PV. 8550

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting
and the complementary presentations of our
briefers, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Mr. Chergui and
Ambassador Lauber.
Peru takes note of the recent developments with
regard to preparations for general elections in Burundi,
which include the adoption of an electoral code and
President Nkurunziza’s important announcement
that he will not stand for election. We hope that those
actions will be followed by others that can ensure an
inclusive, credible and transparent process, in line with
the Kayanza road map, and that it will translate into an
effective consolidation of the rule of law and democratic
institutions in the country. It will be particularly
important to promote and guarantee the free and full
participation of all forces in Burundi’s political life.
The success of those efforts will depend to a great
extent on the support of the international community
and especially on follow-up and support from the
African Union and the East African Community, which
have a central responsibility in these processes. We also
consider it essential to simultaneously and urgently
intensify efforts to revitalize the inter-Burundian
dialogue as an ideal platform for making political
commitments that will help advance sustainable peace.
Additionally, in keeping with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, we stress the importance
of the national reconciliation process, particularly the
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as
the body responsible for laying the foundations that
will enable the Burundian people to once again trust
their institutions. It will also be critical to avoid new
escalations of cross-border violence that jeopardize the
stability and security of the country and the region, and
we welcome the progress made at the community level
in conflict resolution, particularly the participation as
mediators of women’s groups, who, together with young
people, are being called on to participate more actively
in the country’s political processes.
Peru notes with concern the continuing reports of
human rights violations in Burundi and stresses how
important it is that such reports are duly investigated
and those responsible prosecuted and punished. We
also urge the Government of Burundi to strengthen its
cooperation with the various United Nations human
rights protection mechanisms and with independent
civil-society organizations.

19-1772415/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

We also emphasize how urgent it is to address the
humanitarian situation at the same time, particularly
where the thousands of refugees and internally
displaced persons are concerned. That means ensuring
the availability of financial resources and above all the
political will needed to enable them to return safely
and with dignity, with a view to their reintegration into
the country under internationally accepted parameters.
We emphasize the importance of implementing the
2019-2020 Burundi regional refugee response plan and
ensuring the valuable support of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
The implementation of Burundi’s national
development plan for the period from 2018 to 2027 and
the 2019-2023 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework are also critical as relevant instruments that
could contribute to Burundi’s political stability and
socioeconomic development of Burundi in the mediumand long-term.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Peru’s commitment
to achieving sustainable peace in Burundi, thereby
contributing to regional stability and supporting the
important work of Special Envoy Michel Kafando
towards our shared objective.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Mr. Smaїl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and Mr. Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, for their
comprehensive briefings.
To be frank, we do not quite understand the
motives that led our colleagues on the Security Council
to insist on holding today’s meeting. We all know that
it has happily been a long time since the international
community received any alarming news from Burundi.
From diplomats in Bujumbura we know that the situation
there is calm and that the trend is towards normalization.
We want to point to the stable security situation, the
significant reduction in violence, including the attacks
on civilian infrastructure by the radical opposition.
Refugees from neighbouring countries are returning to
Burundi, and the speed of that process depends entirely
on the availability of resources for settling them.
We want to once again remind the Council of a
key event in the inter-Burundian settlement that took
place a year ago. The constitutional referendum was
16/22

14/06/2019

conducted in a calm environment with the participation
of an overwhelming majority of Burundi’s population.
We note that the constitutional reform was supported
by a majority of voters — more than 73 per cent — and
the referendum itself was preceded by a democratic and
transparent information campaign.
We once again call for respect for Burundi’s
sovereignty. The Russian Federation is categorically
opposed to any interference in the country’s internal
affairs, including in the context of the parliamentary and
presidential elections scheduled for 2020. As we know,
the people of Burundi are already actively preparing
for the elections. More specifically, plans are already in
place to finance the elections from the national budget.
The Independent National Electoral Commission is
functioning, and the Parliament has enacted changes to
the electoral code by an overwhelming majority. It is
also important that there is ongoing dialogue among the
country’s political forces, as evidenced by the adoption
of the Kayanza road map by a majority of the political
parties. We urge the authorities and the opposition to
refrain from mutually negative rhetoric and to focus
on preparing for elections. The initial reason for the
dispute among Burundi’s political forces is long gone.
President Nkurunziza has made repeated promises that
he will not run in the upcoming elections.
We believe that at the moment Burundi’s national
Government is in particular need of support on the
socioeconomic front. In that regard, we welcome
Bujumbura’s adoption of a national development
plan for the period from 2018 to 2027. We believe
that further progress in that area could be facilitated
by lifting the economic sanctions on Burundi, in full
concurrence with the decisions of the African Union
Summits held in Nouakchott in July 2018 and Addis
Ababa in February of this year.
In general, we firmly believe that the situation in
Burundi does not pose a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council’s continued attention to
it has long been counterproductive, and our discussions
have done nothing but help the unreconciled opposition
make the country’s internal political processes more
difficult. It is essential that we take Burundi off the
Council’s already overburdened agenda.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): With regard to what you
said at the beginning about everyone speaking for no
more than five minutes, Mr. President, I would not mind
if you brought back the hourglass to help us with that.
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

S/PV. 8550

Unlike my Russian colleague, I believe that it
is very timely that this issue is back on the agenda,
because we believe that it still represents a threat to
peace and security. Burundi’s domestic political crisis
is unresolved, its security situation is volatile and there
are tensions in neighbouring areas. I know that our
friend the Ambassador of Burundi, who believes that
the issue should not be discussed here, also shares that
reluctance to include it on our agenda. But first of all, as
we have heard today, a number of crises, both domestic
and regional, continue. We also heard very clearly how
everyone in the region and from the United Nations is
ready to help. It was very encouraging to hear what
the East African Community, the African Union, the
United Nations, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund are doing.

On the socioeconomic front, I also want to support
what Ambassador Lauber said about the importance
of supporting the national development plan. The
Peacebuilding Fund is ready to do that. Again, I think
the international community wants to support Burundi.
We are not its enemy but rather its supporter. We want
it to go in the right direction, and for that it needs
elections, socioeconomic development, respect for
human rights and plurality.

That international engagement is absolutely
essential to achieving what the country needs, which is
free, fair and transparent elections and the promotion
of the reconciliation process and socioeconomic
development. We heard the figures on the number of
refugees, as well as the implications of climate change.
The refugees must be reintegrated and the participation
of women and young people promoted. In that regard,
I appeal to the Ambassador of Burundi to accept that
support. At the same time, I also encourage those in
the neighbouring region, including the East African
Community and the guarantors of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement, to continue their
engagement and see to it that progress is made.

As we look forward to the 2020 elections, we
welcome the initiative to assume national ownership
and financial responsibility for them. We note that there
is still work to be done, and urge the Government of
Burundi to work with the United Nations mechanisms
in the region. We concur with Mr. Chergui that the
2020 elections should be represent an impetus for unity
in Burundi. On that basis, I will make three pertinent
points today.

The fact that former President Kafando was not
received during his last visit to Burundi is very sad. I
listened to my colleague from South Africa who clearly
said that President Kafando is doing critical work
there. I therefore once again urge Burundi to continue
to prepare for the elections. It is very good that initial
steps have been taken in that regard, but we are also
hearing reports that opposition politicians are being
arrested. And according to Burundian law, political
actors living in exile are not allowed to run for election.
We further appeal for independent media — not just the
BBC but others as well — to be allowed to report freely.
With regard to human rights, I listened to our
briefers who talked about the worrying human rights
situation, where they say there are threats to civil
society and civil freedoms. I therefore appeal to the
Ambassador to do everything to allow the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
back into Bujumbura.

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers for their informative and
comprehensive briefings telling us that the situation
in Burundi remains relatively calm, which is a good
sign. We also noted that reports for the past year have
indicated relative peace. We hope that will continue.

First, regional and subregional organizations
should be given adequate space to support Burundi. We
welcome the efforts of the African Union and the East
African Community (EAC), and note the final report
on the EAC-led inter-Burundian dialogue process
held at the Summit in Arusha earlier this year. In that
regard, Indonesia acknowledges the efforts of the
mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, and
the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of the
United Republic of Tanzania, as well as the work of
the Special Envoy, former President Michel Kafando,
and the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
Secondly, Indonesia calls for increasing humanitarian
assistance to Burundi. We note with caution that
according to the report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, refugee
returns to Burundi will peak in 2019 at more than
100,000 returnees, compared to 58,262 returnees in
2018. The month of May was the peak of the return last
year. We learned that innovative cross-border projects
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund have improved
coexistence among returnees, refugees and host
communities in targeted areas. Yet it is heartbreaking

19-1772417/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

to hear that the Burundi regional refugee response plan
is among the lowest funded appeals in the world. I urge
countries to continue their support and deliver on their
commitments to Burundi.
Thirdly, we must ensure that there will be no
relapses in Burundi even beyond 2020. The role of
the Peacebuilding Commission is indeed crucial in
that regard, and we therefore welcome the PBC’s
recommendations,
which
Ambassador
Lauber
elaborated on and which include encouraging
Burundi to identify the kinds of assistance it needs
in preparing for the 2020 elections, fostering bilateral
and multilateral partners in order to create conditions
conducive to resuming suspended assistance, including
the return of refugees, and promoting reconciliation
and dialogue among all stakeholders in order to
reduce tensions. In that regard, the PBC will definitely
have a more important role to play in Burundi in the
future. The Security Council should be able to support
the PBC’s role from a distance and help the work of
peacebuilding in Burundi to take place. In providing
that space, we will certainly strengthen and contribute
to our collective work in Burundi, the objective of
which is to prevent a relapse into conflict.

14/06/2019

role in dealing with the challenges faced by the
Burundian people. In that context, Poland commends all
efforts made thus far by the East African Community
to enable the inclusive Burundian dialogue. We also
further encourage all regional partners, including the
African Union, to engage in the mediation process,
which could lead to a widely accepted road map, setting
the path towards credible elections in 2020.
Several delegations have also raised the important
issue of the human rights situation in Burundi. Again,
let me reiterate that we see human rights as one of
the pillars of the United Nations system. Human
rights are strictly interlinked with peace and security
and development and therefore should be treated in
a comprehensive manner. That is why we call on the
authorities of Burundi to resume cooperating with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and all mechanisms of the Human Rights Council. We
also urge the authorities of Burundi to fully cooperate
with the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi established
by the Human Rights Council.

Indonesia reiterates our full support for the work
of the PBC and encourages partners and donors to
continue their commitments to the Peacebuilding
Fund. Peace is a luxury that is hard to obtain and even
more difficult to maintain. Indonesia looks forward
to working together with Burundi as partners and to
sharing our own experience.

Let me also add that the Burundi authorities are
obliged to respect and promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of
expression and assembly, as provided for in the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and other
relevant international and regional instruments to
which Burundi is a party. This is not a matter of values
or choice; it is simply a legal obligation, as once a State
is party to a legal instrument it is obliged to implement
its provisions.

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, allow me to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco,
Ambassador Lauber of Switzerland and African
Union Commissioner Chergui for their very valuable
contributions to our discussion.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Burundi. As we have just heard from
Assistant
Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco,
almost 2 million people are at risk of food insecurity,
which is very troubling information to us.

We agree with the other delegations that have
stressed that it is fully justified for the Council to
discuss the situation in Burundi, particularly in the
context of preparations for elections to be held in 2020
and therefore Burundi’s crucial importance in terms of
peace and security in the region. Let me underscore that
we are here in the Council in order to assist Burundi
in strengthening peace and stability in its territory and
improving the well-being of its people.

The political impasse continues to hamper the
humanitarian situation and development in the country.
In this context, we commend the efforts of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and its
Chair, Ambassador Lauber, to bring about a sustainable
improvement to Burundian society and the lives of
its people.

As has been highlighted by many delegations,
including the delegation of South Africa, regional and
subregional organizations continue to play an essential
18/22

We urge the Burundi authorities to improve good
governance, as without good governance and strong,
reliable institutions it is extremely challenging to
advance development and implement all human rights,
including economic and social rights. We also urge them
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

S/PV. 8550

to ensure media freedom and to open up democratic
space ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020.

an inclusive dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement.

In conclusion, allow me to stress that inclusive
dialogue among all parties involved is the only possible
way to find a lasting solution to the political crisis.
It is crucial to address the current challenges on a
sustainable basis and enable the elections to be held
in 2020 in satisfactory conditions. Burundian society,
horribly affected by many years of conflict, deserves to
voice its preferences on its national leadership in free,
fully inclusive and fair elections, in the letter and spirit
of the Arusha Agreement.

We also hope that the States members of the East
African Community will play a more active role and
engage with the Government of Burundi, as well as with
international and regional organizations such as the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union, to achieve the desired stability in Burundi.
Dialogue with neighbouring countries and international
and regional organizations is one of the most important
components of a lasting solution in Burundi.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
At the outset, we thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco,
Mr. Smaïl Chergui and Ambassador Jürg Lauber for
their briefings.
Ever since the constitutional referendum was
held on 17 May 2018, with the participation of most
Burundian political parties, the situation has been
relatively calm in comparison with the outbreak of
the crisis in 2015. We hope that this calm situation
will continue until the presidential elections take
place in 2020. We hope that the elections will include
all groups of the Burundian population and enjoy the
participation of all political parties, as well as being
free, fair, transparent and credible. We also hope that
freedom of expression will be guaranteed, along with
the participation of stakeholders from civil society,
including youth, women and representatives of regional
and international organizations.
I would like to pay tribute to the Government of
Burundi for its efforts to advance the political process,
such as the adoption of a road map before the elections,
the creation of the National Independent Electoral
Commission and the decision to fully fund the 2020
elections through the national budget.
President Nkurunziza’s announcement that he
will not be standing for re-election in the upcoming
elections is an important guarantee that the Government
of Burundi is serious about holding these elections next
year and transferring power to a new President. In this
context, we would also like to commend the efforts of
the African Union and the East African Community
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the political and
security situations in the Republic of Burundi through

The security situation in Burundi has been generally
calm of late and improving despite certain acts of
violence and the continued activities of armed groups.
In that regard, we hope that the security situation will
continue to improve as it has been since the beginning of
the year. We also hope that the Government of Burundi
will seize this opportunity of improvement and relative
stability to intensify efforts to convene the national
dialogue, bring all political parties to the negotiating
table and reach an agreement in order to ensure safe
and non-violent elections in 2020.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
human rights situation and the return of refugees,
there have been some improvements in comparison
with 2017. There has been a decrease in the percentage
of the population exposed to food insecurity. However,
that remains a concern, especially in the context of
continued human rights violations, acts of violence
and enforced disappearances. Those are all violations
of the principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We call for them to stop and for their
perpetrators to be held accountable and be brought
to justice.
With regard to the gradual return of refugees,
following the tripartite agreement signed among
Tanzania, Burundi and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, I would like to underscore
the need to intensify efforts and activities on the part
of the Burundian Government to ensure the economic
and social reintegration of the refugees and provide
them with the necessary guarantees once they return
to their homes.
On the development and socioeconomic situations,
I would like to stress that development and reform
efforts are key factors for any Government that wishes
to promote the well-being of its society and ensure a safe
future. The adoption by the Government of Burundi, on

19-1772419/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

22 August 2018, of a 10-year national development plan
that includes goals linked to sustainable development
principles and a focus on Burundi’s rural areas is a
step in the right direction towards reform, improving
the livelihoods and economic conditions of Burundi’s
population and achieving mutual benefit for all social
groups. We therefore hope that the development plan
will lead to significant progress in the country’s
economy and help contribute to stability in the security,
political and humanitarian situations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I take the floor under your presidency,
Sir, I would like to express our warmest congratulations
to you personally and to your country, Kuwait, on
your well-deserved accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. Knowing your
commitment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the rule of law at the international
level, I am particularly pleased to see you presiding over
the Council for the second time during your two-year
term. Let me also thank my colleague Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for his constructive contribution to
this debate following his visit to Burundi from 6 to
10 May. I would also like to thank the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, my dear friend
and brother Mr. Smaїl Chergui, for his contribution to
this briefing via video-conference from African Union
headquarters in Addis Ababa, although some of his
remarks departed dangerously from the decision made
by the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at their summit on 10 and 11 February.
The Heads of State articulated a four-point message
at the summit. They first congratulated the Government
of Burundi on its preparations for the 2020 elections.
Secondly, the Heads of State and Government welcomed
the statement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that he
would not stand for the 2020 elections. Thirdly, they
made an appeal for peaceful elections in Burundi.
Fourthly, and finally, they called for the lifting of the
sanctions weighing on Burundi. Those were the four
substantive points of the decision made at the summit
of the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union in February, while Mr. Chergui’s comments
were connected to what was said at the summit that
20/22

14/06/2019

took place in Nouakchott in 2018 — one year ago. I
think the expert who prepared his statement used the
content of the 2018 summit instead of the summit that
took place three months ago. We are therefore of the
view that the decision of the Heads of State made during
the summit take precedence over other considerations
and supersede what was said by the secretariat of
the African Union. I wanted to make that distinction
before continuing.
Lastly, I wish to thank the other members of the
Council who make every effort to support compliance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
in the Council’s handling of the situation in Burundi.
Once again, we regret that a few countries continue
to maintain the same stubborn positions that they have
had for more than four years, instead of looking at the
situation in Burundi objectively and with discernment.
Some have gone further, forming a coalition of five and
calling for an unnecessary meeting on Burundi last
month, as if there were an emergency in the country
(see S/PV.8538). What is surprising in all of that is
that some of those countries that have been taking
aim at us for four years without interruption are also
having trouble. Some of them are experiencing major
institutional crises. Others are experiencing an identity
crisis. Still others are experiencing acute social crises,
while others are experiencing all three. And yet they
continue to worry about Burundi. That was just a brief
side note.
Although this meeting was imposed on us, it
is my pleasure to participate and give the Council
an overview of the situation in my country since the
previous Council meeting on Burundi on 19 February
(see S/PV.8465). I hope this will be the last briefing on
Burundi, which has rightfully requested over and over
again to be removed from the Council’s busy agenda.
As my colleague Ambassador Lauber said so well,
who has first-hand information following his visit to
Burundi last month, I can confirm that since 2017 the
political and security situation in Burundi has been calm
and stable and is fully under control. Preparations for
the 2020 elections are at a very advanced stage, both in
terms of organization and budget. National mechanisms
for the preparation of elections are gradually being put
in place, while calming measures to promote a climate
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections next year
are steadily increasing. Without being exhaustive, I
would mention the following measures.
19-17724

14/06/2019

The situation in Burundi

The Constitution of 7 June 2018 is already
the primary fundamental legal framework for the
organization of the 2020 elections. The Kayanza road
map to peaceful elections in 2020 was adopted with
broad support from the entire political class. The
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI)
has already been established and is operational. The
revised electoral code was adopted by the Burundian
Parliament in April by deputies of the ruling party and
the opponent Agathon Rwasa together in a climate of
compromise and spirit of mutual exchange, and by
a tally of 105 votes out of 108. The Council can see
that the electoral code is consensual. The decision was
also made to finance the entire electoral cycle with
national resources.
The political space in the country was expanded
with the approval of Mr. Rwasa’s new opposition party,
the Congrès national pour la liberté. Contrary to what
is being said, that party continues to open new offices
within the country without any interference. The
decision of the President of the Republic to renounce
voluntarily his constitutional right to run in the 2020
elections is a gesture of high political and democratic
value that could serve as an example across the
continent and elsewhere. The release earlier this year of
more than 2,000 prisoners, including the young rioters
and insurgents from 2015, is also part of this campaign
to promote reconciliation and political tolerance before
the major electoral event in 2020 and beyond.
Moreover, on the organizational aspect of the
elections, at their summit in February the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union congratulated the
Government of Burundi for initiating the preparatory
process for the 2020 elections, in particular the
establishment of the Independent National Electoral
Commission and of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The summit also welcomed the statement
by President Nkurunziza that he would not stand for
the presidential elections in 2020, while also urging the
Government and the political parties to work together
for the smooth conduct of the forthcoming elections. On
the same occasion, the Heads of State and Government
of the African Union reiterated their request to the
European Union to immediately lift the unilateral and
immoral sanctions against Burundi and its people.
On the whole, the dialogue among political parties
in Burundi with regard to the holding of elections in
2020 is taking place in a spirit of openness and political
tolerance. We want to point out that almost all of the

S/PV. 8550

decisions that have been taken in Burundi in that regard,
including the Kayanza road map for peaceful elections
in 2020, the establishment of the CENI, Parliament’s
adoption of the electoral code and the return to the
country of several political leaders who fled in 2015,
have been on a basis of consensus. Among them are
former national Presidents and Vice-Presidents,
parliamentarians and other senior Government officials
who have now been reintegrated into their political and
professional lives.
The foreign actors who apparently want to take the
dialogue issue away from Burundi, despite the fact that
facilitation ended on 1 February, have three objectives.
The first is destabilizing Burundi on the eve of the 2020
elections. The second is encouraging the putschists of
2015, who are now on the run and sheltered, fed and
protected by the same actors who have been attacking
Burundi, diplomatically and politically, since 2015.
The third is distracting Burundians’ attention from
the important things, which are the organization of the
2020 elections and the implementation of the national
development plan. When the time comes, all of those
outside actors will have to face up to their responsibility
for the consequences of their interference in matters
that come under Burundi’s sovereignty. Burundians
and the world are watching. For their part, as a matter
of principle, the people of Burundi will remain opposed
to any attempt at foreign interference at any time,
anywhere and under any circumstances, whether by a
State or a regional or international organization.
The security situation is generally excellent
throughout Burundi. From north to south, west to east
and in the centre, day and night, Burundian citizens
are enjoying their civil and political rights in complete
peace of mind. That positive assessment is shared by all
the well-intentioned regional and international actors
who have visited our country since 2017, most recently
President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who made a working
visit today to meet with his Burundian counterpart
President Pierre Nkurunziza to discuss issues of
common bilateral, regional and international interest.
On the humanitarian front, we are pleased with the
massive voluntary return of the Burundian refugees who
fled the country in 2015. Besides the thousands who have
returned on their own without assistance from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
between 1 August 2017 and 29 May of this year, 70,285
refugees have been voluntarily repatriated to Burundi,

19-1772421/22

S/PV.8550

The situation in Burundi

primarily from Tanzania but also from Kenya, Uganda
and the Central African Republic. Only a few days
ago, on 11 June, just this week, 397 refugees returned
to the country from neighbouring countries through
Burundi’s southern border. The massive voluntary
return movement is clear evidence of the restoration of
peace, tranquillity and stability in Burundi, despite the
comments of various foreign actors, who continue to
deliberately inflate the number of refugees still in exile
in order to keep Burundi in a state of artificial crisis.
Beyond our national efforts, the support of our partners
in the reception and socioeconomic reintegration of the
thousands of returning refugees remains essential, and
the same applies to local host communities.
With respect to Burundi as an item on the Security
Council’s agenda, it is clear that we are on it for political
reasons and external interests that have nothing to
do with the welfare of the Burundian people. Our
current political and security situation is no threat to
international peace and security and does not justify
arbitrarily keeping my country on the Council’s agenda.
The continued series of meetings on Burundi, which
have nothing to do with the reality on the ground, is a
destabilizing factor rather than one that promotes peace
and tranquillity. Such unnecessary meetings indirectly
encourage the 2015 putschists who fled the country and
are being pursued by Burundian justice. We therefore
reiterate our legitimate call for taking Burundi off the
Security Council’s agenda and allotting the precious
time spent on Burundi to the world’s many other
hotspots. Burundi’s place is with the United Nations
agencies and programmes that address socioeconomic
development, with a view to supporting our efforts
to implement our national development plan and the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We repudiate the unjustified political and diplomatic
aggression against Burundi and its people. Muscular
diplomacy must give way to mutually beneficial and
respectful cooperation. Such double standards and
disproportionate, unfair pressure will not bring us
to our knees, 57 years after the end of colonialism in
our country, a nightmarish period in our history from
which the Burundian people are still trying to awaken.
Foreign actors must stop infantilizing the Burundian
people, who are proud, dignified and very attached to
their political independence and ubuntu values. They
are mature enough to handle their own affairs without
any foreign interference, whether near or far from our

22/22

14/06/2019

borders. Any attempt to meddle in our domestic affairs
uninvited will always bump up against our patriotic
response, as it did during the regime-change conspiracy
in 2015. We are aware that the 2015 plot is not yet
dead and buried. There are some who seek to revive
it in subtle ways that are less apparent and difficult to
detect at first glance but that fortunately do not escape
our vigilance.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight two major projects that are now the focus
of the Burundian people, the 2020 electoral process
and the implementation of our national development
plan. The principal one is the process of implementing
the development plan, which covers a 10-year period
from 2018 to 2027. The Government of Burundi
has committed to redoubling its efforts to mobilize
domestic resources to fund a majority of the priorities
that have been identified. We also thank the United
Nations country team in Burundi for its support and
invite our partners to contribute to it if they wish. The
second major project, which is very important to us
right now, is the organization of the 2020 elections,
which are an internal matter exclusively of national
sovereignty. Support to this process can be provided
only at the request of the Government of Burundi, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any attempt to create a new role or
redefine an existing role in favour of the United Nations
rather than Burundians in Burundi’s elections would
encroach on national sovereignty and be a flagrant
violation of the Charter, which states in Article 2 that
“[n]othing contained in the present Charter
shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state or shall require the
Members to submit such matters to settlement
under the present Charter”.
I would like to end my statement with that quotation.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. I hope it will be the Council’s last
meeting on Burundi.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

19-17724
