po

1st

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 19 September 1978,
af 3.55 p.m.

THIRTY·THIRD SESSION

Official Records

NEW

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item I:
Opening of the session by thc Chairman of the delegation
of Yugoslavia
.
Agenda item 2:
Minutc of silent prayer or medita tion

YORK

General Assembly, to refer briefly to the chaIJenges which
our world Organization will be facing during the next 90·
days of deliberations of its General Assembly in the present
complex international situation inherited from the past
year.
4. Although I have already had the opportunity-owing to
a concurrence of circul11stances- to address this distin·
guished gathering, the General Assembly, on several occa·
sions this year, I hope I shall not abuse your patience
unduly by tracing a brief outline of the road we have
traversed and the experience we have gained in the period
from last September to the present day.

.

Address by Mr. Lazar Mojsov, Temporary President, Chairman of the delegation of Yugoslavia
,.
Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-third session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee
, .

3

Agenda item 108:
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions

4

Age nda item 4:
Election of the President of thc General Assembly ... . . .

4

Address by Mr. Indalecio Lievano, President of the thirty·
third session of the General Assembly

4

Agenda item 25:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations . . . . . .

7

President: Mr. Indalecio LIEVANO (Colombia).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Yugoslavia
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open the
thirty·third regular session of the General Assembly.

AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite represen·
tatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.

5. The year under review was marked by exceptional
activity on the part of the General Assembly, almost
unprecedented in the history of the United Nations. This
called for extraordinary efforts on the part of all dele·
gations, as well as of the Secretary-General and his
associates.
6. At its thirty-second session, the General Assembly had a
record number of items on its agenda: a total of 131; it
held the largest number of meetings and adopted an
impressive number of resolutions and decisions.

7. In the course of this year we held three special sessions
of the General Assembly, responding thus to the necessities
of the present·day world situation and to the demands of
Member States that some international issues of paramount
importance be discussed in the Assembly in an urgent and
special manner.
8. The eighth special session of the General Assembly was
of particular importance, in spite of its short duration. It
established a pattern for the setting up and financing of
United Nations peace·kee ping forces when the Security
Council, on the basis of the Charter, undertakes urgent
operations aimed at safeguarding peace and security in the
world. It is known that, in the past, there have been serious
crises in the work of the General Assembly, owing to the
fact that the system of responsibility for and the financing
of peace-keeping forces had not been elaborated suffi·
ciently. At present, as a result of the decisions taken at the
eighth special session, a new practice has been esta blished
which will prevent the repetition of past mistakes.

The representatives stood in silence.
Address by Mr. Lazar Mojsov, Temporary President,
Choirman of the delegation of Yugoslavia
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The tradition established in the United Nations makes it incumbent upon me,
at the beginning of the thirty-third regular session of the

9. The ninth special session, devoted to Namibia, raised in
an urgent manner the question of the final elimination of
obstructions hindering the process of the achievement of
independence by Namibia, and that of the definitive
assumptioll by the United Nations of a decisive role and
influence in respect of this problem which has been facing
us for a number of years. The ninth special session not only

Aj33/PV.l

2

General Asscmhly - Thlrty·tl1;rd Session - Plenary Meetings

dramatized the whole situation regarding Namibia but
contributed decisively to the break· through which is at
present emerging along the path leading to the final
liberation of Namibia and its accession to independence.
10. The tenth special session, devoted to disarmament,
was of vital and historic importance for the further role to
be played by the United Nations with respect to this most
complex problem in contemporary international relations.
In the course of five weeks of work and with the
participa tion of an impressive number cf prominc nt stn tesmen from all over the world, the General Asscmbly assessed
as untenable the present situation as regards the arms race,
which threatens to have unpredictable negative conse·
quences for international relations as a whole unless it is
brought to an end as soon as possible. In its Final
Document [resolution S-l 0/2/, the General Assembly at its
tenth special session laid down the basic principles for
further action by the United Nations aimed at curbing the
arms race and undertaking effective measures towards
disarmament. Of particular importance is the machinery for
the continuous review of this complex problem in the
United Nations and for the holding of further negotiations.
Although the decisions taken by the Assembly at its tenth
special session were not aimed at the adoption of concrete
measures and the reaching of new international agreements
and treaties on disarmament, they charted a long-term
course of action by the internathl!ull community in this
area and, even more important, proVided for special forums
and organs for reviewing and conducting negutiations on all
Rspects of the very complex problem of disarmament.

J 1. This very day, before the opening of this meeting, the
consultations among Member States pr.)vidcd fur in para·
graph J20 of the Final Document 01 the tenth special
session of the General Assembly have been successfully
completed. In a let ter just addressed to the SecretaryGeneral I have informed him of the composition of the
Committee on Disarmament, which is open to the nuclear·
weapon States and 35 other States. I Thus conditions have
now been created for the early convening of the Committee
on Disarmament and for the beginning of its work.
12. In addition to the activity of the General Assembly
outlined earlier, two United Nations Conferences were held
recently-one on comba ting racism and racial discrimi·
nation,2 and the other on techn ical co·operation among
developing countries. 3 The resumed seventh session of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law (If the Sea has
also just been concluded.

13. Other organs of the General Assembly and of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, have maintained a very
dynamic pace in their activities and have adopted decisions
of special importance.
14. Now we are again faced with a very extensive agenda
for the thirty·third session, reflecting the major problems of
1 Sec document A/S·IO/24, para. 2.
2 World Conference 1o Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
held at (iel1eva from 14 10 25 AllgU.~1 1971l.
3 United Nations Conference on Tcdll1ical Co-openttiun among.
Developing Countric~, Ilcld al Bucnos Aircs from 30 Aul;tUsl to 12
Septembcr 1918.

pre~ent.day international relations. The months ahead will
aga1l1 be marked by very intensive activity by the General
Assembly.

15. There is no doubt that these facts about the activities
and the almost continuous involvement of the General
Assembly and some other organs of the United Nations
testify to the major role of our world Organization and to
the trend towards once again sei71ng the Assembly of those
important problems in the field of international relations
which were being dealt with outside it. This is an indication
of the increased confidence on the part of Member States
and of world public opinion in the capacities of the General
Assembly, despite occasional criticism addressed to it
because of insufftcien t effectiveness in coming to grips with
the most complex problems facing the world community.
That is, without doubt, a very positive development.

16. However, learning from the experience gained, particularly in the course of this year when the activities of the
General Assembly reached such intensity, we should also
seriously consider the question how best to adapt the work
and over·all activities of the Assembly and those of the
United Nations as a whole to the ever-greater needs, which
are not merely of a quantitative nature. The increasing
number of States Members of the United Nations-and
newly independen t countries will be joining us soon, thus
enhancing the universal character of this unique world
Organization-- as well as the constantly growing number of
both old and new items 011 the agenda of the General
Assembly, underline the need not only for such an
adjustment but also for rationalization of the work and
proper utilization of the time of the Assembly so that it
may be adequate for appropriate deliberations and serious
decision-making in respect of the complex problems included in the agenda of particular sessions.
17. The need has arisen for the General Assembly to
examine its own internal structure, its distribution of work
und its growing responsibilities. And thus, since extensive
reconstruction work and adaptations will soon be under·
taken in this plenary hall so that the General Assembly may
meet the technical requirements of the Assembly as it is
today, which differs a great deal from that of 1945 or
1955, it Willlllso be necessary to make new efforts aimed at
a genuine reorganization of the method of work of the
General Assembly. J am confident that this task also will be
carried out successfully. The vital ity of the Assembly has
already been demonstrated in the course of its many years
of active work when it had to face all the changes and new
problems in the development of international relations and
all the consequences of those changes, Which ineVitably
affected its composition and the achievement of univer·
sality as well as its over·all work and resu1ts.
18. Concurrently with such intensiw activity by the
General Assembly, the world situation has also been
evolving dynamically. In the year under review further
deterioration and convulsions in some vital areas of
international relations came to the fore. At the same time,
however, neW negotiating processes have been initiated in
almost all fields. The fact that these negotiations, particu.
larly on some of the most complex and serious situations
involving conllicts in the world, have not yet yielded
decisive and positive results leading to the finding of lasting

solut
princ
only
existt
facto
escat
the J
settl€

pres~

forCl'

and

weig
man:
Natil
19,

long
even
Md
reae
naH
nati
witt
inte
mar

roa<

triei
the
Nar
witl
Nat

20.

ron
rabl
gre
ind
un
bo

re
co
21

o
al
a
al
t

-

1$ ~d"l

the Gefit!i

:he~tiWl!d
lhe {;tl:l:l
led N2tir~

Iboo :lJl'.i::
bllt, of!h;t
,e1ltit~"l

uJ

n inmtJ.lil~
mberS~

the Ge«:i

e-Utd t~ j

solutions based on just foundations, in the spirit of the
principles of the United Nations and its relevant decisions,
only proves the complexity of those situations and the
existence of major clashes between certain international
factors in various areas of conflict. There has been no
escalation of armed conflict on a broader scale, although
the negotiations and efforts to establish a dialogue for the
settlement of crises were accompanied by setbacks and by
pressures and aggressive acts and moves on the part of
forces which have been persistently opposing the peaceful
and just settlement of the problems that have been
weighing heavily on the entire international comm1ll1ity for
many years and on which the attention of the United
Nations has constantly been focused.

ogrips'il~

commwdt:
ten!.

ined. pm:
.ilies ob

sAOIllld tioc
pt the 'l~d
ht"Se of til
e1NU. 'lilticl
! mete_,,;
'llUlHltl-);l;

; soon. t~:j
iique ."i;
numbe::i
.he~

Ir ~b 11

: w'onr,;
, sotrjll!
and~1«':

rot*em\ j:.

$!Iernb~ :

itm (l:,f~':ri

e et.: lil:l\"~l
I be U'Iil'X·

emb~l"'J:

bI)' i:5 It i
If 11}'45::
It ;rim~4!

ork oitl
alll)) 'li\iiJ ~
Slembl) t;l;
ltmy !tl,
el md!l:t
IJlb!..)n,~

tllle1>tllZ;';
of ur~~
} b}' t~
;aI.so ~::

:w fl.lrt~

are,u :[
!Imf Cm:,
nitated i:
15. Plttl.'"

sil~tio~
~t )~ie!~~

~ nf bSti'cl

3

1st meeting - 19 september 1978

19. However, it has become quite certain now that it is no
longer possible to hold back and still less to arrest or render
even more complicated the liberation processes in southern
Africa. The peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe have
reached the decisive stage in their struggle for the termination of colonialism and the regime of racial discrimination and apartheid. It is necessary to intensify efforts
within the United Nations and on the part of the whole
international community in order to thwart the last
manipulations and remove the remaining barriers on the
road to the achievement of independence by those countries. I am confident tha t we shall soon greet in our midst in
the General Assembly representatives of the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe as independent and free nations
within the ranks of the States Members of the United
Nations.
20. In other areas of decolonization, too, the anachronistic forms of domination and exploitation are inexorably nearing their end. The United Nations has made a
great contribution to thc achievement of freedom and
independence in vast regions where colonialism prevailed
until not so long ago. The thirty-third session, too, will be
bound to continue to monitor the development of the
remaining colonial situations so that the dark age of
colonialism may finally come to an end.
21. In the Middle East, efforts are being made to
overcome the unfavourable development caused by the
already well-known aggressive behaviour and annexationist
aspirations of Israel in respect of its Arab neighbours. Here
also it is becoming ever more obvious that it is impossible
to ignore and constantly put forward new pre.conditions in
respect of the rightful demands of the Arab countriessupported by the overwhelming majority in the United
Nations and by the whole international community-for the
liberation of all the Arab territories occupied in 1967 and
for respect for the inalienable and legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and for their right
to establish their own State. It is not possible to achieve a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East without the
participation of all the parties concerned, including the
Palestine Liberation Organization, in the negotiating process. If these basic demands continue to be ignored we shall
be faced with a new and dangerous development in the
Middle East crisis, which for three decades now has done so
much harm not only to all the peoples of that region, but
also to the positive evolution of international relations in
general. During this session the General Assembly will once
again be confronted with all the aspects of the Middle East

crisis. The United Nations cannot and must not remain
aloof from active efforts to find at least a just and durable
solution in the Middle East.
22. Othe; international disputes and conflicts have also
reached the phase when initiatives are being taken for their
definitive solution. It is necessary to intensify efforts for
negotiations in the spirit of the relevant recommendations
of the General Assembly and the stands taken by it.
23. The negotiations which, after the sixth and seventh
special sessions of the General Assembly, began on a
number of major problems and difficulties in the area of
international economic relations have, unfortunately, come
to a standstill. The expectation of the developing countries
that the international community, and the highly developed
c01ll1tries in particular, would address themselves with due
attention and earnestness to the consideration of the
problem of development in the world and the establishment
of a new system of more eqUitable international economic
relations has not been fulfilled. The General Assembly will
soon be entrusted with the task of preparing for the new
special session, in 1980, which will be devoted to international economic relations. Those preparations should
serve, as is urgently demanded by all developing countries,
to give a new impetus to the initiation of negotiations
between the developing and the developed countries with a
view to finding lasting and more meaningful solutions to
the accumulated problems of development and ensuring the
harmonious development of international economic rela·
tions, in order to spare the international community new
and even more serious disturbances and difficulties in the
years ahead.
24. These are only some of the most important problems
included in the comprehensive agenda now before the
General Assembly. A year of very intensive and constant
activity by tIle Assembly, a year of negotiations, however
indecisive and hesitant they may be, is continuing. In the
next few moments the General Assembly will elect its new
President, who, together with all representatives, will
endeavour to make a valuable personal contribution to the
successful consideration of all the problems confronting the
Assembly. Confident that the work of the thirty.third
session of the Assembly will evolve in a constructive
atmosphere, marked by genuine efforts to find appropriate
solutions to all the problems it will discuss, I wish you utI
much success in the fulfilment of this major task.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-third session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
25. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the rules
of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the
beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of
the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine
members. Accordingly, it is proposed that for the thirtythird session the Credentials Committee should consist of
the following Member States: China, Denmark, India, Sierra
Leone, Suriname, Thailand, Union of Soviet Socialist

Q
4

Genera! Assembly - TIlirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

Republics, United States of America and Zaire. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the countries [ have
mentioneJ are hereby appointed members of the Credentials Committee.
It was so decided (decision 33/301 ).

AGENDA ITEM 108
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions
26. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning to
the next item on our agenda for this afternoon, I should
like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document A/33/254.
which contains a letter addressed to me by the SecretaryGeneral informing the Assembly that one Member State is
in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to
the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the
Charter.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
27. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT I now invite the
members of the General Assemb Iy to proceed to the
election of the President of the thirty-third session of the
General Assembly. Under rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections shall be held by secret ballot and there shall be
no nominations. However, after consultations with U1e
regional groups, I should like to propose that, without
constituting a precedent, the Assembly agree to waive rule
92 in this particular election and that, on the basis of the
endorsement of his candidacy by all regional groups, we
proceed to elect the President of the thirty-third session by
acclamation. May I consider that the General Assembly
adopts tha t proposal?
It was so decided.

28. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I therefore declare
Mr. Indalecio Lievano of Colombia elected President of the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly.
Mr. lndalecio Lievano (Colombia) was elected bv occla·
motion President of the General Assembly (decision)
33/302).

29. The TEMPORA RY PRESIDENT: I extend my sincere
congratulations to Mr. Lievano and I invite him to assume
the presidency.
Mr. Lievano took the Glair.
Address by Mr. Indalecio LievOIlO, President of the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly

30. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On
behalf of Colombia, I wish to express to the members of
this Assembly my sincere gratitude for the proof of
confidence and the very lofty distinction it has conferred

on me by electing me President of the United Nations
General Assembly. This distinction is all the more of a
challenge since I shall be succeeding Mr. Lazar Mojsov
whose outstanding human and intellectual qualities hav~
demonstrated in his guidance of the work of the Assembly
the virtues of a people, the Yugoslav people, which has
been able to coexist constructively with the various
ideological trends of our age and to alleviate the tensions
created by intolerance in the world community.
31. In assuming the responsibilities which tlus honour
entails I trust I shall enjoy the co-operation of the
Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, the Chairmen of the Main
Committees and those who, like the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, have given the Organization the invaluable assistance of their insight and experience in handling
the sensitive connicts which have threatened and are still
threatening peaceful coexistence among nations,
32. The task of preserving that coexistence is not an easy
one. The United Nations was founded at a time when the
world, after a great catastrophe. rallied to the belief that a
new age had begun, an age in which the interests and
aspirations of the big Powers·· whose political and economic
systems were presented as models· would not constitute an
insurmountable obstacle to international harmony. Unfor.
tunately. things did not turn out that way. The number of
conflicts capable of leading to !In ou tbreak of war was not
reduced as:l result of the new balances of power; and, while
world-wide conflagrations, which nations sought to do
away with, did not break out, with their inevitably
devastating effects, that was and still is due to the invention
of weapons of such great destructive power that they
necessarily cast doubt on the validity of the ancient idea of
war liS a solution to international problems.
33. It would therefore be incorrect to suppose that the
obstacles tha t have prevented the outbreak of a new world
war are an indica tion of genuine advances towards creating
the conditions for lasting peace. To be more precise, it
might be said that we arc liVing at 3 time when old and new
conOicts have developed to the point where, in earlier
times, they would have led to global armed confrontation;
an outcome we are escaping today nul !P much because of
the wisdom of the policies devised to deal with interna·
tional problems as because of the unthinkable consequences
of a clash involving nuclear weapons, which, paradoxically
enough. have become the illusory bulwark of a precarious
peace.
34. This is borne out by the highly dangerous nature of
the problems facing the international commW1ity. Can it
really be said that in our times a genuine detente has
emerged as !I lasting alternative to the deep-rooted antag·
onisms between East and West? Can it be said that the
threat of the aons race has disappeared and that the
tendency of industrial societies to link the rate of their
economic activity to increased production of war materials
has been halted'! Has there perhaps been any lessening of
the conl1icts threatening peace on the African continent,
whose peoples are struggling !lgainst the legacy of colonialism, which creates the potential for new forms of
dependence'! Can it be said that the practice of intervening
in local conflicts for the purpose of ex tending or preserving
old or new spheres of influence has been renounced~ Has

,----,Jniled Na~
or

the more
I
l.az;a r MojWJ',
qUll.lil~$ ba'U
If !he AssernM!
Iplt, whidt Jm
lh the
lie '!he

_-Oil!

te'--

lly',

:h lhis ~
:rallt)n or •
Ilefl of the).!-

:telary~,
;;than lhe~"
flce U\~S1

cd and Ire d

on:!.

~ l:ll oolamJ

lime when 0:
he belief tbK I
~ mlereus u~

II1Ind

:ec.cmo-

ill '.(mstitule~

~fmOn)'. Uof«-

The JU.lmbet fi
uf war W~~!

l\!o'et; lind" ~

k)ughl to·~

h1:lf iMl'i~
il I he
l\j!j'cr CMI .~.

m'ftft_

MICIIHlI ~<i

,P}lO'Sie thal ~
ut' ~ r'~' ..iliA
(pw'llr(b~~

_MY

l'll!l't p;eei:le. it

ent"d

letI:'. in ~
(!{,nfron~
I",h l!«'a_1i

I with inltrl'!te"omeq~~

• p1lmdooc~
t1{1I~J!
'f(llU Mcmii;l·

nunily. tal a
le Mletlle '-

l-umLed -bit
~ SiIl,id Ib.:u •
lUld thit •

e nlte of ~
rwu,m~

If lMe.nia&ei
ell" (ou(ifIW.
J8llC)' of ~
~w fonm
orint~
g;orP~!l!

et

10un~d'

lW

1st meeting - 19 September 1978

the sharpening of tensions between East and West been
offset by genuine progress in the North-South dialogue, or,
rather, have the successive rounds of that dialogue brought
to light the obstinate reluctance of the industrial countries
of the North to accept the changes needed for a new
international economic order? Are the countries with
advanced technologies contributing to the expansion of
trade, or have they regressed to protectionist systems which
revive restrictive situations similar to those which not so
long ago preceded major depressions? Has progress perhaps
been made towards introducing monetary reforms which
would permit a more equitable distribution of international
purchasing power and make the expansion of trade go.
hand in hand with balanced world development? Or has
concern with recycling the substantial monetary reserves
transferred to the producing countries by the rise in oil
prices taken precedence over such reforms-a concern not
in evidence earlier, when those monetary reserves were
concentrated among the rich nations and their recycling in
the opposite direction to that sought today would have
favoured the developing world, which is so urgently in need
of international purchasing power?
35. It is relevant to ask these questions because they reveal
the existence of unresolved pr~blems which make
the task of preserving the prestige of international organizations extraordinarily difficult. Just as authority becomes
problema tical within a country if the broad mass of citizens
do not derive a minimum of benefits from their status as
nationals, so in the international field the influence of
organizations like the United Nations is diminished if
certain States or regions retain excessive advantages while
for others unfavourable situations are perpetuated.
36. When that occurs, the world conununity becomes
increasingly fragmented, the internal class or racial tensions
of nations are ultimately transferred to international
relations, and territorial disputes multiply. It is significant
that in our day we have witnessed the simultaneous
outbreak of anned conflicts which throughout history
have been a reflection of different stages in the development of mankind. The revival and parallel development
of wars waged under a religious, racist or ideological banner
, indicate that the stagnation and poverty of vast regions of
the earth are incompatible with the peaceful development
of international life.
37. I hope I am not wrong in saying that my country and
the geographical region to which it belongs regard the high
distinction with which I have been honoured as an
opportunity to share with the international community the
experiences of peoples and countries which, in the successive stages of their development, have acquired knowledge about many problems which today concern the
United Nations. The fact that 160 years ago the majority of
the States of our region attained their independence and
became part of the world market placed them in a position
to perceive the effects of certain international economic
relations whose evolution inevitably aggravated the in·
equalities among nations. The obstacles which those rela·
tions placed in the path of their development provided an
object·lesson for their citizens and their leaders, who
understandably have ceased to be surprised at the gap.
which developed in the course of time between the real
nature of the world market and production processes and

5

the image of them formed by the founders of economic
science.
38. In the splendid dawn of that science, the great
economists believed that the advances of industrial technology, by raising labour productivity, would reduce the
production costs of manufactured goods and bring about a
fall in their prices, phenomena which they did not consider
equally applicable to the prices of food and raw materials,
where new technology seemed to be more difficult to apply
and lacked equal appeal. Consequently, the world forecast
by the classical economists was one in which the prices of
industrial goods would necessarily decline in keeping with
increases in productivity, while the prices of agricultural
products would remain high.
39. The fact that such forecasts were not fulfilled was due
to the overriding importance gradually acqUired by the
monopolistic structure of industrial production in the
advanced nations, enabling their firms to enjoy a wide
margin of freedom to fix prices. Through their power over
the market the industrial sectors of the advanced countries
were able to incorporate into the prices of manufactured
goods-which they did in a generalized way-a consistently
high rate of return on capital, an ever-increasing level of
remuneration and social benefits for their unionized work
force, special bonuses for the managerial bureaucracy of
companies, an equally growing level of income for services
which supported manufacturing activities, and costs of
marketing and advertising of massive proportions.
40. That explains why the prices of industrial goods did
not decrease, as the founders of economic science had
hoped, but rather acquired the nature of administered
prices, enabling the capital and labour organizations of the
industrial societies to pass on to the consumers, both
national and foreign, the cost of the large volume of
benefits and incomes distributed to the people involved in
their economic activities.
41. Naturally, the rise in administered prices could not
have equal effects in all the regions of a world characterized
by the coexistence of societies whose enterprises exercised
very different degrees of control over the market. One
effect was the impact of those prices on the peoples of the
rich nations, whose oligopolies and transnational cor·
porations used their power over the market to incorporate
into their prices the high incomes paid to their industrial
bureaucracies, their executive ~lites, their organized
workers and their marketing services. The administered
prices had a different effect on the economies or regions
producing primary goods, the sale and export of whichunder the pressure of an intensely competitive marketgenerated only meagre incomes which were of course
insufficient to improve the purchasing power of the
population through distribution systems. Thus, profound
inequalities developed in a world in which opulence and
profligacy on the part of a limited number of nations
continue to bear inexorably down upon the mounting
poverty and indebtedness of the majority of the peoples of
the world.
42. The effects of this process were not limited to the
growing economic inequalities that it genera ted. In
countries which became accustomed to the easy solution of

6

General Assembly - Thirty·third Session - Plenary Meetings

transla ting into higher prices the continued increase in the
remuneration to capital and labour, there was in additioll a
rupture of the appropriate relationship between the returns
of the factors of production and their real efficiency and
productivity. The power over the market exerted by those
factors contributed to the possibility that the prices of the
industrialized societies would reach levels that exceeded
their productivity, thus generating demand in excess of the
supply of goods and services. When this happened, infla·
tionary pressures of a persistent, not a temporary, n.ature
were unleashed, and they became more severe inasmuch as
the rising levels of administered prices required a parallel
increase in the money supply. This increase in turn exerted
a multiplier effect on world inflation when its epicentre was
located in countries whose money played the role of a
reserve cmrency. In such countries the electoratc was
anxious to reduce taxes and at the same time to increase
wages and profits. This led to the constant printing of paper
money, the propagation of the inflationary effects to the
world economy as a whole and the ultimate destruction of
the monetary institutions imposed by the big Powers at
Bretton Woods.
43. When faced with that lmforeseen and extremely
anomalous situation, the industrial societies responded with
solutions which demonstrated their unshaken confidence in
the trading patterns of the traditional economic order. In
the first instance, they decided to seek price stability,
which was threatened by the inflationary spiral, and
stubbornly resisted any marked improvement in the prices
of raw materials or food-stuffs originating in the developing
countries, as was and still is the case with coffee, sugar, tea,
cocoa, cotton, rubber, jute, hard fibres, copper and tin.
44. That resistance became entrenched and remained so
because of the mental habits acquired for generations in the
traditional centres of world power; these habits made a
dogma of the assumption that primary commodities should
be cheap and industrial goods should enjoy th, privilege of
steady price increases. This discriminatory altitude concedes exceptions only in the case of the primary com·
modities which the industrial societies produce, albeit
inefficiently. In order to protect the high prices and costs
of such commodities, they resort to restrictive and protectionist procedures, forgetting the argument of the alleged
defence of the consumer which they so fervently advance
when commodities from the developing countries are
involved.
45. Because they were so remote from the causes of the
inflation, the solutions had little effect in eliminating the
serious dislocations impeding the functioning of the world
economy and of the industrial nations themselves. The
latter were therefore obliged to tryout internal remedies,
including the prices and incomes policies which were
recommended by their more imaginative experts and were
based on recognition of the fact that the demand generated
by the prices and incomes administered by the capital
institutions and the trade unions of the wealthy societies
has contributed most markedly to modern inflation.

46. However, those policies failed owing to practical
difficulties in their implementation and to the resistance of
the best organized groups in those societies. The entrepreneurs stubbornly resisted systems which mi:5rt I11ve the

effect of restricting price increases that resulted in larger
profits, and the trade unions were reluctant to accept
policies aime d at discouraging labour agreements that
exceeded productivity levels and the real growth of the
economy. And while the affluent nations continued to
export the inflation thus generated to the world economy,
their official spokesmen persisted in attributing that in.
f1ation to the prices of food-stuffs or fuels produced by the
developing countries.
47. A contributing factor similar to the failure of prices
and incomes policies was provided by the optimism
inspired in the affluent societies by the growth of trade
among them, even though they actually had reduced thejr
trade with the developing world. The fact that the focal
points of prosperity situated in the geographical areas of
those societies monopolized the profits from the expansion
of trade induced the leaders of the affluent societies to
believe that such expansion was sufficiently dynamic to
maintain the international economy at peak performance,
despite the fact that the gulf between the prosperity of dIe
industrialized nations and the backwardness and indebt.
edness of the developing world had become wider. But the
frequent recessions-not followed, as was hoped, by genuine recovery-and the persistence of inflationary phe·
nomena accompanied by high levels of unemployment
demonstrated the serious limitations of solutions which
attached so little importance to the need for growth in
effective demand among the peoples of the third world.
48. Paradoxically, the solution then judged suitable for
meet{ng the crisis Was a return to protectionism. The
industrialized societies finally resorted to this system in
order to protect, by means of tariff and similar barriers, the
high earnings guaranteed to capital and labour in those
societies-thanks to their administered prices. That protection was conceived for the purpose of discriminating
simultaneously against the infant industries of the devel.
oping countries and against the exports of those developed
nations which had been most effective in combating the
tendency to maintain earnings from their production units
at a level above that of their productivity and efficiency.

49. To the diminution in the flow of trade between the
under-developed world and the industrialized societies was
now added the fragmentation of exchanges between the
industrialized nations themselves, with the resultant contraction of the world market. Understandably, there is
today an over-all lack of confidence about the supposed
wisdom of solutions which, with the ebb and flow of
events, had been tried in an effort to remedy the
imbalances of the international economy.
50. The establishment of a new economic order has thus
become the goals for the solution of the problems of an era
which has seen the fall of colonialism, the awakening of the
poor nations, changes in the international division of
labour, and revolutionary shifts in the geographical location
. of the centres of power. Those profound changes will daily
cast increasing doubt on the legitimacy of a distribution of
the world's income based on the influence exercised on the
pattern of the temlS of international trade by the administered prices of the industrialized societies.

~
11. The search fo~
Inerefo re not ~ gr
ccliar to ollr tIme.
~ which factors oJ
~tegration imposed
;egree of interdep
planet. When that
~uired for the a~l
I mpted that artH
;ocesses, which co
trade and various d
by the ach.ieve~e.n
among the sOcletICi
Uving than thos~ .w
Ine benefits of clvlh:

52. Unfortunately,
to finding solutions
need to make majol
order. Identifying
and the advantage
countries must for~
position vis·a·vis it
tneir ties of econon
in order to oppose
made, The practica
nas been dlat the
marginal area whosl
Iney erupt in the fo
alter the geographic

53. That is why
importance in recer
of the meeha nisms
Ilshed after the Sel
by an increase .in t1
or sales of military
comes as no surpri
aspiration of world
the practical result
rertain Powers the
political advantages

i4. The Uni ted I
mission to mere in
and conflicts arh
problems of unde
izalion cannot be
which initiatives \I
new economic or
llappened with th
Economic Rights
dialogue or the c(
in Tokyo with I'
generalized prefer
mandate quite rig
concern itself witl
struggle against ra
were it to stop she
ll),lay perpetuate
States. Just as el
ensure respect fo
equally determinl
and monetary f

7

1st meeting - 19 September 1978

III btrgfr

~

accept

lIS

lha:!

l of the

llned 10

'Of~'~_

IhJJJa •

db!" ri'..e

,f pieit's
ptimUm

or ttitik

\('d mifir
bt' foa!

areai of

,pr..iln$i~

li'lie~$ l':l

ililmi>C 10

!!m;l\l'l"'f.
) \.\t~··.e

llli,&eIDIlhd Ililt

b} €iCllJ-

lI}'
&

pk.

whidn

ii"wth il'l

'fld

~bk' fil"!

In,

The

$1em

m

itn, Uto;f'
11 tb1l;~

lml t,rllf.

ni:Mlitr~
ill dn't}·

''1;cei!(iiptd

hl'll the
mUD1u

51. The search for a new international economic order is
therefore not a groundless aspiration; nor is it a desire
peculiar to our time, It was a distinctive feature of every era
in which factors of economic dynamism or geographiGal
integration imposed by expansionist Powers led to a high
degree of interdependence between large areas of our
planet. When that happened, the international order required for the articulation of that interdependence attempted that articulation either throug11 authoritarian
processes, which continued to guarantee specific forms of
trade and various degrees of autonomy among nations, or
by the achievement of a consensus based on agreements
among the societies which enjoyed a higher standard of
living than those which were still excluded from many of
the benefits of civilization.
52. Unfortunately, we cannot say that we are any nearer
to finding solutions which are based on recognition of the
need to make major changes in the international economic
order. Identifying inequalities which have to be corrected
and the advantages and privileges which the advanced
countries must forgo has led the latter to adopt a united
position vis-a-vis the developing countries and to tighten
their ties of economic, financial and monetary co-operation
in order to oppose the concessions wllich will have to be
made. The practical effect of that union of the powerful
has been that the developing world has been treated as a
marginal area whose problems receive attention only when
they erupt in the form of major pol itical changes that could
alter the geographical distribution of world power.
53. That is why tile arms trade had acquired such
importance in recent years. The dismantling simultaneously
of the mechanisms of financial and economic aid established after the Second World War has been ac~ompanied
by an increase in the volumc and regularity of military aid
or sales of military equipmcnt to developing countries. It
comes as no surprise to see the ease with which the nohle
aspiration of world disarmament is confused with schemes
the practical results of which are reduced to guaranteeing
certain Powers the monopoly on arms sales, with all the
political advantages which this entails.

I'h:Y·

'hts, '<il><i;.i

,een t::'lt
an I 0l.l1I1.
there i5

up~

00-' (.)lil-

~)

L\t

t~Ji$ trilili

If iiJl tu
II (lf1he
itimI of
~'1!Clti$~

,iU"ld:o'

IJilj(NM i.'f

d .,~n Ih-e

~ :;l,dmin·

54. The United Nations can hardly reduce its guiding
mission to mere intervention after the fact in distlll'bances
,md conflicts arising from the failure to resolve the
problems of under-development and poverty. The OrganiZ3 tion cannot be indifferent to the depressing way in
which initiatives which should have brought us closer to a
new economic order have been rendered ineffective, as
happened with the Development Decades, the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, the North-South
dialogue or the commitments which Governments secured
in Tokyo with regard to the system of non-reciprocal
generalized preferences for the developing countries. The
mandate quite rightly conferred on the United Nations to
concern itself with the protection of human rights and the
struggle against racial discrimination would make no sense
were it to stop short of the mechanisms and practices which
tl),jay perpetuate the great economic inequalities among
Sutes, Just as effective proccdures had to be sought to
ensure respect for human rights in the political field, so
equally determined action is required in the commercial
and monetary fields. which can hardly be allowed to

become areas in which inequality and power have absolute
sway.
55. HaVing been honoured by you with the lofty distinction of presiding over the thirty-third session of the
General Assembly, I am confident that in its deliberations
the antagonisms that divide the world will receive the
responsible and appropriate consideration which an era like
ours demands-an era in which only peaceful solutions are
acceptable. The contribution which the United Nations
makes to securing the commitments needed in order to
satisfy the aspirations of peoples will be decisive for its
continuing prestige and will detemline whether its guiding
mission is to be spared the unfortunate fate of the
international organizations which preceded it. The collapse
of its authority and influence would be a luxury which we
cannot afford in a world which has unleashed nuclear
power and which has reached such a high degree of
interdependence among nations that the problems of each
nation spread to the rest of the world at a speed
unprecedented in the history of mankind.

56. As I said on an earlier occasion in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, we are not living
in a period of calm in which time passes with peaceful
unifonnity. Nowadays, time rushes by like the huge rivers
of the tropics, whose waters hurl themselves forward with
headlong force when they draw near to the edge of a
cataract.
AGENDA ITEM 2S
Admission of new Members to the United NlItions
57. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the proced lire followed in the past, I
should now like to invite the General Assembly to consider,
under item 25 of the provisional agenda, the positive
recommendation by the Security Council for the admission
to membership of the United Nations of Solomon Islands.
This special procedure has been applied previously in order
to give States recently recommended by the Security
Council for membership in our Organization the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts favourably on their
requests, to participate from the outset in the work of the
session, If there is no objection. we shall proceed accordingly.
It was so dC!cided.

58, The PRESI DENT (interpretation from Spl/nish J: In
document A/33/207 the Security Council has recommended the admissioll of Solomon Islllllds to membership
In the United Nations. Docllmcnt A/33/L.1 and Add.1
contains a draft resolutiDn to this cffect May I take it that
thc General Assembly accepts the recummcndation of the
Secllfity Council and adopts thc draft resolution unanimously?

The draft resulutiO!l was adopted (resolutio!l 33/ I).

r

59, The PRESIDENT (interpretation ji'O/ll ,S"pallish
I
declare Solomon Islands admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

8

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

The delegation of Solomon Islands was escorted to its
place in the General Assemb{l' hall.
60. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
President of the thirty-third regular session of the United
Nations General Assembly, I wish to welcome a new State,
Solomon Islands, whose application for admission to
membership in the Organization has just been approved.
61. The Solomon Islands were discovered in 1568 by a

Spaniard, Alvaro Mendana de Neira, during a flourishing
period of Hispanic history, and from that time onwards
captured the imagination of travellers and writers, who saw
the islands as a treasure trove of natural resources and an
earthly paradise. In the nineteenth century the Solomon
Islands were associated with the United Kingdom, and in
this century its original inhabitants began a long struggle to
gain total independence, which they have succeeded in
doing, peacefully and without bloodshed, thanks to the
mature manner in which the former colonial Power
perceived the irreversible process of self-determination of
peoples, which is a fundamen tal chara cteristic of our time.
62. The admission of Solomon Islands has brought the
number of States Members of the United Nations to ISO.
This figure, which would have seemed lmattainable three
decades ago, is an indication of how the decolonization
process has been taking its course and at the same time of
the extent to which our Organi7.a tion has succeeded in
attaining a lll1iversal character. This universality forms the
basis of the unquestionable responsibility of the United
Nations to guide international relations towards the goals uf
peace and security.
63. I should like to congra tula te the people and Govern·
ment of Solomon Islands and particularly the Prime
Minister, Mr. Peter Kenilorea, on the unan imous approval
with which the international community received its
application for admission to membership in the United
Nations {A/33/202-S/12801/. This signifies recognition of
the wUl of the inhabitants of Solomon Islands to work
together with all peoples in the consolidation of peaceful
coexistence and in achieving permanent co·operation for
international progress and development. [ am grateful for
its assurance that it will abide by the principles or the
Charter and I offer it the full co·operation of the General
Assembly in the satisfactory fulfilment of tllose desires.

statesman, politician, lll1iversity professor, publicist, author
and public servant. Nor are you new to the work of the
United Nations, having at tended the twenty-fifth, thirtieth
thirty-first and thirty.second sessions of the General As:
sembly. You have also represented your COWl!ry at several
very important international conferences. Certainly, after
hearing your very important address this afternoon, no one
can doubt your rare brilliance and commitment to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. These
attributes already assure us that you will guide the work of
this Assembly to a very fruitful conclusion.

-

12. The PRESlDI

rer

rf.1/<' call on the
~f of the group

13. Mr. JAIPAL (
.J.li~ group (lf Sta
tht \\'3.rm congratu
U1unimous e1e c t ion

il1lhirt),·third regu

i*'Jys occupied 81

mI MS often playl

iltIiberatk.1nS of thi

66. I should like also, on behalf of the African group, to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. La7.ar Mojsov of
Yugoslavia, who guided the work of the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session with exemplary brilliance. The
thirty-second session, together with the three special
sessions, will probab ly go down in the history of the United
Nations as one of the longest continuous period of meetings
ever, and yet Mr. Mojsov presided over its several inter·
mittent sittings with calm and tenacity.

67. Let me noW turn to the question of the admission of
Solomon Islands to the United Nations.
68. This Organiz.a tion can properly pride itself on its

membership embracing peoples of divergent origins, beliefs
and political and economic systems. It is perhaps in this
divergence that we find our strength, as we benefit from the
cross-fertilization of ideas and as we learn to live logether in
our vcry complex world. Quite often the differences which
separate us can be overcome if we get to know each other
better, and certainly the United Nations provides a useful
meeting-place where beneficial and lasting relationShips can
be forged. It is for this reason that the United Nations
continues to aspire to universal membership.
69. from very humble beginn iugs, this Organization over
the years has grown tremcndously. Today the principle of
the Wliversality of membership of the United Nations
celebrates yet another victory with tne admission of
Solomon Islands to the United Natillns. This new State not
only pushes the number of our Members up to 150 but
certainly brings to this body frcsb ideas which should
further enhance our work.

64. Several representatives have expressed the desire to
speak at this time. I now caIJ on the representative of
Botswana, who wishes to speak on behalf of the African
States.

It is a great honour and privilege for me, on behalf of
the African group, to welcome the delegation of Solomon
Islands and to congratulate the Go.. .ernment and people of
Solomon Islands upon their attainment or full membership
in the United Nations.

65. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, your unanimous
election to your high officc is a tribute both to yourself
personally and to your great countty, Colombi:t. In my
capacity as Chairman of the African group of States ror this
month, I wish to congratulate you most warmly upon your
election. You can be assured of the full co.operation of the
African group in the exccution of your arduous tasks. We
certainly look forward to working with you, as we have
done with your many predecessors, in grappling with the
very important issues before this Assembly. You bring to
this office a wealth of experience, expertise and skills
gained through your brilliant an d impressive career as

71. The presence of the delegation of Solomon Islands
among us here is yet another victory for decoloni7.ation. We
thank all those Who, together with the people of Solomon
Islands, made this great event possible. I have in mind here,
in particular, the indefatigable Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implemen tation of the
Declaration un the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and PeQples. WIder the able leadership of
1\'lr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, and the
administering Power, the United Kingdom, which co·
operated with the Special Committee in the decolonization
process.

70.

You corn;: tt, usdqtlOlNtk strvice

rep;re-senI aIi\'e in thi

ttt Republic. as

Prtsident designate

oounlrfs del ega tic

lI$SiOOi.. You have
ili& Y'our lW>"n. YOI
~ your special ...
I)/' particular in terE

illdlfu to have ye

~e Ui~ during thi
!I~ boefore it a

Foris:ionaI lIge nda
F~ct lHid securit
IIdI·heing,.
it In your

Opel

~

!O question
&cin& the cornm
l1l~ud the anon
llm~ order (l[ tod
fllil) to the solutio

IS. We ex tend to
AJWl group's who
!'*WOfk.

16. J mould like
lfillIP'S tribute to

Mr. Luar M()jso\',
dllM8 this year w
.ct~$ in the se

llThe Asian g
aFt\' II \'ery w~

ll.llyJst b«n adm

or Solnmon Islan

up on its atu
lIGll of internatii
UMed Nations. il

1l1li'If'luhty of me

n. We a1r.t1 welc
AJiln. grclup and

Ir~ of mutual un~

ill. The PRESH
tOVt C3U on the
Republic. who wi
EilItopean States.

...
Ist meeting - 19 September 1978

lUblicist, author
:le work of the
-fifth, th irtieth,
he General Asun try at several
Certainly, after
:ernoon, no one
nitment to the
Nations. These
ide the work of

'ncan group. to
lzar Mojsov of
neral Assembly
brilliance. The
three special
y of the Uniled
iod of meetings
s several inler.

e admission of

e itself on ill
origins, beliefs
perhaps in this
enefit from Ihe
live together in
'rerences which
IOW each olher
ovides a useful
lationships can
Jnited Nations

:anization over
~e principle of
lni ted Nations
admission of
new State nol
Ip to 150 but
which sho~1d
e, on behalfof
In of Solomon
and people oJ
U membership
lomon Islands
Ionization. We
e of Solomon
in mind hen,
nittee on the
ation of the
:e to Coloni~
leadership of
mia, and loo
1, which co·
ecolonizalion

72. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): J
now call on the representa tive of India, who will speak on
behalf of the group of Asian States.
73. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, on behalf of the
Asian group of States I have the honour to extend to you
the warm congratulations of all the Asian States on your
unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at
its thirty-third regular session. Your country, Colombia, has
always occupied an eminent place in international affairs
and has often played a leading and enlightened role in the
deliberations of this Organization since it was established.
You come to us, Sir, with a distinguished record in the
diplomatic service of your country, in your Parliament as a
representative in the House of Assembly and as a Senator of
the Republic, as Minister for Foreign Affairs and as
President designate for the Republic. You have led your
country's delegations to the last three General Assembly
sessions. You have been honoured by 11 countries, includ·
ing your own. Your literary contributions are well known
and your special work in the field of rural development is
of particular interest to Asian countries. We are fortunate
indeed to have your wise and experienced leadership to
guide us during this session of the General Assembly, which
has before it a record number of 132 items on its
provisional agenda, some of them of critical relevance to
peace and security as weIl as to economic and social
well.being.

74. In your opening address, Mr. President, you posed
some 10 questions concerning the unresolved problems
facing the community of nations' and you brilliantly
analysed the anomalies underlying the unsatisfactory eco·
nomic order of today. I hope that we shall address ourselves
fully to the solution of the problems highlighted by you.

75. We extend to you, Mr. President, the assurances of the
Asian group's whole-hearted co-operation and assistance in
your work.
76. I should like to take this opportunity to pay the Asian
group's tribu~e to the splendid work of your predecessor,
Mr. Lazar MOJsov, who shouldered unusually heavy burdens
during this year with great distinction. We wish him further
successes in the service of his country.
77. The Asian group has also asked me on its behalf to
express a very warm welcome to Solomon Islands, which
has just been admitted as our youngest Member. The entry
of Solomon Islands into the United Nations puts the final
stamp on its attainment of independence and its asump.
tion of international rights and responsibilities. For the
United Nations, it is one more advance towards the goal of
universality of membership.

78. We also welcome the entry of Solomon Islands to the
Asian group and look forward to the development of close
ties of mutual understanding and co-operation.
79. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of the Genuan Democratic
Republic, who will speak on behalf of the group of Eastern
European States.

9

80. Mr. FLORlN (Gemlan Democratic Republic) (inter·
pretation from Russian): Mr. President, I should like, on
behalf of the group of Eastern European States, warmly to
congratulate you on your election to the responsible post
of President of the thirty-third session of the United
Nations General Assembly. In so doing, we assure you that
our delegations will actively and constructively help to
discharge the important tasks facing the Assembly at the
current session. We applaud your predecessor, our comrade
Minister Mojsov, who so successfully presided over the
thirty-second session. We voice our respect and gra titude to
him.
81. I have been asked to ex press our pro found satisfaction
at the decision taken by the General Assembly to admit
Solomon Islands to membership in the United Nations. We
warmly welcome the young State as the one hundred and
fiftieth Member of our world Organization. The admission
of that country is a further step on the way to achieving
universality of membership in the United Nations and
expands equitable co-operation between States.

82. Five years ago the German Democratic Republic was
honoured to become a Member of this Organization-in
fact, its one hundred and thirty-third Member. Today its
representative has an opportunity to congratulate. on
behalf of the group of Eastern European States, Solomon
Islands on its admission as the one hundred and fiftieth
Member State. These facts, like many others, reflect the
changes which are occurring in the world.
83. The declaration of independence of Solomon Islands
on 7 July 1978 was a further significant success in the
consistent struggle for the implemen tation of the right of
peoples to national and social sel f-determina lion. The result
of that process is in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the historic
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
The policy of the socialist States, unswervingly based on
principles of the equality and self-determination of peoples
and oriented towards the devefopment of friendship and
co-operation between States, logically led to a recognition
of Solomon Islands as a sovereign State and to support for
that country's legitimate request to become a Member of
the United Nations.

84. We state our willingness to co-operate with the
delegation of Solomon Islands in the interest of the lofty
purposes of the United Nations Charter for the enhancement of peace throughout the world.

85. It is particularly noteworthy that Solomon Islands is
situated in a region where over recent years the ideas of
peace and co-operation have been becoming ever more
firmly established. The peoples of many Territories in the
Pacific Ocean have, however, still Llot been able to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence. The States in our group, in accordance with the
principles of their policy, will in future show solidarity in
supporting the struggle of those peoples.
86. I express the conviction that Solomon Islands will take
an active part in resolving the vital international problems,

10

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

not only in the region of the Pacific Ocean but throughout
the world, in the inte rests of peace and of the peoples.
87. I wish Solomon Islands further success in strengthening its ·independence and in pursuing a policy designed to
ensure social progress.
88. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Cuba, who wi!l speak on
behalf of the Latin American group.
89. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, the members of the Latin
American group of States have entrusted me with the high
honour of extending to you, on behalf of our region, our
warmest congratulations on your unanimous election to the
important post of President of the General Assembly of the
United Nations at its thirty·third session. This election also
confers honour on your great country, Colombia, and on
our whole Latin American region.
90. We are convinced, because of your long and brilliant
career as statesman and diplomat, your well-known executive ability as head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of our
sister Republic of Colombia and your high moral qualities,
that you will provide true guidance in this Assembly's work
in the complex international circumstances in which you
are now assuming your functions.
91. In expressing this confidence in you I should like at
the same time to reaffirm our intention to co-operate with
you completely in the discharge of your responsibilities.
92. As a Cuban, Mr. President, may I congratulate you on
your unanimous election, which does honour to our
continent.
93. It is also a pleasant duty to transmit to the Prime
Minister of Solomon Islands on behalf of the nations of
Latin America our cordial greetings on his country's
admission to membership in the United Nations. This new
State Member of the United Nations can rely on the sincere
co.operation and support of the countries of Latin America
in our joint endeavour to strengthen international peace
and security.
94. I would not wish to end these brief remarks without
expressing to the outgoing President, Mr. Lazar Mojsov,
Deputy Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Latin
American countries' appreciation of the exemplary and
expert manner in which he guided the work of the
thirty-second regular session of the General Assembly and
of its eighth, ninth and tenth special sessions.
95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call
now on the representative of Luxembourg who will speak
on behalf of the group of Western European and other
States.
96. Mr. PETERS (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, it is a signal pleasure and a great
honour for me to be the one to represent the group of
Western European and other States in extending our hearty
congratulations on your unanimous election to the high

post of President of the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session. Your professional and human qualities already give
us suffiCient guarantees that the thirty-third session of the
General Assembly, under your wise direction, will be
crowned with the anticipated success. I assure you of the
full support of the group of Western European and other
states in the arduous task that will be yours and ours in the
coming months.
97. I would certainly be shirking an elementary duty if I
did not once again thank your illustrious predecessor,
Mr. Mojsov, who conducted our work with wisdom and
perspicacity during four sessions of the General Assembly.

logelhe

tlrogglE
equity
imperil
feslaU(

103.

I

we ho]
ofSolc
of the

non-aI

tlruggl

and dl
co-op;

98. It is a privilege for me to welcome most sincerely, on
behalf of the group of Western European and other States,
the delegation of Solomon Islands. We extend our congratu·
lations to Solomon Islands on becoming independent on
7 July this year. We are happy to welcome this State as the
one hundred and fiftieth Member of the great family of the
United Nations. The United Nations has thus taken another
step towards the ideal of complete universality, and I
should like to congratulate the Government of the United
Kingdom for the exemplary and enlightened way in which
it assisted Solomon Islands to become an independent and
sovereign State.

aims

99. Solomon Islands is a small State so far as territory and
population are concerned, and it will not give offence if the
representative of another small State Member of the United
Nations makes this observation. However, we are convinced
that that new State will play an important role in our
Organization and that it will make a significant contribution to its work. It is in this spirit that the members of
the group of Western European and other States offers
Solomon Islands their friendship and all possible cooperation in achieving the ideals and objectives of the
United Nations Charter, which, they, too support.

leSSic

100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now give the floor to the representative of Iraq, who will
speak on behalf of the group of Ar.ab States.

on

count I

104.
now I

Unite I

IOS.

rust (
this 1

We!o

ptofH
in de

106.

pleas
and
supp
Nati(
guidl
indej
IhelT
prosl

107,

wor

Co.(

ext!
101. Mr. AI-ALl (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, your election to the presidency of the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly will undoubtedly be most profitable to the international community,
given the competence and rich experience which you have
acquired as a statesman and philosopher. May I take this
opportunity to ex tend to you, on behalf of the Arab States,
a warm welcome and our sincere congratulations on your
election to preside over this session and to voice the hope
that your work will be crowned with complete success. At
the same time, also on behalf of the Arab countries, I
should like our friend, Mr. Mojsov, the outgoing President
of the General Assembly, to know how very much we
appreciate the great efforts he exerted to establish peace
and security in the world and his support o"f the aspirations
of the peoples struggling for independence and freedom.

108
vel:
oor

Ihi:

see
ha!
gui
sal

Ur
rei
\(

dl
M
C·

8
102. I am also pleased, on behalf of the Arab group, to
welcome the newly independent State of Solomon.
Islands to membership of the United Nations. I hope and
trust that this yotmg State will contribute effectively,

"

--.......
its thirty-thir~

les already ~ve
I se ssion of the
:ction, wiU be
:ure you of the
pean and other
and ours in the

mtary duty if I
JS predecessor
:h wisdom an~
1eraJ Assembly,

1St sincerely, on
I1d other Stale~
dour congralu.
independent on
this State as the
at famDy of the
,s taken another
ersality, and I
t of the Unite~
d way in which
1dependertt an~

as territory an~
le offence if the
er of the Unite~
'e are convince~
Int role in our
,nificant contr~
the members or
lr States offers
1I possible 00·
ljectives of the
pport.

~m Spanish): I

r Iraq, who wlll

from Arabic):
lidency of the
y will undoubt·
l1al community,
which you have
May I take this
the Arab States,
llations on your
voice the ho~
Ilete success. At
ab countries, I
tgoing President
very much we
establish peace
f the aspirations
nd freedom.

Arab group, la
: of Solomon
ons. I hope an~
ute effective~,

1st meeting - 19 September 1978

11

together with the third-world group of countries, to the just
tTUggle to ensure the establishment of justice, peace and
~quity throughout the world an~ to. the fight. agains.t
imperialism, exploitation and racism In all their mamfestations.

States of the world. Our connexlon with Solomon Islands,
has long been harmonious, and we look forward to
continuing a close relationship in the future as fellow
members of the Commonwealth and on the basis of
equality and friendship.

101 On behalf of the Government of Iraq, may I say that
we hope to enjoy the best relations with the friendly State
of Solomon Islands so as to render a service to the countries
of the third world, particularly those belonging to the
non-aligned movement. We pay a tribute here to its
struggling people's struggle for independence and freedom"
and declare our determination to establish every means of
co-operation with this new State in order to serve the noble
aims and humanitarian objectives shared by our two
countries.

110. We are especially pleased to welcome here today the
presence of Prime Minister Kenilorea. It is perhaps fitting
that Solomon Islands, the youngest Member of this world
community, should have as its Head of Government one of
the youngest prime ministers in the world. Under his
leadership my delegation and my Government are confident
that Solomon Islands will play an important and valuable
role in their own region, in the Commonwealth and in this
Organization.

104. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I

now call on the representative of the host country, the
United States of America.
105. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America ): Sir, may I
first congratulate you on your election to the presidency of
this thirty-third regular session of the General Assembly.
We look forward with great anticipation and enthusiasm to
profiting from your leadership and wisdom as you guide us
in dealing with the issues at hand for this coming Assembly
session.

106. As the host Government, the United States is also
pleased to welcome Solomon Islands as the one hundred
and fiftieth Member of the United Nations. We have
supported its application for membership in the Uni~ed
Nations out of a firm conviction that the principles which
guided the people of Solomon Islands successful1y to
independence on 7 July of this year will continue to guide
them in our effort to establish a world of peace, justice and
prosperity.
107. We extend our congratulations to the representatives
of Solomon Islands and welcome them to the important
work of the United Nations. We assure them of the full
co-operation of the United States in this endeavour and
extend to them the warm greetings of the American people.

108. Mr. BROWN (United Kingdom): Sir, my delegation is
very happy to join in the ex press ions of pleasure and
congratulation on your assumption of the presidency of
this Assembly. It is a source of satisfaction to all of us to
see as our President someone of such wide experience who
has given proof of great diplomatic skiIls in the task of
guiding his country's foreign policies. And it is a pleasure to
salute you as representative of a country with which the
United Kingdom has long enjoyed close and friendly
relations.
109. Today we in the United Kingdom delegation are
delighted to welcome Solomon Islands as the newest
Member of the United Nat ions, thus bringing the number of
our Members to 150. In the debate on the admission of
Solomon Islands in the Security Council, we already had
the occasion to congratulate ourselves on the fact that yet
another of the Territories for which the United Kingdom
was responsible as administering Power has acceded to
independence and taken its place among the sovereign

. 111. Mr. TOMA (Samoa): Mr. President, it is my privilege

on behalf of the Samoan delegation to extend to you our
sincere congratulations on your election to your high office
and to join in the many expressions of high esteem and
tribute justly paid you and your country. We are confident
that under your wise guidance the work ahead will be easier
for us all.
112. May I also take this opportunity to record sincere
appreciation and admiration of the superb manner in which
your predecessor, Mr. Mojsov, discharged his duties as
President during his term of office.

III The Samoan delegation feels it a great honour to
have been able to join in sponsoring the draft resolution
requesting the admission of Solomon Islands to membership in the United Nations A/33/L.l and Add.i/. The
independence of Solomon Islands and its desire to join the
United Nations is the latest development in a trend which
has been emerging in the Pacific over the last 15 years,
During this period, island States gradually have been ga!ning
independence and adding their voices to the other regIOnal
voices from the Pacific in this great forum. And though
some of our voices may be small and may 'come from afar,
the more of us there are, the less faint will our collective
voice be; for often, because of our very isolation an~ si~e,
we feel we can offer, as I hope we can, an objective
viewpoint and make worth-while contributions on the
many serious issues that come before this body.

r

114. We are delighted that Solomon Islands, with its long
history of patience and forbearance, is now to add its voice,
a voice of frankness and wisdom, that will undoubtedly be
of benefit to all Members.
115. Witnessing the emergence of Solomon Islands as a
nation to take its rightful place in the international
community gives Samoa special satisfaction in that we and
the Solomons share a curious link in colonial history: our
colonial fate and that of part of what now forms Solomon
Islands was sealed by the same stroke of the pen, as it were.
The Berlin Agreement of 1899 between the three Powers
dominant in the Pacific at that time determined that we
and the central Solomons would become, respectively,
German and British Territories.
116. Now, almost a century later, we are pleased to
congratulate both the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands,

12

General Assembly - Thirty·third Session - Plenary Meetings

Mr. Kenilorea and his Government, as well as the Government of the United Kingdom, for the way in which
independence was achieved and for the swiftness with
which Solomon Islands has become a Member here.
117., As we welcome Solomon Islands' membership in the
United Nations today we look forward eagerly to even
larger Pacific representation in this great body, but of
course this will be possible only when all those Pacific
peoples who aspire to independence are able to achieve the
status they seek. We express the hope that all paths to
independence will be as smooth and as unobstructed as that
of Solomon Islands.

118. Member States wi11 agree that the capacity of the
United Nations to attain its noble objectives is strengthened
by universality of its membership with all nations abiding
by its principles. For this reason then as well as because of
our natural joy at the emergence on the world scene of
another Pacific nation and close friend, we warmly welcome your country, Mr. Prime Minister, and wish you well
in this world body.
119. Mr. FRANCIS (New Zealand): Mr. President, may r
first of all congratulate you on your unanimous election as
President of this session of the United Nations General
Assembly. The acclaim with which your election was
greeted does honour to you and to your country. I know
that under your leadership and skilled guidance our work
will proceed smoothly and effectively. You will. have the
full co-operation of the New Zealand delegation.
120. I also wish to ex press my Governmen1's deep
appreciation to the outgoing President of the Assembly,
Mr, Lazar Mojsov, who presided with great skill and
dedication over three crUCial special sesions of the General
Assembly as well as over the thirty-second regular session,
and who has earned the gratitude of us all.
12 I. I am delighted to be able to express today New
Zealand's warm congratulations and greetings to the Prime
Minister and the delegation of Solomon Islands. This is a
significant day, both for the Pacific and for the United
Nations. This session could scarcely have a more auspicious
'beginning. Solomon Islands is the fourth nation from the
Pacific to join this Organization in recent years. Its
admission will add an important new voice to those
speaking for the peoples of that vast ocean area. Solomon
Islands is, moreover, the one hundred and fiftieth Member
of the United Nations. Its admission marks a significant
stage in the progress of this Organization towards universality of membership. And that is something of which my
delegation is acutely aware, perched up as we are on the
high jump-seat at the back of the hall. But that elevation is
well worth while when it allows our good friends from the
Solomons to join us. We can look down from our vantage
point with satisfaction as we see the growing number in the
Assembly below us.
122. Solomon Islands and New Zealand are neighbours in
the South Pacific. We have developed, over the years, a
close relationship. It has grown, in large part, through
individual contacts between our people. It is enriched and
sustained by real friendship. As members of the South

-'-----------~--

Pacific Forum we work together for the welfare and
development of our region. We are truly Pacific partners.

123. New Zealand watched with sympathy and interest
the process of decolonization in Solomon Islands. It was
smooth and efficient, and was a tribute to the co·operative
spirit existing between the Solomons and Britain. It was
with a sense of excitement and expectation, therefore, that
New Zealand took part in the celebrations marking the
independence of the country on 7 July 1978, and straightaway opened a resident diplomatic mission in Honiara. It is
with equal pleasure that we welcome Solomon Islands as a
Member of the United Nations today. I know that the
admission of Solomon Islands will strengthen the United
Nations and add a new dimension to its work. We look
forward to long and fruitful co-operation in this Organi.
za tion with our friends and partners from the Pacific.
124. Mr. NISHIDA (Japan): Mr. President, I should like to
begin my remarks today by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the thirty-third session of
the United Nations General Assembly and to express my
conviction that under your able leadership the Assembly
wiIl be able to perform its work both smoothly and
effectively.
125. I should also like to take this occasion to express the
deep gratitude of my delegation for the distinguished
leadership which Mr. Lazar Mojsov prOVided to this Assembly throughout the deliberations of its thirty-second
regular session as well as its eighth, ninth and tenth special
sessions.

election
delegati
appropl
express
cessor,
butions

dUring

addre~

130. I

membe

/ASEA

land-tl
happy
in the

warml~

Indepel
of an
process
United
niously
comme
Islands

131.

univerl
Nation
internl
particl
resolul
United
acclam

132.
126. As the representative of an Asian country which is
itself a part of the Pacific region and which has had special
ties with the people of Solomon Islands, it is with great
pleasure that I join with the previous speakers in expressing
our heartfelt welcome to the delegation of Solomon Islands
to the United Nations. I feel deeply honoured to be able to
convey the warm greetings of both the Government and
people of Japan to the newest Member of this Organization.
I note that Mr. Peter Kenilorea, the Prime Minister of
Solomon Islands, is himself present with us today. Therefore I should like to take this occasion to express the
conviction of the Japanese Government that under his wise
and capable leadership the people of his country will
certainly make an important contribution to the international community.

127. As all of us are surely aware, the decision which we
have taken today raises the membership of this Organization to to a full 150 and brings us yet closer to our
cherished goal of the true universality of United Nations
membership. I am confident that I speak for all of us when
I express the satisfaction which my own delegation feels
regarding this decision and our conviction that the people
of Solomon Islands will fulfil their responsibilities under
the United Nations Charter with sincerity and distinction.
128. On behalf of the people of my own country I am
happy to welcome the people of Solomon Islands to their
rightful place in the world community.
,129. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia): Mr. President; allow·
me to extend to you my sincere congratulations on your

oppor!
relatio
existin
Asia a

ASEA

opera1
endeal
streng
Intem
equita

133.

like t
presid
long
most
co-op
tasks

134.
outgo
all kl
respol
sembl
pay i
with'
of thi
the A
135.
the l

1st meeting - 19 September 1978

'lIi!'d1_ •

~~

~~im~

".k-

"~
~.i1-

~-.~
. .tqlfit

;II~lI.'
.&.1U&f~ll

~~1'U

,_

'~Iit

~!l.~ lt~

Wit.

~til

-~

~d:lit,

~lIt

W'OliI illl\!:! 1'-

:r...... ~i

'Q~~
!l~~\i

..,_",.ilIii'%' 1I1li

,,~n~.!lt(

~,tl$f~t

! Il'G ~.~.\r
1lb>.I!lil'l!J'4iflOl'llIt

Urfll~~

~f.f)" ~,1!

lti!:l,!td~

~ 1lIl_.pI!!

llli1l1t 1Fa:l\IIlf

~li,~@liI!_1iil

h,ll1;.t*t1ir
__

~;lVj\

:mf

~.:mt.
W.~,;i:

!1d,r,

ftlftet

election by acclamation as President of this Assembly. My
delegation will have the occasion to congratulate you
appropriately on your election to the presidency, and to
express our high appreciation to your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Lazar Mojsov, for his important contributions to the success of the work of the United Nations
during the past year, when the Indonesian Foreign Minister
addresses the Assembly on 28 September next.
130. I have been requested by my colleagues the other
members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
I ASHANj -Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore an d Thai·
land-to speak on their behalf. All of us are extremely
happy to see Solomon Islands, one of our close neighbours
in the sou th west Pacific, attain its independ ence. We
warmly welcome it into the family of the United Nations.
Independence for Solomon Islands marks the culmination
of an orderly process of constitutional advancement, a
process in which the leaders of Solomon Islands and the
United Kingdom Govemment worked together harmoniously in pursuit of a common objective. They deserve our
commendation for the smooth manner in which Solomon
Islands have acceded to sovereignty and independence.
131. ASEAN has consistently supported the principle of
universality with regard to the membership of the United
Nations as one of the most effective ways of promoting
international peace and co-operation. We are therefore
particularly pleased to have become a sponsor of the draft
resolution on the admission of Solomon Islands to the
United Nations, which has just been adopted by
acclamation.

132. The members of ASEAN would like to take this
opportunity to express their conviction that the friendly
relations and mutually beneficial co·operation already
existing between the countries in the regions of South East
Asia and the Pacific will fully include Solomon Islands. The
ASEAN delegations are looking forward to close cooperation with the delegation of Solomon Islands in the
endeavours of the United Nations to maintain and
strengthen world peace and security and to establish a new
international economic order that is more just and more
equitable.

n'~:j,

1'\~~J3'¥~
.\1i!'_ttl 'lli

.i1t<lt ~"lI!'

<:!\!'i ..t"idl.
..~:f ~~ ~!tf·
,~t~,~

fltt'd N1itWts
llil)lI'lll:I'II:~.

.t!lt~ If.m
tl!~~
ti~.IIt~

_llr

~ :i~.II;t;I,.t\ti\.lt:
~Ji!~l~ ~ aTl
~,I'!d.l ~&', ~e::f

~t:l'It.iA"IT
il;!lIrl il,~ ~'ZlW

133. Mr. ANDERSON (Australia): Mr President, I should
like to congratulnte you most warmly on your election to
preside over this Assembly, a responsibility for which your
long and distinguished career In many fields qualifies you
most eminently. I should also like to offer you the full
co-operation or the Australian delegation in the important
tasks that lie ahead.

134. I should like also to extend our sincere thanks to the
outgoing President, Mr. Lazar Mojsov. The past year, as we
all know, imposed exceptionally heavy and important
responsibilities upon the President of the General Assembly. On behalf of the Australian delegation I wish to
pay a particular tribute to the competence and wisdom
with which Mr. Mojsov conducted the thirty-second session
of the General Assembly and the three special sessions of
the Assembly which have taken place in recent months.
135. It is always a pleasure to welcome a new Member to
the United Nations. For an Australian representative it is

13

particularly gratifying when the new member is one of
Australia's neighbours. Geography alone would dictate that
the ties between Australia and Solomon Islands should be
close and cordial, but regional solidarity and co·operation
have ensured that that is so.
136. As a neighbour with long and close ties with the
Solomons, as a member of the Commonwealth. and as a
member of the United Nations Special Committee on
decoloni7..ation, Australia has followed closely the process
of decolonization which led to the independence of
Solomon Islands on 7 July of this year. The process was
peaceful and harmonious, and the United Kingdom, the
former administering Power, is to be conunended for the
way in which it responded to the wishes of the people of
the Territory.
137. I am confident that the membership of Solomon
Islands and its participation in the work of the Organization
will enrich and strengthen the United Nations. Australians
are happy to note that the Solomons is also assuming a
new role as an active and co-operative member of the South
Pacific community, where we have welcomed it as a
member in the South Pacific Forum.
138. The task facing the Government and people of
Solomon Islands does not, of course, end with independence; in many ways it has only begun. We are therefore
pleased to note that the United Kingdom will continue to
co-operate with and to provide developmental assistance to
the Solomon Islands Governmen 1. My own Government
will also continue its co-operation. It will provide substantial developmental assistance to Solomon Islands in the
coming years on a wide range of projects, from medical
teams to technical assistance and training awards.
139. Australia was honoured to become a sponsor of the
application of Solomon [slands for United Nations membership. My delegation wannly welcomes the admission of the
Solomons as the one hundred and fiftieth Member of
our Organization, and we look rorward to co-operating
closely with their representatives in the future, both here in
New York and in the United Nations forum.
140. Mr. MATANE (Papua New GUinea): My delegation
warmly congratulates you. Sir, on your unanimous election
as President of the thirty-third session of the General
Assembly. We pay a tribute also to Mr. Mojsov, who
distinguished himself as President of the last session.

141. My delegation wishes to associate itself with those
delegations that Ilave just expressed their support for the
admission of Papua New Guinea's neighbour, Solomon
Islands, to membership in the United Nations system. We
are appreciative of the fact that this newly independent and
sovereign nation's accession to this famlly of nations has
the full support of the entire membership. The admission is
truly a great moment for the people of Solomon Islands. It
is more than welcomed by three other small nations in the
South Pacific, namely, Fiji, Western Samoa and Papua New
Guinea, which are Members of the United Nations. Although other countries in the region are not yet Mern~rs
of the United NaUons, their people are happy to see that
one of their coun tries has been admitted to the United
Nations.

14

General Assembly - Thirty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

142. What I wanted to say has been said by those
delegations which have spoken before me. Moreover, o~r
views on the subject were highlighted on 17 ~ugust tIll,S
year when my delegation addressed the S;cun~y ~ouncJl
during its consideration of Solomon Islands applIcatIOn for
membership of the United Nations.
143. The admission of Solomon Islands bears witness to
the determination of the developing countries, big or small,
to join the community of nations in solving the problems
affecting mankind. We hope that the peoples of t~e
Territories still under foreign domination will be given theIr
right to self-determination in the not-too-distan.t future.
That is only fair so tllat they too can have theIr say on
international economic, political and social issues for the
benefit of mankind.
144. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands,
Mr. Peter Kenilorea.
145. Mr. KENILOREA (Solomon Islands): May I first of

all congratulate you, Sir, and the people of the Republic of
Colombia on your assumption of the office of President of
the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. My people
of Solomon Islands join me in wishing you well in the
performance of the duties of this high office.
146. Mr. President and distinguished representatives, I
now wish to say how very honoured I am to address you
today in this Assembly and to convey to you the humble
greetings of my people and the Government of Solomon
Islands.

We are very grateful for the kind, congratulatory
messages sent to us during our independence celebrations.
Indeed I thank you all most sincerely for your kind support
and prayers during that historic day of 7 July 1978. The
encouragingly warm reception you have given me today,
and the kind words of welcome addressed to us by some
of our traditionally friendly nations both here in the
Assembly and in the Security Council, will remain a source
of further strength, pride and promise to our young nation.
We look forward to working side by side with you and the
United Nations for the world peace and happiness on which
mankind's future on this planet depends so much.
147

148. J want to pay a special tribute at this juncture if I
may, to Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom,
and to thank that Government for all its help over the past
85 years, laying for us in Solomon Islands what we believe
to be a sound foundation for our future progress. It is our
hope that the happy association which exists between our
two countries, and which goes back many years, will
continue to be fruitful.
149. You in this great assembly of nations have seen fit to
admit my country into your midst as the one hundred and
fiftieth Member. With humble pride, and in my capacity as
Prime Minister of our newly independent nation, 1 accept
the challenge and wish to declare before you all that
Solomon Islands accepts the obligations contained in the
Charter of the United Nations and undertakes to fulfil
them.

150. Solomon Islands is a small nation of 200,000 people.
We are a small country of small islands. We are a people
unpretentious, simple but happy, of diverse tongues and
ethnic origins, a people deeply in love with our OWn culture
and way of life. Our smallness and diversity, our culture
and being ourselves were the greatest source of strength to
us in our attainment of independence_ Our friends near and
far respect this and we should not like to lose this identity
for something the world might wish us to do which we do
not understand.
151. This principle is fundamental to our pledge to this
family of nations. It is important for our participation and
involvement in regional organizations and multilateral
institutions. In fact it is essential to conducting our affairs
with thosc nations that may wish to work closely with us. I
believe that all nations, small or big, island or continental,
developing or developed, are members of the human race
and therefore should have respect for each other.
152. For our part, we intend to respect the beliefs of

others even if we should differ in our views. We also expect
to be respected for the identity which we regard as the soul
of our young nation, which is to do and to have what we
fully understand. We have carried this precept into our
system of government, believing that as a nation we must
live within our means and take care how we use our
- available resources. In development we believe in a balanced
approach that would encourage the improvement of living
standards and the maintenance of a satisfactory quality of
life. We welcome foreign aid and foreign investment on
terms that are fair and satisfactory to Solomon Islands as a
nation.
153. While assuming the responsibility today as an independent nation to pursue development aims and objectives in line with the aspirations of our own people, we are
fully aware of the realities of interdependence in the world
today. This great Assembly mirrors this common understanding.
154. Although we in Solomon Islands cannot claim to be
entirely free from the many ills which have beset other
nations of the world, we deplore the use of force and
inhuman treatment of people.
1SS. In the Pacific we look forward to full participation in
the affairs of our region in co-operation with our neighbouring countries. We welcome Tuvalu's emergence as an
independent nation early next month, on 1 October 1978.

156. We recognize and affirm the importance of regional
organizations such as the South Pacific Forum w~ich we ~re
formally joining this week as well, and the nelghbou.nng
association, ASEAN. We believe that such well-conceIved
efforts in regional co-operation should receive international
support. Big changes are taking place in the traditional
pattern of international relations and regional as well as
world-wide interdependence must take on a new and extra
meaning, to advance the fundamental values of human
equality and dignity.
157. The advent of my country's independence t~o
months ago and now today our entry into this world fam.lly
of nations illustrate the significant changes that are taklllg

~

~Iache IOpacific. We the I

In t e

f Iy
th nnore, ac Ive
rur e and ask the
ventures,
. . to
reater recogl1ltlon
! , 's and grant, ,
Ternto ne
, added impetus
~ve
development.

158 As with other t
'I~d countries also h
I ~ n unemployment, pI
10,
n
ethnic disputes, eve
Fortunately, being s.~[
distribute social faclht
equitably than are.our
lries. The smaller sIze.
strong links and ties WI t

159. While the Pacific
nomogeneous group b
grounds and colonial (
are nevertheless all sm
and common problm
nomic, because we 1
operating in the world
more in trade than ot!'
we are much more isol

160. Most small islal
portunities to a few 111
exchange; these are USI
fruit, sugar and spices.
and could diversify fu
agricultural products,
elassify my own coun tl

161 The economy
expansion and diver:
ambitions and aspi ra ti
national development
points in the Solom(
elude: diversified and
culture, forest produc
balance-of-payments
sufficiency in basic f
meat and fish; improY
air, between islands
paris; a strong base
production for local r
joint ventures by Sol
seas partners of prav,
and vocational edu(
decentralized health
advanced form of loc
powers of administra'

1st meeting - 19 September 1978

._-place in the political status of many of our island countries
in the Pacific. We the people of these island nations are,
furthermore, actively engaged in regional co-operative
ventures, and ask the international community to give
greater recognition to the special problems of our small
Territories and grant, where needed, special measures to
give added impetus to our social and economic
development.

158. As with other third-world countries, we in small
island countries also have growing problems of urbanization, unemployment, pollution, slums, social alienation and
ethnic disputes, even if they appear in different forms.
Fortunately, being smaller, we are perhaps more able to
distribute social facilities per head of population more
equitably than are our friends in larger developing countries. The smaller size of our towns in the Pacific and our
strong links and ties with viIlage life also help.

cct the

ws. W

.,

~ regard~theVA:

ita have wnll.i
preceplmlo~f

ana'

how

:lieve'
rove
,facto
ign i

Ilomon

I today

It aims anoo\j:t

)wn people, wtl
dence in lliewul:

is commonunif'

lrtance
)!Um which Ill"

the nei~~o~j
Ich well·con~W

ceive in
in the
'Cgional
n a new
values of

159. While the Pacific islands cannot rightly claim to be a
homogeneous group because of different cultural backgrounds and colonial experiences, by world standards we
are nevertheless all small and have some common identity
and common problems. Our greatest problems are economic, because we are in a disadvantageous position
operating in the world economy. We in the Pacific suffer
more in trade than other developing island groups because
we are much more isolated from the major world markets.
160. Most small islands are restricted in economic opportunities to a few main commodities for earning foreign
exchange; these are usually coconut and other oil products,
fruit, sugar and spices. Some bigger island groups are luckier
and could diversify further into a wider range of mainly
agricultural products, fisheries and sometimes minerals. I
classify my own country as belonging to this category.
161 The economy of Solomon Islands is undergoing
expansion and diversification, in accordance with the
ambitions and aspirations of our people as expressed in our
national development plan for the period 1975-1979. Key
points in the Solomon Islands development strategy include: diversified and increased export industries in agriculture, forest products and fisheries, to proVide a secure
balance-of-payments base for domestic growth; selfsufficiency in basic food-stuffs, such as root-crops, rice,
meat and fish; improved internal transport by land, sea and
air, between islands and between agricultural areas and
ports; a strong base of small-holder farming and food
production for local markets; major commercial projects as
joint ventures by Solomon Islands Government and overseas partners of proven capability and integrity; technical
and vocational education for rural and urban living;
decentralized health services easily accessible to all; an
advanced form of local government in provinces, with wide
powers of administration planning and executing of island-

15

level government activities; and a Government revenue
policy to redistribute incomes between groups and islands
through the provision of economic and social services
without removing the incentive to work and produce
surpluses.
162. We in the Solomon Islands understand very well the
need to do all we can to help ourselves. We have to put our
own house in order, mobilize our own people, land and
savings, and devise policies and programmes that are
practical in the light of the resources we can expect and
that both shape and fit our people's aspirations. We have to
exercise the greatest care about increasing our recurrent
costs and our financial liabilities faster than our economy
and our incomes can be expected to grow. We have to live
within our means. We define "our means" as our available
resources, which include the wide range of assistance we
believe is available to us from multinational institutions,
friendly nations and commercial investors of skill and
integrity who are prepared to undertake important strategic
projects jointly with us. We have made a good start in our
national development, and we recognize how long and how
full of risks and dangers is the road ahead.
163. Questions of either good or bad economic potential
and viability do not however dictate that countries must
have political aspirations in order to have political viability.
Because of our small size, however, the political influence
of our individual countries in the Pacific is of course
limited. It is by joining international organizations and
institutions, I feel, that small countries like ours will find
the opportunity to contribute to world peace and harmony
in ways that big countries are perhaps not able to do
because of their heavy commitment and close involvement
at all times and at various levels in the affairs of the world.
164. That is the wish behind my country's application to
become a Member of this family of nations and, I believe,
the essential nexus in United Nations and international
relationships. We in Solomon Islands want to contribute,
participate and give, as well as receive, in this world body of
nations. We cannot offer arms and ammunition-we do not
have them, and do not wish to have them-as a means
of compromise in conflicts. But we have good commonsense and believe in our ability and capacity to contribute
in some smaJ] way to peace and harmony in this our
wonderful world. Wc would in this way also be able to
realize the meaning of our national motto, which is "To
lead is to serve"-whether it be at home in the vilJages, in
our own national Parliament or in the world parliament.
165. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands for his
important statement.

The meeting rose at 6.20 [J.In.
