S/PV.7143

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7143rd meeting

Wednesday, 19 March 2014, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Sarki
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Shearman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on Peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746)

14-26914 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426914*

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746)

19/03/2014

The example of Sierra Leone, and of Timor Leste
before it, provides evidence of how post-conflict
peacebuilding can prevent a relapse into violence and
underpin a country’s development after conflict. On the
other hand, the recent upsurges of violence in the Central
African Republic and in South Sudan demonstrate the
unpredictable environment for peacebuilding and the
great risks involved. That is why we must always be
prepared to adapt and seek new approaches based on
experience and evidence.

The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.

In 2012, the Secretary-General identified inclusivity,
institution-building and the need for sustained
international support and mutual accountability as
three priority areas for peacebuilding. Let me say a few
words about each.

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme, to
participate in this meeting.

First, with respect to inclusivity, national
ownership, national leadership and national political
commitment are indispensable elements for durable
peace. But peace agreements that involve only a limited
number of protagonists or key actors often fail to meet
peoples’ needs and expectations, and therefore turn out
to be fragile. While peace settlements admittedly need
to include so-called people with guns, peacebuilding
primarily requires political processes with broad
participation and public accountability.

The Security Council will now begin consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/746, which contains the SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give
him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Thank you for
organizing this timely debate, Madam President. I
know how committed and experienced you and several
of your colleagues on the Council are to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Peacebuilding encompasses a variety of political and
development actions by United Nations peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, country teams
and other actors. It lies at the heart of United Nations
aspirations in countries emerging from conflict.
Just two weeks ago, the Secretary-General visited
Sierra Leone to mark the closure of the United Nations
peacebuilding operation, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. The transition to
the country team is under way, in close collaboration
with the Government of Sierra Leone and with the
continued political engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

2/26

In Guinea last year, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit,
facilitated a political dialogue, with support from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund. It promoted trust among political parties and
strengthened the role of women, including as electoral
monitors. Those were critical elements for the largely
peaceful elections held in September 2013. In Yemen
over the past two years, the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser worked to bring the voices of women and youth
into the country’s national dialogue. Both examples
highlight the importance of gender-responsive
peacebuilding and the inclusion of women in peace
processes.
Let me underscore the Secretary-General’s
engagement in that area, through the commitment
to allocate 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
peacebuilding funds to projects promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women. I am aware
that the goal has not yet been reached, but it remains a
priority concern in peacebuilding.
My second point concerns institution-building
for fostering peace, development and social cohesion.

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Inclusive institution-building in the areas of justice,
education and health care can help States gain broad
popular confidence and ensure that disputes and
political competition are handled without resort to
violence. Effective and impartial security and judicial
institutions are particularly important for building
respect for human rights and the rule of law. We see
the centrality of institution-building in Liberia, where
United Nations support for the establishment of five
regional security and justice hubs has helped to restore
faith in the country’s security services. The expansion
of judicial services and legal reforms are central parts
of Liberia’s statement of mutual commitments with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Ssupport to the Land
Commission and so-called “peace huts” has promoted
the peaceful resolution of disputes. I know that the
representative of Jordan is very familiar with that point.
The examples of successful peacebuilding I have
mentioned depend upon sustained and predictable
financial and political international support, which
brings me to my third point. Where a United Nations
mission is making the transition to a United Nations
country team, such as in Burundi or Sierra Leone, we
need to ensure continued funding for central activities.
We also need to provide the necessary political support
and act decisively at critical moments. As the Council
noted during its recent mission to Mali, cantonment is a
key confidence-building measure in the peace process.
Early and reliable funding by the Peacebuilding Fund is
essential for the ability of the United Nations to support
cantonment.
In Somalia, the New Deal Compact has aligned
donors with the priorities articulated by the Government
and Somali counterparts. That has strengthened
mutual accountability. In Liberia, a publicly accessible
so-called “dashboard” showing the details of donor
funding has promoted transparency.
I would also like to add that the African Union
engagement in the Central African Republic, Somalia
and elsewhere in Africa underlines the importance
of working in close partnership with regional
organizations in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Building a regional environment
conducive to peace should be a critical priority for
countries emerging from conflict. That will help them
to strengthen fragile transitions and reduce illicit arms
or financial flows.
The Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral in Burundi, the Central African Republic

S/PV.7143

and Guinea-Bissau have worked actively with the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the cooperation
of neighbouring countries and regional organizations.
Last year, in May, the Secretary-General and the World
Bank President visited the Great Lakes region of Africa
and, together with the Chairperson of the African
Union, the President of the African Development
Bank and the Commissioner for Development of
the European Union, visited the Sahel in November.
That demonstrated the welcome joint commitment to
supporting transformative work and engagement for
peace and development. Similar partnerships have
been developed in the Great Lakes region, where the
United Nations and the European Union are working
with Governments and civil society to improve
natural-resource management.
Member States created a new peacebuilding
architecture at the Summit in 2005 in response to the
frequent relapse into violence of countries emerging
from armed conflict. Given its diverse composition,
the Peacebuilding Commission is well placed to
help ensure the coherence of efforts and sustained
attention in support of peace. I would also assert that
the Peacebuilding Fund is now widely recognized for
its usefulness and flexibility. But questions remain
as to where and how the Commission can be most
helpful and relevant. The Commission and its country
configurations are working hard to play a useful
advisory role to the Security Council and to bring to
bear the collective weight of Member States in support
of peacebuilding priorities.
We should recall, however, that the Peacebuilding
Commission is a subsidiary organ of this body and, I
stress, can be of optimal use only if the Council empowers
it and utilizes its potential. When the Peacebuilding
Commission was established — I happened to be
President of the General Assembly at the time — we
believed that the Council could benefit from an advisory
body that could take a longer, post-conflict perspective.
I would like to appeal to the Council to take advantage
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2015
to shape the kind of Peacebuilding Commission that
will be relevant, catalytic and effective, not least from
the perspective of the Security Council and, naturally,
in the interests of those States that are affected. The
realities in the world certainly remind us that there is a
need for such a function and such a role for the United
Nations. I look forward to hearing the new Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission speak on that challenge.

14-269143/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The challenges are many, serious and urgent
in countries like Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan, Mali and Somalia. I am
confident that the Governments and the people of those
countries could gain considerably from an efficient
and broadly anchored United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Mr. Eliasson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota: I also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
The Peacebuilding Commission is pleased
to contribute to the Security Council’s interim
consideration of the progress made on United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflict.
The periodic reporting by the Secretary-General to
the Security Council and the General Assembly on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict offers an
opportunity to keep Member States and United Nations
operational entities focused on the imperative of joint
and coherent efforts to prevent conflict and situations
of relapse into conflict.
Peacebuilding is an expression of the international
community’s recognition that our collective response
to conflict must be multifaceted and sustained over the
long term. In that context, the Commission recognizes
the importance of the main themes set out in the
Secretary-General’s 2012 report on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746), namely, inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained international support
and mutual accountability.
The recent crises in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan remind us that the nature
of peacebuilding requires a careful examination of
strategies for stabilization efforts and their sequencing.
Collective and persistent engagement to address this
systemic and ongoing deficiency must continue.
In my inaugural statement to the Peacebuilding
Commission, on 29 January, I noted that, while
sustaining peace is a central objective of the United
Nations’ peace and security architecture, we face the
systemic challenge of the short span of attention and
commitment from the international community to
the complex and long-term challenges to sustainable
peace. The Peacebuilding Commission was indeed
mandated to “extend the period of attention given by

4/26

19/03/2014

the international community to post-conflict recovery”
(resolution 1645 (2005), para. 2 (c)).
A key feature of the Commission’s engagement with
Burundi and Sierra Leone since 2006 has been to sustain
attention to the ongoing political and socioeconomic
challenges facing both countries, in which the United
Nations heavily invested to re-establish security,
strengthen governance structures, promote greater
respect for the rule of law, support community recovery
and support the early stages of the respective political
processes. In support of the United Nations leadership
in both countries, the Commission has advised the
Security Council over the years on issues requiring
immediate attention while also working to mobilize
broader support from subregions and international
partners in favour of the long-term political and
socioeconomic dimensions of peacebuilding.
Both countries are approaching the milestone of
transitioning from the Security Council’s politically
and security-oriented mandated missions to the
development-oriented presence of the United Nations
country team. An adequate transition from emergency
to development remains essential but is still, to a
great extent, an ideal fraught with challenges. The
change in the nature of the United Nations presence
and mandate on the ground in both countries calls for
calibrated yet sustained attention to ongoing political
and socioeconomic challenges associated with nascent
national institutions and governance practices, and
strong engagement on the development track.
While we continue to insist that peacebuilding must
be nationally owned and that ownership comes with
responsibility, the international community must also
rise to the occasion and continue to help Burundi and
Sierra Leone to stay the course. That is also a consistent
message that the Commission and the respective United
Nations leadership deliver in, and on behalf of, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.
The importance of inclusive political processes
and national institutions and capacities cannot be
overemphasized. In Guinea and in Guinea-Bissau,
the Commission’s collaboration with the respective
United Nations leadership focuses on ensuring that,
regardless of the outcome of national elections, political
dialogue should remain inclusive and the political
space should remain available for the opposition to
participate in shaping the future of both countries.
No majority Government can alone face the myriad
challenges facing a society emerging from conflict.
14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

As demonstrated by the painful turn of events in the
Central African Republic, elected Governments that fail
to keep the various societal and political forces engaged
can drive their countries towards untold tragedies. That
is the advice that the United Nations overall and the
Commission jointly continue to extend to the political
leadership in Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
A crucial aspect of inclusivity relates to the
participation and contribution of women and youth to
the peacebuilding process. While women and youth
endure the tragic consequences of violent conflicts,
they are also strategic agents for societal transformation
and emancipation in post-conflict societies. In a
declaration adopted by the Peacebuilding Commission
last September on women’s economic empowerment for
peacebuilding, our ministers recognized that
“the economic empowerment of women greatly
contributes to the effectiveness of post-conflict
economic activities and economic growth”
(PBC/7/OC/3, para. 4).
In Guinea-Bissau, I was impressed by the potential
contribution of women’s organizations to strengthening
the economic role of women, thus helping to forge a
more inclusive political culture in the country and
bringing together different identities, religions and
political affiliations. The transformative potential of
greater participation by women in the economic and
political spheres can provide an invaluable contribution
to building more peaceful, democratic and prosperous
societies. The gender dimension of peacebuilding
deserves our continuing attention and unwavering
commitment.
Building or rebuilding institutions in a country
emerging from conflict is the practical expression of
national ownership and the sustainability of peace. At
the same time, institutions take a long time to develop
into an efficient medium for political participation and
for the delivery of security, justice, basic social services
and economic opportunities. The Commission’s
observation of the contribution of nascent institutions to
peacebuilding, such as the National Revenue Authority
and the Anti-corruption Commission in Burundi, the
National Youth Commission in Sierra Leone and the
regional justice and security hubs in Liberia, confirms
that institution-building must go beyond establishing
and nurturing organizational structures. The capacity
of the Government to sustain and empower those
institutions to help in rebuilding the social fabric and
generating economic opportunities remains a key

S/PV.7143

challenge for the countries concerned. Unless there
is a solid commitment from the political leadership,
institutions may fall prey to political manipulation or
other forms of dysfunction. Through its collaboration
with the Peacebuilding Fund and by lending its political
weight in support of the United Nations leadership
and the Governments concerned, the Commission has
supported institution-building related initiatives in
Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The Commission can certainly do more to support the
development of strategies and initiatives that prioritize
institution-building and capacity development. In areas
such as natural-resource management, transparent
financial management for development, domestic
revenue-generation and the fight against illicit financial
flows and organized crime, the Commission can serve
as a platform to mobilize targeted technical support,
especially in the context of South-South cooperation.
As the Secretary-General prepares to release
his next report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict, later this year, the Commission emphasizes
the need for deepening analysis, supported by country
examples, of how the United Nations collective
and diversified efforts across the security and
socioeconomic spectrum of post-conflict response
contribute to long-term peacebuilding objectives. There
is a need to know in what ways the United Nations
mandated presence and evolving operational practice
has made a real difference in the countries affected
by or emerging from conflict. The Commission will
benefit from that analysis as it seeks to further deepen,
focus and calibrate its advisory function to the Council
and its support to the United Nations leadership in the
field. That is a critical aspect of the Commission’s early
preparation for the upcoming mandated review in 2015.
In the same vein, in light of the Council’s presidential
note contained in document S/2003/515, of 28 August
2013, regular informal interactive meetings with the
members of the Security Council will further sharpen
the focus on peacebuilding-related topics, particularly
in the country-specific contexts.
In June 2014, the Commission will convene its
first-ever annual session. The session will offer an
opportunity for Member States, the United Nations
system and other actors to address and focus on a
peacebuilding-related theme with a view to elaborating
how intergovernmental policy and political support can
improve and make a difference for people in countries
emerging from conflict. We trust that this annual

14-269145/26

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7143

effort can reinforce and help orient the evolving United
Nations peacebuilding agenda, not least by engaging
key partners from regional organizations, international
financial institutions and civil society. A viable
partnership with those actors is no longer a matter of
choice. It is indeed a necessity, and that is where the
Peacebuilding Commission has its special niche.
Finally, allow me a final word on the interrelated
topics of inclusivity, institution-building and mutual
accountability. While keeping a focus on the centrality
of inclusive national development for peacebuilding, let
us not cede to the mental habits of viewing development
ultimately as a technology of security. Our efforts must
remain people-centered. True peace is also built upon
an enlarged sense of development, as emancipation
and fulfilment of multidimensional human aspirations,
including through cultural and social interconnections.
I believe we can put that idea at the very centre of our
peacebuilding efforts, while fostering greater solidarity
and true empathy so as to dispel the logic of providers
and beneficiaries through improved reciprocity and
mutual recognition.
For all of us, there is much to learn from the
struggles of the people facing peacebuilding challenges
in their daily lives. The Peacebuilding Commission
can also be an important platform for connecting
their voice, promoting a network for new encounters
and allowing for an active and horizontal flow of
knowledge and experience. In 2014, we will have plenty
of opportunities to embark on that enriched dialogue.
The President (spoke
Mr. Patriota for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Clark.
Ms. Clark: I thank the Council for the invitation to
brief it on this topic.
Since the peacebuilding architecture was
established, in 2005, the United Nations has made
important progress in improving its approaches to
peacebuilding, building on lessons learned and practical
experience on the ground. Today, peacebuilding is
mainstreamed across the United Nations system and
is used in different contexts and situations affected by
conflict and violence.
Peacebuilding has also been a driver of reform and
initiatives such as the relatively new United Nations
global focal point for police, justice and corrections.
Individual United Nations agencies have developed

6/26

19/03/2014

their own peacebuilding strategies on the basis of their
mandates and programmes.
However, there continue to be some important
challenges in United Nations support for peacebuilding.
For members of the United Nations Development Group,
a more inclusive approach to peacebuilding than we
often see today is a key priority. Achieving sustainable
peace requires the engagement and participation of
all social groups, beyond the main protagonists to
a conflict, and urban centres. It requires meaningful
participation by women, youth and other marginalized
groups.
It also requires that we maintain a sustained
presence at the local level in order to understand and
respond to the immediate and longer-term needs of
communities, including on the issues of livelihoods,
basic social services, the provision of security and
justice for victims. In that respect, the United Nations
worked with local authorities in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2013 to investigate
five recent incidents of serious crimes affecting 900
victims of sexual and gender-based violence, murder
and pillage and to bring those responsible to justice.
Institution-building is closely linked with
peacebuilding. However, we need to take a less narrow
view of that nexus and to strengthen our understanding
of how a valid social contract can contribute to peace
and how international actors can support such a contract
developing. Without both responsive and inclusive State
institutions and a vibrant civil society, there is unlikely
to be either sustained peace or a basis for long-term
development.
An example of an approach that addresses both
those elements is to be found in Somalia, where the
United Nations is working with the Federal Government
to assess and strengthen its capacities to perform core
State functions. At the same time, we are also focusing
on supporting governance at the local level — the
level at which people most frequently engage with the
authorities and to which they are most likely to turn for
services and support.
Our efforts in Somalia have enabled local
Governments and municipalities to collect property and
business taxes. That revenue is now funding municipal
services for people in approximately 16 districts across
the country. Local elections are being held, waste is
being collected and roads are being maintained. If trust

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

in Government institutions is to be built following a
conflict, the local level is a good place to start.
Peacebuilding requires predictable and sustained
international support on the basis of clear and focused
priorities and mutual accountability. In recent years,
Governments and international actors have agreed
on compacts or mutual accountability frameworks
to provide that basis and for the ongoing monitoring
of progress and dialogue. The United Nations has
supported such mutual accountability processes in
Afghanistan, Yemen, Sierra Leone and Somalia. We
hope that more countries will engage in that way.
By setting clear and realistic goals that cover the
whole peacebuilding spectrum, including building
inclusive politics, security, justice, livelihoods and the
delivery of social services, and by agreeing on how to
deliver on those goals, we can help to strengthen the
credibility of peace processes and peacebuilding and to
ensure effective delivery and results.
For that approach to work, both national and
international actors must be fully committed to
delivering on shared goals and be willing to work
together. That will help to reduce the risk of failure and
to strengthen the chance of peace processes succeeding.
Nonetheless, success can never be guaranteed, nor
will every individual programme in a post-conflict
context produce results. Such situations are inherently
risky and setbacks are frequent.
It is therefore important to better integrate risk
management in peacebuilding approaches and to ensure
that we are better at balancing the risks of failure of
individual programmes with the importance of trying
to make a difference where we can. Discussions on
managing the risks of operating in such difficult
environments needs to be ongoing with national
Governments and with donors.
Pooled funding is one important way of sharing
and managing risks together. The United Nations
recently established multi-partner trust funds in Mali
and Somalia to enable donors to channel funding
towards the programmes that may be more difficult
for individual donors to support directly. Those pooled
funds enable stronger risk mitigation and management
through a shared platform and divide the residual risk
among several participants. The Mali Stabilization
Fund has already had an significnat and positive impact
on the situation in the country.

S/PV.7143

When setbacks occur in countries, as they have in
such a traumatic way in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan in recent months, it is important that
we at the United Nations maintain our capability to
support and work with local partners and to protect
countries’ capacities to deal with and respond to the
crisis themselves.
So often, funding for vital early recovery work with
communities is squeezed out during crises and local
communities lose the ability to support themselves.
Then, when peacebuilding opportunities arise, we are
forced to start all over again from a worse position.
We must find ways to address that conundrum and to
ensure predictable funding for early recovery.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the paramount
importance of national ownership and leadership
in peacebuilding processes. At the end of the day,
sustained peace and long-term development, led and
fully owned by countries themselves, is always the goal
of peacebuilding. We must support countries to make
progress towards that goal as rapidly as possible.
That is why it is important to strengthen inclusion,
institution-building and mutual accountability as
crucial elements in peacebuilding and as foundations
for national ownership. While crisis and conflict create
many obstacles to such objectives in the short term,
we should never lose sight of that long-term goal. I
hope that that goal will remain a major priority in
the discussion of how to strengthen United Nations
peacebuilding and prepare for the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture in 2015.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Clark
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the briefings by Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme. They
have given us an assessment of the work, progress and
challenges facing the Peacebuilding Commission.
In our statement, we will focus on the three priority
areas set out by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/746), namely, inclusivity, institution-building
and sustained international support and mutual

14-269147/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

accountability. In our view, those aspects are central
to peacebuilding and to establishing the necessary
conditions for progress and to prevent a relapse into
new situations of instability and tension.
From an early stage, inclusivity, seeks to ensure the
participation of all actors and parties involved in the
conflict and of those who, suffering the consequences,
are often not considered participants in the national
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes.
Inclusivity can provide legitimacy to reconstruction
processes and can involve and engage the population
in such processes, thereby promoting social cohesion
and national ownership and laying the foundations
for lasting agreements. In that way, they also prevent
frustration, tension and possible relapse into conflict at
the same time as they allow for work on the underlying
roots of a conflict with a view to reconciliation among
the affected population.
In that context, we draw attention to the
fundamental role that women should have in postconflict and peacebuilding processes. We express our
concern that women remain marginalized from political
power and planning in peacebuilding processes and
in many national processes in general, in spite of the
Council’s call in resolution 1325 (2000) that women
should be ensured greater representation at all levels of
decision-making. We must continue working towards
the effective implementation of that resolution and
the seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding set out in the Secretary-General’s 2010
report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).
With regard to building national institutions in
the post-conflict phase of peacebuilding, the process
of institutionalization must be adaptable and able to
respond to the needs of the population, while possessing
transparent working mechanisms that make their work
subject to accountability. In that work, particular
attention should be paid to the political and social
dynamics of the country and its practices, ensuring
the central importance of national ownership of such
processes. Institutions that are perceived as legitimate
and independent will allow for progress towards a
successful transition. Such progress will strengthen
respect for the rule of law and its underlying principles,
which is essential for the stability and development of
the country.

8/26

19/03/2014

With regard to sustained international support
and mutual accountability, we must recognize the
importance of political and financial support and
commitments for making progress in national strategies
aimed at peacebuilding. Such efforts require certainty
and predictability when it comes to resources. We
therefore acknowledge the importance of partnerships,
as noted in the report of the Secretary-General, with the
World Bank, other institutions and the private sector.
Donations must respect and contribute to national
peacebuilding plans. It is the country emerging from
conflict itself, with the support of the Commission and
of the international community, that should designate
the plans it deems most relevant. We underscore the
role that regional and subregional organizations can
play in providing the necessary political support to the
peacebuilding process and, as far as possible, financial
support.
Against a complex international backdrop, we
issue a call for the work to continue on mechanisms
that could provide greater certainty in the flow of
resources. In that regard, I am pleased to report that my
country expects to continue its annual contribution to
the Peacebuilding Fund.
In our capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2009 and during our membership in
2012, we had the opportunity to learn first-hand about,
and become involved in, the Commission’s work to
promote peace and rebuild the countries that are part
of the various configurations. We acknowledge the
progress achieved. However, much remains to be done
to ensure the full implementation of the objectives for
which the Commission was established. In that regard,
we believe that the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations could expand its scope to consider
peacebuilding and establish linkages with the relevant
actors in this field.
We conclude by reiterating the call to continue
perfecting the relationship between the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission and improving and
expanding the channels of communication between the
two bodies, in particular when it comes to considering
the renewal of mandates.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized today’s
meeting. I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
comprehensive briefing. I also thank Ambassador

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Antonio de Aguiar Patriota and Administrator Helen
Clark, who provided value-added insights from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
Development Programme, respectively.
The issue of post-conflict peacebuilding is
multifaceted and covers a wide range of interconnected
values that the United Nations has pursued. If it were
not for the effective condition of the entire United
Nations system and beyond, the task of peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict would remain
difficult. We hope that today’s discussion can be
another step forward towards the solidification of our
shared strategy for peacebuilding in which the role of
women is sufficiently taken into consideration.
As today’s briefers stressed, the success of
peacebuilding depends on the implementation of key
priorities, such as inclusivity, institution-building,
sustainable support and mutual accountability, with
a horizontal focus on gender mainstreaming. Today I
would like to address the challenges we face and ways
to overcome those impediments to achieve progress in
peacebuilding.
First, we have seen that it is often difficult to
incorporate inclusivity into local political culture.
Winner-take-all politics and the alienation of minorities
undermine hard-won yet still fragile stability and even
lead to relapses into conflict. Empirical evidence shows
that if a Government fails to address social grievances,
the international community loses confidence and
becomes reluctant to translate their development
partnership into action, which is crucial to take on
the root causes of conflicts. Social cohesion through
reconciliation should be the basis for early stabilization
as well as for long-term prosperity. In that context,
we would like to underline that women can play an
important role in ensuring social cohesion and political
legitimacy.
Secondly, delays in institution-building threaten
the credibility of newly established authorities in postconflict situations, as illustrated by the case of the
Central African Republic. Providing basic services is
critical to achieve stability and to discourage people
from taking the law into their own hands.
We believe that scarce resources can be better
utilized through effective coordination among the
relevant organizations operating in the same areas.
Similar tasks performed by each organization need
to be streamlined and rearranged according to

S/PV.7143

their respective comparative advantages under the
“delivering as one” perspective. The role of the United
Nations Development Programme can be strengthened
in terms of the division of labour in relation to political
and peacekeeping missions. The coordination efforts
between the United Nations and the World Bank for the
security and development of the Great Lakes region and
the Sahel are commendable examples.
Thirdly, interactive cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Security
Council has yet to reach its full potential. In order to
create synergy, both bodies should be interdependent,
not just out of principle but based on mutual needs.
Both sides need to make more efforts. The PBC and
its country-specific configurations should be able
to provide value-added consultations to the Security
Council, while the latter could be more engaged and
provide enhanced feedback.
For a response tailored to meet each country’s
unique historical and social challenges, the Council
needs to take better advantage of country-specific
configurations. In particular, we hope that the PBC
configuration for the Central African Republic, under the
new leadership of Morocco, will strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations field-based mission, beginning with the
preparation process, taking into consideration the possible
dispatch of Blue Helmets.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s seven-point
action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding should
be strenuously maintained. Women are too often
victimized in conflict areas, and their role is still
regarded as secondary, not only in peacebuilding but in
the general process of development. The role of women
could be maximized if and when Governments and the
international community continue to systematically
empower women. We long for the day when women
will no longer need quotas to fulfil their full potential,
as witnessed in many countries across the globe.
Lastly, we would like to briefly mention the
Republic of Korea’s participation in efforts aimed at
the peacebuilding process. In addition to the financial
contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund and the United
Nations Civilian Capacities Initiative, the Republic
of Korea will continue to explore ways to provide
value-added contributions under our shared vision.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Let me begin by commending
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on one of the very important structures of the

14-269149/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

United Nations dealing with peace and post-conflict
reconstruction and development in affected societies.
Let me also thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing this
morning, and Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, for her
briefing. I particularly wish to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for his briefing on the perspective
of the PBC.
I recall that in 2005 to 2006 I was in Geneva when
the Secretary-General’s document “In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for all”
(A/59/2005) was being discussed and the configuration
or establishment of the PBC was actualized. The PBC
and the Human Rights Council gave a clear signal to
the whole world that the United Nations was desirous
of continuing to deepen the implementation of peace
and human-rights elements all over the world. The third
element, which remains outstanding, was the reform
of the Security Council, which we are now looking
forward to taking place soon.
Nigeria commends the Peacebuilding Commission
for all its contributions to the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflicts. The
example of Sierra Leone is very good testimony to the
work of the Commission, which has been drawn down
today because of the success of the implementations of
various elements.
Nigeria also notes that today’s briefing is taking
place in accordance with the presidential statement of
20 December 2012 (S/PRST/2012/29), which invited the
Secretary-General to brief the Council on the progress
made in the implementation of the his 2012 report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746).
That periodic report to the Security Council and the
General Assembly on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict highlights the need to strengthen collective
and coherent efforts to prevent conflicts and to avoid
relapsing into conflict. We also support and encourage
regular interactive meetings among Member States,
through which we can exchange views on issues on
the agenda of the PBC at all levels. That is consistent
with the note by the Council President of 28 August
2013 (S/2013/515), which calls for a regular informal
interactive meeting with the members.
The establishment of the PBC was a statement of
our aspirations for sustainable peace. Its institutional

10/26

19/03/2014

structure was designed to permit stakeholders, both
within and outside the United Nations system, to
contribute to the realization of those aspirations in
post-conflict countries. Indeed, the PBC has been
the rallying point for key stakeholders in the work of
peacebuilding in marshalling available resources, in
galvanizing political support to countries on its agenda
and in coordinating the relevant actors within and
outside the United Nations system in the promotion
of peacebuilding objectives. In particular, we must
appreciate the contributions of the country-specific
configurations, which have been rightly described as
the heart and soul of the PBC, and therefore its greatest
potential.
The PBC has continued to focus the attention
of the international community on the political and
socioeconomic challenges in countries under its
mandate. The Commission’s engagement in Burundi
and Sierra Leone since 2006, for example, has helped
highlight the challenges facing those countries. United
Nations missions in both countries are now in transition
from the Security Council’s security- and politically
oriented mandates to the development-oriented mandate
of the United Nations country teams.
While bearing in mind that the primary
responsibility of peacebuilding efforts rests squarely
on the relevant Governments, strengthening their
capacity constitutes the foundation for their success in
that regard. Therefore, we call on all Member States
to forge more effective partnerships with the countries
concerned by assisting their Governments in building
national capacity. We should initiate and support all
efforts aimed at putting national Governments in charge
as we continue to emphasize the need for adherence to
crucial elements such as credibility, accountability,
effectiveness and responsibility.
In that regard, we call on Member States to continue
to assist Burundi and Sierra Leone and to ensure that
both countries remain on course. The same request is
made in respect of Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.
Nigeria continues to demonstrate its commitment
to the peaceful settlement of conflicts, sustainable
peace and development. We have stood at the forefront
of global peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
especially by standing by the United Nations in all
its peace ventures, including by being a member of
the PBC since its inception. From the lessons we have
learned over the years, we believe that sincere support

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

for national ownership should be a core principle in
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.
For that reason, Nigeria looks forward to the firstever annual session of the PBC, to be held in June
2014. It is expected that the session will afford us an
opportunity to discuss how to engage key partners to
support national ownership of peacebuilding efforts. In
addition, we would like to stress the following issues as
food for thought ahead of the 2014 session.
First, in view of the fact that much still needs
to be done in order to make optimal use of the PBC
instrument, we expect that the session will consider
ways and means by which the PBC mandates can be
strengthened to attain that objective. We must continue
to work to ensure that the Commission remains central
and key to the development of post-conflict States
and that it continues to occupy its rightful place in the
United Nations system.
Secondly, we must improve on the coordination, the
coherence and the clear delineation of responsibilities
among key stakeholders in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture so as to prevent the
duplication of effort and maximize output.
Thirdly, and lastly, we should explore ways
of mobilizing support for long-term political and
socioeconomic dimensions of peacebuilding from the
subregions and from international partners.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding. I am convinced that
discussions of this nature can significantly contribute
to the improvement and streamlining of practices
in peacebuilding and post-conflict construction and
initiatives. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme,
Ms. Helen Clark; and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Patriota of Brazil, for
their valuable contributions.
As the Council knows, my country went from a
post-conflict situation to a contributor to peacekeeping
operations. Our experience alone is an indication that
indeed post-conflict peacebuilding is an important
process in dealing with both the aftermath of conflicts
and conflict-prevention. We recognize the importance
of peacebuilding in creating conditions conducive to
achieving sustainable and irreversible peace.

S/PV.7143

However, the international community faces
the critical gap between applying existing top-down
strategies and the realities on the ground. Too often,
post-conflict peacebuilding is regarded as a purely
operational process, using blueprints that stipulate what
institutions must be established and what systems must
be introduced, with technical aspects tending to take
priority. Many cases of countries on the PBC agenda
lead us to question whether local political mechanisms,
capacities and conflict dynamics have been taken into
account and whether mechanisms have been put in
place to safeguard their continued existence and avoid
a relapse of conflicts.
The situation in the Central African Republic
speaks for itself. Despite being on the PBC agenda for
nearly six years, political instability and administrative
weaknesses persisted and, in 2013, the situation in the
Central African Republic worsened. Community-based
militias were established and the stage was set for
simmering violence between Christians and Muslims.
In South Sudan, although not on the PBC agenda,
renewed fighting occurred in December 2013 despite
the United Nations in South Sudan having a strong
peacebuilding mandate.
Those two cases demonstrate that the international
community in general and the United Nations in
particular need to learn how to do things differently.
They must adopt targeted post-conflict measures
that address the root causes of a particular conflict
while at the same time respecting the specificity of
each situation, including the local political dynamics,
cultural, religious and ethnic configurations and other
elements that might play a critical role in post-conflict
settings.
We believe that the focus should be on the means
and potential available to the international community
to support locally driven and locally defined priorities
with a clear implementation plan and benchmarks to
build local capacities. We are aware that building
national capacities in a post-conflict situation already
requires an existing capacity from a third party. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of pools
of civilian capacity through the CivCaps initiative,
which aims at strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations system to deliver effective, timely and
coordinated support to strengthen national institutions
in the aftermath of conflict.
Like some of my colleagues, Rwanda also commends
the Secretary-General’s seven-point action plan on

14-2691411/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

gender-responsive peacebuilding, which encourages
Governments to directly involve women in setting
peacebuilding priorities, identifying beneficiaries and
monitoring implementation. In addition to the potential
for women to contribute to successful peacebuilding,
their participation should also be encouraged on the
basis of fairness and justice. It is common knowledge
that, in countries afflicted by conflicts, women account
for half the population, and therefore should be part of
the decision-making that would have an impact on their
future. Furthermore, women are greatly victimized
during conflicts, and therefore deserve to be heard.
There are many avenues through which the
inclusion of women in post-conflict peacebuilding can
bolster peacebuilding initiatives and thereby contribute
to a positive peace outcome. For example, individual
women and women’s organizations adopt a variety of
strategies for reducing fear and uncertainty following
conflict and for fostering an environment of trust
and collaboration. Furthermore, women who adopt
positions of political leadership could provide a direct
alternative to traditional political actors, adding to the
post-conflict impetus of change and addressing the
injustice of the past.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, it
should be recalled that shortly after the genocide
it was estimated that the majority of the Rwandan
population was female. In their victimization and
endurance, women of Rwanda immediately got up
and started rebuilding their home country. They
assumed non-traditional social and economic roles as
heads of household, community leaders and financial
providers, meeting the needs of devastated families and
communities. Moreover, there was a concerted effort in
the Government and among women’s groups to address
the needs of Rwandan women and engage them in the
all-important processes of national reconstruction and
reconciliation.
Today, the Rwandan story represents in many ways
a process of collective social learning. The Government
of Rwanda does not regard the aims of including
women as a philosophical idea, but as a necessary
practical mechanism for reconciliation, reconstruction,
sustainable peace and development.
The post-conflict recovery path adopted by the
Government of Rwanda since 1994 can be shared
through the initiatives highlighted heretofore. In the
spirit of South-South cooperation, for example, and in
12/26

19/03/2014

line with the recommendations from the 2013 report
of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2014/5), we stand ready to
work with United Nations entities that have expressed
interest in having Rwanda participate in both initiatives.
Rwanda has already provided high-level expertise on a
number of issues, including experience and expertise
in, inter alia, aid coordination, specialized police
capacities, military institution-building and security
sector reform.
On the role of the international community, we
are grateful that within the United Nations system the
Peacebuilding Commission has been given the role of
proposing and advising on strategies for post-conflict
recovery and of bringing together all the relevant actors
involved in resource mobilization and the political,
financial and technical aspects of post-conflict
recovery. That continues to be an important, yet very
complex and challenging, role.
But in the nearly 10 years of the PBC’s existence,
the United Nations and the Security Council should
have been able to identify some best practices and
lessons learned to make it more effective and relevant
in peacebuilding activities. We also believe that the
Security Council can and should contribute to the
Commission’s efforts to play such a role. Furthermore,
Rwanda believes that the Commission can make an
impact only if it is able to leverage its unique membership
structure and bring political support to its engagement
in the field, as well as within intergovernmental forums
and through strong advocacy. The collective support
from the PBC membership should focus on building
national capacities.
To conclude, let me emphasize that there is a
need for enhanced coordination and coherency within
the United Nations and with the other relevant actors
involved. We believe that the PBC should support the
United Nations in delivering as one, remain focused on
nationally identified priorities in the field and ensure
that the United Nations entities at Headquarters and
their guidance in the field missions is aligned with
national peacebuilding priorities.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I
thank
Deputy
Secretary-General
Eliasson,
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Chair Patriota and
Adminstrator Clark for their statements this morning.
Maintaining international peace and security is a
struggle we contend with across the globe. Increasingly,

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

we see that building peace is a challenge that we must
take on with even greater urgency. Building peace
requires a commitment by the international community
to stay involved and a commitment by post-conflict
countries to uphold the spirit of inclusivity.
A 2010 World Bank report entitled Conflict
Relapse and the Sustainability of Post-Conflict Peace
found that 90 per cent of the conflicts that occurred
in the past decade took place in countries that had
previously experienced civil war. The problem of civil
war, the report found, is not a problem of preventing
new conflicts from arising but of permanently ending
those that have already started. That reality is sadly
brought to life today in the Central African Republic
and in South Sudan. Their relapses into conflict remind
us of the need for sustained international engagement
in post-conflict countries and demand of us that we
examine how effective our engagement has been and
how we can improve upon it in the future.
The Peacebuilding Commission and its countryspecific peacebuilding configurations have helped to
focus international support for post-conflict countries,
build institutions, promote an open political climate
and advance stability through development. With the
review of the PBC coming up in 2015, now is the time to
look at the impact of long-term peacebuilding and how
the Council can contribute to that discussion.
We recently saw a successful example of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, where the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone was
recently closed by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
an acknowledgement of how far the country has come
since its civil war. The peacebuilding mission there
contributed to building strong political institutions and
helped solidify gains that the Government and people
of Sierra Leone had achieved. Earlier this month,
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, a former child soldier from
Sierra Leone, spoke to the Council (see S/PV.7129) and
offered proof of the country’s healing process. Armed
now with a bachelor’s degree, Alhaji is an example of
the good things that can happen when stability takes
root.
Even as Sierra Leone enjoys stability and the
United Nations peacebuilding mission draws down, we
are reminded that long-term development efforts and
continued economic growth are at the foundation of
any sustainable peace. We appreciate the strengthened
United Nations-World Bank partnership and urge
greater dialogue between the World Bank and the

S/PV.7143

Security Council to facilitate post-conflict development
strategies. We have seen too often the recurrent issues
that make countries vulnerable to relapse: erosion of
inclusive political settlements, lack of Government
capacity, especially in public finance and the rule of
law, and insufficient economic growth and job creation.
South Sudan is an example of what happens when
political inclusivity is lost, as well as a reminder that
we cannot let other countries slip down that path.
In Burundi, inclusivity was a key component of the
Arusha Agreement that ended the conflict there in 2001.
Today, we are increasingly concerned by signs that
the country is moving away from that inclusive spirit.
Efforts by the Government to shut down — sometimes
violently — meetings of the political opposition are
deeply troubling. The international community must
maintain its focus on Burundi and continue to work
with the Government to foster open political space and
credible elections in 2015.
The post-election transition plan for GuineaBissau developed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ramos-Horta, and the strategic
objectives outlined by the Chair of the PBC GuineaBissau configuration, Mr. Patriota, are examples of how
a peacebuilding office and the PBC can develop strategic
frameworks and coordinate international support for
institution-building. Their plans, which call for fasttracking needed reforms, will help the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to hit the ground running. By helping
Governments become more responsive and better able
to deliver services to their people, peacebuilding efforts
can contribute to restoring Government credibility.
Maintaining international peace and security
requires strong Government, but also engaged and
dedicated communities. All sectors of society must be
included in the peace process and throughout the postconflict period. It is particularly critical to ensure the
inclusion of women in political dialogue and mediation
efforts. Truth and reconciliation commissions are an
essential tool that post-conflict societies can use to help
build an inclusive and sustainable peace. We urge the
Government of Sri Lanka to move forward on creating
such a commission to help their country heal, and we
welcome their recent consultations with South Africa
in that regard.
The 2015 review of the PBC and peacebuilding
architecture will provide an opportunity to focus on
ways to sharpen the PBC’s potential. The United States
attaches great importance to that review and intends to

14-2691413/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

engage actively, including as a member of the Security
Council, and to work closely with PBC members and
countries on and off the PBC agenda to enhance the
PBC’s impact.
Finally, we will be successful in achieving those
goals only if we have the people on the ground with the
right skills and background to tackle those complicated
problems. The United State welcomes the progress
made in the Secretary-General’s civilian capacity
review. We encourage the United Nations system to
apply the lessons learned from that review in planning
for future post-conflict engagements.
Ms. King (Australia): Thank you, Madam President,
for your initiative in convening this briefing, which
provides a timely opportunity for us to take stock of
the United Nations peacebuilding efforts over the
past 12 months. I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
Antonio Patriota and United Nations Development
Programme Administrator Helen Clark for their
briefings.
We completely agree with the Deputy SecretaryGeneral that ensuring that we have an efficient and
effective peacebuilding architecture is our collective
responsibilty. We should be working on that constantly
to ensure that the architecture serves the interests
of those who genuinely need peacebuilding in their
countries.
We will have some important opportunities to
address this more systemically in the coming months,
but it is also fundamental that we constantly bear in
mind in the Council that the relationship between it and
the Peacebuilding Commission must be as effective and
cooperative as it can possibly be. We strongly support
the notion of regular informal exchanges between the
Council and the Commission, in line with the Council’s
own formal commitment to that.
Today I would like to touch upon two priority areas
that the Secretary-General outlined in his 2012 report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746),
namely, inclusivity and institution-building. In doing so,
I want to highlight the importance of the participation
of women and the role of police in peacebuilding.
The Secretary-General’s report has helped
underscore that there cannot be any sustainable peace
without inclusive peacebuilding processes. Ensuring
that all the relevant actors are included in peacebuilding
activities is undoubtedly a difficult and time-consuming
14/26

19/03/2014

task, but it needs to be done in order to generate a clear
sense of national ownership of the path being forged.
Ensuring that peace agreements and political
settlements include all the relevant stakeholders is
only the first step. To reduce the risk of relapse into
violence, it is imperative that the views and needs of
not only parties to the conflict — those who are holding
the guns — but also women, youth, ethnic groups and
minorities are heard and integrated into the peace
process. We need look no further than current efforts
to move past conflict to peace in Syria, South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere to see that
without inclusivity, such efforts will not succeed.
Yet that is only the beginning. Inclusivity must
be a factor in long-term peacebuilding processes,
from consolidating democracy to promoting national
reconciliation and strengthening institutions.
The Deputy Secretary-General has highlighted
the example of Sierra Leone. We are following a long
and brutal civil war. We have witnesses a successful
transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict
peacebuilding. With the completion of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone at the end of March, the focus has now
moved to ensuring sustained economic development.
Inclusivity in the peacebuilding process in Sierra
Leone has certainly been a key factor in the success of
that process.
The importance of women’s participation in
peacebuilding cannot be underestimated. Australia
welcomes the significant advances made by the Security
Council in 2013, including through the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013), on women’s participation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We must now
ensure that we use that road map effectively to realize
the benefits of our collective peacebuilding efforts.
Involving women’s organizations is a critical
part of that agenda. Such groups are often the bridge
between formal mechanisms and the needs of local
communities. Their views and experiences should be
valued accordingly. That means their involvement in the
institutions and structures that we are putting in place
as part of our peacebuilding efforts. We need to ensure
that women are lawmakers, members of the judiciary
and advocates for the removal of laws that restrict
women’s access to justice and economic security.
Institution-building is a central pillar of
sustainable peace. Studies show that countries with
14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7143

strong, accountable and inclusive institutions are 30 to
45 per cent less likely to fall into large-scale conflict.
Strengthening institutions and governance at an early
stage so as to provide security and the rule of law is
a precondition for communities to start to rebuild.
We have come to understand that requirement from
operations in our region, such as in Timor-Leste and
Solomon Islands, but there are clear lessons on such an
approach everywhere.

The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone recently completed its work and
is hailed as a success story in the area of peacebuilding.
At the same time, peacebuilding is a lengthy, complex
and difficult task. Under the current circumstances,
peacebuilding faces new issues and challenges that
require the international community’s in-depth
consideration and proper response. I would like to
highlight the following four points.

The early development of a credible national
police service is often an essential element of effective
peacebuilding. Reverting to the issue of inclusivity, the
recruitment and training of women to serve as police
officers are essential elements of a credible national
police service. Female police officers are better able
to access women within local communities, provide
the support that those communities need and better
understand what may be inhibiting their effective
participation in peacebuilding. An effective police
service that fairly and justly services communities
within the newly established rule of law will be
instrumental to peacebuilding efforts.

First, post-conflict peacebuilding must fully respect
the ownership of the relevant countries, which should
assume the primary responsibility for peacebuilding.
The international community should fully respect their
sovereignty and will and provide assistance pursuant
to the priorities identified by their Governments.
The United Nations and its agencies, in assisting in
peacebuilding efforts, should strengthen partnerships
with the countries concerned and help them to draw
up integrated peacebuilding strategies on the basis
of the local context. Owing to the different histories
and specific conditions, there is no one-size-fitsall approach to peacebuilding. The international
community should fully respect cultural traditions and
the prevailing requirements of the countries concerned,
pay attention to the actual conditions on the ground and
not just automatically replicate past practices.

To conclude, we look forward to the first-ever
annual session of the Peacebuilding Commission and
commend that initiative. We reiterate our commitment
to the effectiveness of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and to fine-tuning that architecture and
its operationalization. It is absolutely critical to our
ultimate substantive goal, which is to genuinely tailor
peacebuilding to the very specific needs of the countries
concerned, to prevent a relapse into conflict and,
instead, to provide a path to security and development.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Luxembourg for its initiative in convening
this open meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding.
I thank Mr. Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Clark, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, for their
briefings.
Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of a
conflict has an effective role to play in eliminating the
root causes of conflict. It has an important bearing on
achieving lasting peace and sustainable development
in countries and regions emerging from conflict. In
recent years, the United Nations has been actively
participating in peacebuilding efforts in the countries
and regions on its agenda, where it has accumulated
rich experience and achieved significant results.

Secondly, post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
should focus on removing the deep-rooted causes of
conflict, with a particular emphasis on economic and
social development. In post-conflict peacebuilding, the
international community has long emphasized human
rights, the rule of law and security sector reform
without paying adequate attention to the economic and
social development of the countries concerned and with
limited input in that regard. We call on the international
community to focus more on the economic and social
development of the countries concerned. Only through
rapid economic recovery and recontruction will the
affected populations be able to enjoy the dividends
of peace and will a solid foundation for political
reconciliation, the stabilization of security and the
establishment of a political basis for the peace process
be laid.
Thirdly, post-conflict peacebuilding should enjoy
adequate and guaranteed resources. The international
community’s swift and timely support in the form of
assistance to the countries concerned is an important
factor in smoothly achieving peacebuilding objectives.
The United Nations should continue to heed the

14-2691415/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

financing requirements of reconstruction programmes
in the countries concerned. The Organization should
also urge the international community to continue to
provide assistance to peacebuilding activities within
those countries and to work together to broaden the
channels for financing with no political preconditions
for assistance. In that regard, China commends the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for its active role
and supports its efforts to improve its work in enhancing
the evaluation of the projects that it has carried and the
efficiency of the utilization of resources. China will
continue to support the Peacebuilding Fund within its
abilities.
Fourthly, post-conflict peacebuilding requires
closer coordination and cooperation by all parties
concerned. The United Nations should continue to play a
coordinating role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
and should seek to establish a stable and cooperative
relationship with the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the African Development Bank and
other international and regional financial institutions.
At the same time, it should make use of the unique
peacebuilding advantages of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, in order to
make progress in that regard. The relevant agencies
within the United Nations system should have a clear
division of labour and should strengthen cooperation.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission should
have a greater role in coordinating peacebuilding
activities.
China has always supported peacebuilding efforts
in post-conflict countries. We are ready to continue
to work with the international community in helping
countries emerging from conflict to achieve durable
peace and sustainable development.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
would like to begin by thanking the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and leadership on this matter, as
well as to express my thanks for the excellent briefings
provided by our friends Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and by Ms. Helen Clarke, the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
My comments this morning will be brief and a little
bit different. I therefore respectively beg the Council’s
understanding in advance.
We agree that inclusivity is the key to successful
post-conflict peacebuilding, but we do not agree it can

16/26

19/03/2014

be attained through political processes or through an
economic development agenda alone, either separately
or together, as is proposed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/746). Nor does it make any sense that
national ownership is highlighted repeatedly when the
very emphasis on the need for inclusivity makes it clear
that in most, if not all, post-conflict societies — as
opposed to normal developing countries — there is no
cohesive nation that can go about owning anything.
Own what? Owned by whom? By the nation still at war,
only there is no killing and we perceive the acrimony a
little less easily?
In post-conflict societies, the conflict is not
actually past; it is current, present; it is there now. Only
the killing is past, otherwise the conflict continues
as before, only now through political manoeuvres,
corruption and criminality.
That being the case, advancing the importance
of national ownership is the wrongful application of
ordinary development practices to a context that is
markedly different, even if the two contexts share some
of the same characteristics — youth unemployment,
poor education facilities, poor infrastructure, et cetera.
That is where we seem to have been fooled: post-killing
environments and ordinary development challenges are
not one and the same thing; they are different, much in
the same way the PBC and UNDP were established to
address, at their core, different challenges. The quicker
we understand that, the better.
It is absolutely true that the path to eventual national
ownership, once a country has graduated from a postkilling status, under strict United Nations observation,
to weak-State status, has to — must, even — run
through the inclusivity stage first, if it hopes to get
anywhere. But there is a major piece missing in the
Secretary-General’s analysis, and that is that inclusivity
cannot simply be obtained through political powersharing, elections, training, employment schemes and
the building of infrastructure alone. That approach has
now run its course. It is flawed, and has failed more
times than it has succeeded.
Nothing bears that point out more tragically than
then entire content of paragraph 15 in the SecretaryGeneral’s 2012 report. Given what has happened in
South Sudan since the report was published, the contents
of paragraph 15 are a telling, if not tragic, example of
how the United Nations not only missed the bull’s-eye
but was aiming in the wrong direction to begin with.

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Inclusivity, at a level that makes it meaningful,
can properly be brought about only when a deeper
psychological accommodation is reached by excombatants and their communities in recognition of
what has often brought them to fight in the first place.
In other words, the deficit of trust spoken of in the
Secretary-General’s report can be reduced to zero only
when there is also a proper resolution to the divergent
historical narratives.
I will not repeat all we said on this subject in
January (see S/PV.7105), save to say events since the
thematic debate on historical narratives, events which
the Council has wrestled with every week, have only
brought into sharper focus the undeniable importance
of history, of understanding it properly, of not abusing
it, but finding the truth, rejecting the lies, and not just by
the lied to, but more important, by the liars themselves
and, after a reckoning, a settling of history, the finding
of a permanent reconciliation, and one that will produce
the “inclusivity” necessary for later, much-needed,
political processes and economic growth.
Finally, a point in relation to women and
peacebuilding: we all believe strongly that only
good can come out of greater female participation in
societies recovering from war. It is not just a women’s
right or a human right; it is a matter of basic justice,
and it can only be for the betterment of the country.
But it is also obvious that, in many parts of the world,
very impressive economic growth was still achieved
following the end of devastating conflicts, without
women playing a major role in them. In other words,
it is better to make the argument that even more could
be achieved with the greater participation of women,
rather than by saying, simply, that women are necessary
for the successful economic development of a society or
community.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson, the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission,
Ambassador
Patriota,
and
the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, Ms. Clark, for their informative briefings,
in which they highlighted the peacebuilding efforts
of the United Nations, the difficulties facing the
Organization and the outlook in this area.
The Russian Federation considers assistance to
peacebuilding as one of the key factors for the effective
resolution of conflicts and ensuring that they do not

S/PV.7143

recur. In most cases, countries torn apart by war or
crises are not capable of coping on their own with the
broad array of problems related to restoring security
and law and order, protecting human rights and fighting
poverty. International assistance in this regard is
particularly crucial.
At the same time, we are convinced that the key
to successful and sustainable results from this kind
of cooperation lies in national ownership on the part
of States. They have to determine their priorities for
themselves, whose practical implementation should
be overseen by national Government institutions that
represent the interests of society as a whole.
Considerable work in the area of peacebuilding
is carried out in the framework of the United Nations
through peacekeeping missions and the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations.
That endeavour entails considerable difficulties and
challenges that require coordinated efforts on the
part of Member States, United Nations funds and
programmes, regional organizations, the Secretariat and
international financial institutions. Peacebuilding tasks
are increasingly included in the multifaceted mandates
of peacekeeping operations. First and foremost, that
means assisting in the sectors of security, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, supporting the
re-establishment of law enforcement and the rule of
law. In general, such efforts are required to address
the causes of a conflict and prevent its recurrence.
Peacekeepers should not replace national bodies.
International assistance in the area of peacekeeping
remains fragmentary. There is a lack of coordination
in the division of labour that leads to a duplication of
peacebuilding efforts, non-optimal use of resources and
the squandering of available resources. In that regard,
it is important that all those involved in peacebuilding
work clearly within their mandates and the established
regulations. The examples of Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic require a thorough analysis
of peacebuilding activity, with a focus on the reasons
for the lack of expected results and the failure to ensure
that such situations do not relapse into crisis.
It is clear that, to achieve practical results, there
is a need to continue fine-tuning the peacebuilding
architecture at the global and country levels alike.
The Russian Federation supports the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as one of the central
intergovernmental bodies for coordinating such

14-2691417/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

cooperation. In our view, its added value is to provide
quality advisory assistance to the Security Council at
its request on countries on the agendas of both bodies.
In our view, the Commission, in the framework of
its mandate, should contribute to dealing with major
crosscutting issues related to peacebuilding and to the
United Nations system as a whole, and that require
multidimensional discussion with Member States
within the framework of specialized United Nations
bodies.
The events planned for this year, including
holding the first annual session of the Commission
and the beginning of the scheduled 2015 review, will
make a significant contribution to consolidating the
Commission as an intergovernmental body that plays a
key role in the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations.
Today the Peacebuilding Commission has acquired
significant experience in direct dialogue with national
Governments, based on mutual control in fulfilling
obligations as well as through coordinating the
efforts of international players in implementing the
priorities determined by post-conflict countries. A
positive example of that could be the stabilization of
the situations in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. It
is essential to consolidate those successes, including
through continual security sector reform, forwardlooking socioeconomic development and combating
poverty and unemployment. United Nations funds
should play a key role.
The Peacebuilding Fund is one of the most important
components of the peacebuilding architecture. That
mechanism, a term-loan facility that contributes to
attracting long-term resources for rebuilding and
development, has confirmed its effectiveness. On
that basis, Russia has continued to provide an annual
contribution of $2 million to the Fund. Providing
assistance to the Fund on the basis of programmes
and projects developed by the United Nations and the
Government in question should take into account the
priorities of the host country and ensure its responsible
approach in using that kind of assistance. At the same
time, it is important to ensure that countries do not
become addicted to donor infusions.
We continue to consider that the country principle
is key in distributing resources. We do not think that
artificial priorities should be imposed on countries. It
is the Governments themselves that should determine
their priorities.
18/26

19/03/2014

Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Eliasson; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Patriora; and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Ms. Clark, for their briefings.
Two years after the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the issue of peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746), I think it is very
useful for the Council to once again express its views
on a subject that is at the heart of the work of the
Organization. I would like to thank the Luxembourg
presidency of the Council for convening this discussion.
I would like to recall some principles that France
considers essential with regard to peacebuilding.
First, peacebuilding implies the establishment
of inclusive processes, in particular of a national
dialogue — of course, one that is inclusive in the
sense mentioned by the Ambassador of Jordan in his
statement today. In other words, it is not just a sharing
of power and infrastructure; it is effectively finding
a narrative that can lead to reconciliation. It was
precisely to relaunch the national dialogue that had
been obstructed and a conflict narrative that was going
in contradictory directions that the Council visited
Mali in early February to try to put the stabilization
process back on a better basis.
Working to build peace after a conflict must
also include all segments of society. We support the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
designed to ensure the active participation of women in
peacebuilding processes. We often say that and do little,
and therefore we need to make progress in that area.
In that respect, the appointment of the interim Head
of the Transitional Government in the Central African
Republic, Ms. Samba-Panza, and the important place
given to women in her Government has, we feel, been a
good example of that. Over and above the participation
of women, we must ensure the participation of all
sectors of society in the transition process.
Another principle for establishing the bases for
a lasting peace is the need to work on justice. Justice
remains the key to all post-conflict stabilization.
Through its practical experience in a number of
countries, the Council has identified several key areas
for intervention when it comes to justice — support
for the criminal justice system, independent justice,
the establishment of a prison system, security sector

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

reform and support for the international criminal
justice system.
National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for bringing to justice and punishing those
responsible for atrocities, including those committed in
post-conflict situations. But when States fail in their
responsibilities, the International Criminal Court must
play its part. Cases from a number of countries in
which we are involved in peacebuilding — the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — have already been referred to the Court.
Finally, it is essential to begin long-term work to
rebuild institutions that inspire public confidence.
Again in reference to the Central African Republic, up
until today, thanks to the action of the African force
supported by the French Operation Sangaris, large-scale
massacres have been avoided. However, we face a
situation of insecurity borne of the collapse of the State.
It is therefore essential, parallel to security measures,
to act immediately to restore the State’s authority and
constructive relations with the society as a whole. For
that, certain basic actions need to be carried out, such
as ensuring that civil servants are paid, which would
get the police and gendarmerie forces back to work, as
well as the courts and detention centres.
We cannot simply separate the opposing armies.
We also must arrest and bring to justice those who
order or incite violence. We must also bear in mind the
goal of holding elections no later than February 2015.
To re-establish the Central African Republic State,
those projects need resources. With regard to those
priority areas, the United Nations — today through the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic and as soon as possible, we
hope, through a peacekeeping operation — will have
an essential role to play. The international community,
however, must strengthen its mobilization in order
to provide the means necessary. As emphasized by
Ms. Clark, UNDP has a critical role to play in that regard.
It has the ability to develop policies and to mobilize,
as we saw in the Central African Republic, where the
UNDP has shown its effectiveness and its ability to
react in recent crises by setting up a multi-donor fund.
In the face of the challenge of peacebuilding,
the United Nations offers an opportunity to act in
a coordinated fashion. For our part, we would like
to stress the need to proceed in stages and to think
carefully about the various phases of transition.

S/PV.7143

Peacekeeping operations themselves have now become
multidimensional, and from their deployment try to
respond to varying challenges in countries where State
structures have practically disappeared.
It is important that peacekeeping operations pave
the way for peacebuilding. We must explain, however,
that those operations cannot in one year or in a few
months accomplish a whole multitude of tasks. Previous
speakers today have referred to the difficulties that we
have encountered in South Sudan.
Moreover, there must be close cooperation between
UNDP and the special political missions or the civilian
component of peacekeeping operations, so as to avoid
duplication. Exit strategies must be prepared, which
should guide the action of missions on a daily basis. In
those complex peacebuilding processes, I would like to
stress the particular importance of reinforcing the link
between the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, who depend upon the resources provided by
the peacekeeping operations or special missions, and
the United Nations country teams, directed by the
Resident Coordinators.
The country teams are expected to take over, at
the appropriate moment, the leading of peacekeeping
operations to ensure an effective transition towards
development programmes. That is an important
challenge, which we can see in countries such as Burundi
and Sierra Leone. The international community must
remain mobilized in those types of situations because,
if we do not, we cannot exclude a relapse into conflict
after the when different actors are demobilized.
Lastly, coordination among all actors contributing
to peacebuilding is essential. Others before me
have mentioned the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States, endorsed in Busan at the end of 2011,
which reminds us the necessity of coordination. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund are entities that can play a very useful role in
support of activities on the ground and to ensure the
necessary synergies with the missions in place. In that
regard, I welcome the establishment of justice/police
oversight mechanisms in Liberia that are financed by
the Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. In our opinion, those
are very interesting examples of cooperation among
different United Nations actors.
We are certain tha the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission architecture in 2015 will give us an

14-2691419/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

opportunity to go even further in terms of coordination
and the further strengthening of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, an institution in which we
truly believe and which has made a lasting contribution
since its establishment to strengthening States in postconflict situations.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
President for having organizing this morning’s meeting
on the peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict. I also
thank the speakers for their detailed briefings on the
topic.
Today, the world is ravaged by a multitude of
conflicts. Darfur, the Sudan, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Syrian crisis, to mention but a few, are
the best examples. Those conflicts have completely
undone social fabrics, which have become difficult to
reconstruct. Populations are traumatized and divided
by deep hatred that gives rise to war, which turns
sometimes into genocide. That is the case with Syria
and the Central African Republic, where large-scale
destruction have forced distraught populations to leave
to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. To put an end
to the spiral of violence, the United Nations, in its role
as guarantor of world peace, mobilizes massive human,
material and financial resources.
Conflict is a moment of tension with multiple
potential causes — the clash of opposing political,
economic and cultural interests or due to expansionary
ambitions. A conflict can be long-lasting and engulf
human lives and bring about human rights violations,
such as rape, the enlistment of children in the army,
population transfers and modifications of borders. War
is a source of underdevelopment because it generates
ignorance, hate and lack of trust, and is therefore a
useless waste of time and energy. It is clear that military
intervention can contribute to the settlement of certain
conflicts, but dialogue remains the simplest and least
costly of all methods.
Peacebuilding through dialogue is the way to
maintain lasting and viable peace, while development
assistance provides the tools for strengthening it.
Africa experiences many problems that dangerously
undermine its socioeconomic development. The extreme
poverty of its populations is a major source of conflict.
Countries such as the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan
will not experience lasting peace in the short term after
an agreement is reached following national dialogue if
20/26

19/03/2014

peacebuilding is not folled up with massive amounts of
development aid. To achieve that end, donor countries
must work out comprehensive national strategies for
better peacebuilding. They must define intervention
strategies for peacebuilding in those countries when the
need is felt and support national dialogue and provide
development assistance, inter alia.
Peacebuilding requires the mobilization of
various actors on the ground. In Africa, women are
peacebuilding actors. As women and children are the
primary victims of conflict, they need to be involved
in the search for peace, peacebuilding and peace
negotiations. Women are a positive force that is often
overlooked. Women of the African diaspora can play
a significant role in reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Examples throughout the world show that women
generally participate actively in seeking peace.
What makes peacebuilding difficult in the aftermath
of conflict is not only the absence of will on the part of
the parties in conflict to stop the violence, but also the
refusal of parties involved in the settlement of conflicts
to address the underlying causes of conflicts.
My country, Chad, experienced several decades
of civil war from which it was able to escape thanks
to mediation and dialogue among the different
components of its society, where women are in the
majority. Peacebuilding became a reality thanks to the
mobilization of all parts of the nation. Today, the results
achieved are appreciated by the entire international
community, even if progress is still needed in some
areas. Women are significantly represented in State
institutions. Medical, anti-retroviral, obstetric and
surgical care are given cost-free, and a mother’s and
children’s hospital was built.
As for development, the structures for distributing
aid were implemented to help women to develop
income-generating revenues.
In conclusion, in Chad, like elsewhere,
peacebuilding requires robust support from the
international community as a whole, and in particular
the United Nations.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the statements made by the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; by Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and by Ms. Helen Clark,
Administration of the United Nations Development
Programme.
14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
of October 2010 (S/2010/466), an effective response on
the part of the Organization requires developing a broadbased and coordinated strategy for peacebuilding, one
that is based on identifying priorities on the part of local
and authorities and that sets goals and concrete and
achievable time frames. The report also points out that
such work requires developing efforts at humanitarian
assistance, establishing or re-establishing the rule of
law, drafting and implementing security and justice
policies, promoting sustainable development and a
rigorous, democratic policy for protecting, promoting
and ensuring human rights. No doubt, that continues to
be an existing challenge.
Having had an opportunity to serve as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and to
actively participate in the Peacebuilding Commission
makes it possible for us to reflect upon profound
and valuable experiences. The first that I would like
to share with you, Madam, President, and with my
colleagues has to do with the value of peace, which can
be evaluated on the basis of its relationship with the
persistence of inequality, violence and oppression. I say
that because, as we have seen from our field visits with
the Security Council, at the time peacebuilding work
begins after a conflict, we have noted the existence of
certain myths and fictions at the point of departure.
We believe that post-conflict peacebuilding has to
do with communities and “doing” — that is to say, that
it must take place in a concrete context that involves
power and social relations, where peace is no longer
clear-cut or indisputable. Although we could begin our
peacebuilding undertaking with uniform, universal
approaches, we would be doing so in the dark and while
ignoring the underlying causes and specific reasons
that led a given society to conflict. That has been a
lesson that we have learned.
There are no universal approaches for working on
a coordinated plan for peacebuilding, since a set of
uniform practices might not adequately reflect, include
or express the reality in a specific society. We all know
of examples where post-conflict assistance policies
have become, or been experienced as, an imposition, or
have worked on the basis of a “remote control” approach
in which certain generic programmes or actions are
applicable, in the abstract, to any country in the world.
We know that from experience; it is one of the
lessons we have learned. Such cooperation is not really
transformational, but rather is profoundly inefficient,

S/PV.7143

as it is not sensitive to the concrete social, economic
and cultural conditions in which it seeks to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development.
We have learned that, in our post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts, it is our responsibility to begin
any process of change with questions, and with the
ability to listen and to watch. That will lead us to an
understanding of who and what causes or motives led
that specific society, at a specific point in time, to
actually choose to destroy its prospects for the future.
That has enabled us to understand that peacebuilding
is a process that cannot be imposed or administered
from the outside, but rather one that must arise from
the capacities and hopes and interests of each society.
National ownership of that process must take place in a
progressive manner. That is not only the most respectful
way of achieving our goals, but also a precondition for
achieving true peace.
Being a member of the Security Council has enabled
us to grasp, on the ground, the need to move away from
the myths and fictions that could lead us down deadend streets or into ineffective actions to achieve peace
in post-conflict situations.
One example of that, which Council members
have certainly heard of, is the myth of a lost paradise.
In a refugee camp in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, one often hears women say that in the past
they were happy, but they lived well and were never
victims of violence, and there were no problems in their
communities. I think that is an idealization of a past
that never existed. It can be understood as a way of
grieving, and that is the way that we should understand
it. But in our Organization, we cannot work in postconflict societies by looking in the rear-view mirror at a
past that never existed. It is precisely the empowerment
of members of society that enables them to remember
the past, even painfully, in order to be able to face
the difficulties of the present moment and meet its
challenges, in order to build the future that they needed
and deserve.
Another myth that we encountered — again in
a refugee camp, but in the Sudan — and that causes
ethical tension for us, is when the presence of the
United Nations or other international organizations on
the ground gives rise to or permits a growing belief that
the future of that community will be resolved through
that presence and thanks to it, and that the possibility
for those people to live in a happy society is in the
hands of those saviours. To allow that kind of belief to

14-2691421/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

grow is not only illegitimate, ethically speaking, but it
institutionally reproduces a mentality of dependence,
which defines people and countries as beneficiaries
of aid and at the same time prevents people and
communities from becoming subjects of change, with
rights and responsibilities that they have freely taken
on in order to build or rebuild a social compact and
lasting peace.
In another refugee camp, a woman told us that for
her, peace was a fleeting moment between two wars.
That is the myth of eternal return. For her, it will
always be that way — a fleeting instant between two
wars. Our responsibility must be to overcome such a
defeatist attitude, such a fatalistic stance. That is our
responsibilty.
I would like to note the important reports that
we have received and read. We in the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Council need to ask ourselves
which States need which kind of democracy, and which
kind of democracy is needed for peace.
We have also learned that building or rebuilding
a State in the post-conflict stage cannot be based on
a logic of power, on the idea that “man is a wolf to
his fellow man” or on enduring conflict or dissent.
We have also learned that, in a post-conflict society,
authoritarianism, uniformity and a hegemonic belief
that there is only one right way are not the path to lasting
peace. We have learned that the path to lasting peace is
through a democracy that is founded on deliberation,
equality and liberty and a just and inclusive society,
with full respect for human rights. The paradox is that
we have learned that and know it clearly, but the belief
that man is a wolf to his fellow man and the hegemonic
insistence that there is only one way forward persist,
even in post-conflict societies, like a trap that we must
seek to remove.
I have allowed myself to reflect on those abstract
ideas because this kind of meeting allows us to reflect
on things. Often we make decisions as if we were
firemen putting out fires. I think the Peacebuilding
Commission has an enormous preventive role. The idea
is to consolidate peace in order to prevent violence
from resuming, hate from becoming entrenched and
war from destroying.
I would recall Mr. Brahimi’s concept of the three
circles when he told us how he saw the situation in Syria.
In the Council and in the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations Development Programme shows

22/26

19/03/2014

us that the local level and the national level have to be
incorporated into the regional level, and the regional
level into the international level. It is no longer possible
to think in any other way, not simply because of the
Internet, but because the world is interdependent. We
are interconnected, and human rights have become
universal.
This is another area of tension that we are discussing
today in the Council, and also in the Assembly. How
can we ensure that universal human rights, which
must be included in the very essence of building and
rebuilding the rule of law in post-conflict societies,
are not subject to opinion? How can we ensure that
cultural, ethnic, gender-based, racial and religious
diversity is not crushed and does not become a victim of
uniformity? I think that, in our efforts for post-conflict
peacebuilding, we need to work and provide assistance
and cooperation to ensure that the social compacts that
arise from the multifaceted identities of the various
countries include, woven into their very structure, that
which is non-negotiable, namely, respect for human
rights. There should be a democratic debate on what is
actually negotiable, that is, the diverse and pluralistic
identity of a country.
I am very grateful to you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to hold this debate. We continue to
support the principles that other colleagues have
highlighted. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his assessment of the implementation of the
priorities identified by the Council in 2012. I also
thank Ms. Clark. She is aware of how much I respect
her not only on a personal level but also owing to the
fact that the United Nations Development Programme
introduced the aspect of human development on the basis
of lasting and sustainable economic, social, cultural
and environmental development. The work of UNDP in
post-conflict situations provides a time-based, cultural
and strategic bridge for the alleviation of the urgent
needs of hunger and poverty through humanitarian
development assistance from a situation of desperation
to the hope of building or rebuilding a country, from the
fragmentation of a country to its social cohesion. Those
are of course enormous challenges.
Turning to the issue of women, children and young
people, my philosophy professor used to say that it is
not enough simply to include women in the electoral
process in order to build a democracy. Democratic
elections in which women participate are not sufficient.
Women should have the right to vote. However, there

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7143

must also be economic, social and political genderempowerment and ownership among women for them to
truly participate freely and equally in decision-making
processes. They can then once again raise children who
have seen their future destroyed, not without hope but
as equal human beings.

new drivers of conflict, such as organized crime, drug
trafficking and the illicit trade in natural resources,
emerge. We must rise to those new challenges, The
United Nations must improve the way in which it
analyses conflict, plans and reviews missions and
prepares for transitions.

Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme for their briefings.

In each mission setting, the United Nations should
undertake a rigorous analysis of the conflict and its
causes in order to understand how to focus and prioritize
its peacebuilding activities. Missions must coordinate
closely with their partners on the ground, including the
United Nations country team. United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes play an important role in
delivering critical peacebuilding tasks. Arrangements
such as the joint global focal point for the police, justice
and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict
and other crisis situations are essential to ensuring a
united “One UN” approach to peacebuilding.

I would like to focus on three issues: first, improving
the ability of the United Nations to plan, adapt and
draw down its peacebuilding interventions; secondly,
the role of women in peacebuilding; and, thirdly, the
2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.
As others have said, the Council will reach an
important milestone next week as we close the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone. The people of Sierra Leone have worked hard
to stabilize their country and, although they still
face many challenges, they are now on the path to a
brighter future. The United Nations should be proud
of the central role that it has played in helping Sierra
Leone to recover from its devastating civil war. That
is an example of how effective, tailored and wellplanned United Nations peacebuilding interventions
can improve people’s lives.
In 1992, former Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali
introduced the concept of peacebuilding in “An Agenda
for Peace”. Since then, the Council has launched
numerous missions with mandates that recognize the
importance not only of monitoring a ceasefire but
also of building an enduring peace. Countries such as
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, which once tore themselves
apart in civil wars, have made considerable progress
in building stability, aided by United Nations missions.
The experience of more than two decades of United
Nations peacebuilding has taught us that strong national
ownership of inclusive peacebuilding processes and a
focus on building national institutions are essential to
securing a sustainable peace.
However, recent relapses into conflict in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan demonstrate that we
must constantly review and improve our approaches
to peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is becoming more
complex and challenging for the United Nations as

In addition, we need systematic reviews of existing
missions to consider regularly whether a mission’s
mix of military, police and civilian capacities remain
appropriate in the light of changing circumstances
in the field. Finally, we need to ensure that there is a
clear plan for drawing down each mission once we can
responsibly do so.
In turn, as Council members, we have the
responsibility to ensure that the mandates that we
provide to United Nations missions are focused, realistic
and prioritized. Such steps will allow United Nations
peacebuilding interventions to be more dynamic and
ensure that such interventions have the right focus and
capabilites to help host Governments and countries
build lasting peace.
I would like to turn to the issue of women and
peacebuilding, which is a high priority for the United
Kingdom. Since the end of the Cold War, women have
represented only 4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements, less than 3 per cent of mediators at peace
talks and less than 10 per cent of those sitting at the
table to negotiate on behalf of a party to conflict. More
must be done to promote the role of women in postconflict peacebuilding processes.
In that regard, the adoption of resolution 2122
(2013), last October, was a positive step forward. Thye
full implementation of the resolution by all stakeholders
is now key. The United Kingdom, for its part, is
actively working to promote women’s participation in
peacebuilding. For example, on Syria, we provided the

14-2691423/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Syrian National Coalition with negotiation training
on gender issues and women’s participation and
played a leading role in supporting increased women’s
representation in the recent second Geneva Conference
on Syria.
We continue to call on the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and special envoys to establish
regular consultations with women’s organizations and to
work with civil society to support women’s leadership.
We also continue to call on the Secretary-General to
strengthen gender training and experts in mediation
teams and to support the appointment of senior women
as United Nations mediators. As the Ambassador of
Rwanda said, increasing women’s participation and
leadership in peacebuilding is a practical necessity, not
a philosophical proposition.
I would like to conclude with a brief word on
the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. That will be an important moment for
all United Nations bodies involved in peacebuilding
activities. The United Kingdom believes that the review
should not only focus on the institutions established
in 2005, but also should consider the effectiveness of
all United Nations peacebuilding activities and the
contributions made by all United Nations operational
peacebuilding divisions, including the Secretariat
and agencies, funds and programmes. Since 2005,
peacebuilding has moved on and is now much more
mainstreamed into the day-to-day work of many parts
of the United Nations system. A narrow focus on the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office will not provide
Member States with a full evaluation of the effectiveness
of the United Nations peacebuilding activities.

19/03/2014

instituition-building and sustained international
support, accompanied by strong national ownership.
The international community should also devote
enhanced attention to minimizing the impact of external
stresses such as cross-border conflict and the possible
spillover of threats posed by international criminal
networks. Internal factors, such as political exclusion,
real or perceived discrimination against social groups,
corruption, high levels of youth unemployment and
unequally distributed natural resources could also be
profoundly destabilizing for countries that have weak
institutions and are politically and socially fragmented.
In my remarks, I would like to focus on two
elements: institution-building and the rule of law. Under
last month’s Lithuanian presidency, the Council held an
open debate (see S/PV.7113) and adopted on a presidential
statement on the rule of law (S/PRST/2014/5). That
exercise emphasized, once again, the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacebuilding, conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. Moreover, it unfolded around the idea
that early peacebuilding starts with peacekeeping
missions and that their support to strengthening
rule-of-law institutions should lay foundations for
long-term peacebuilding objectives. In that context, the
role of the effective management of transitions, as well
as the importance of partnerships and cooperation with
Member States, regional, subregional and international
partners, was underlined. The Council also reiterated
that national ownership, responsibility and political
will were critical in building sustainable peace.

Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
all speakers for their interventions. Sustaining and
consolidating peace is a central objective of the United
Nations peace and security architecture. It is our
collective responsibility to consolidate the gains that
we have achieved and to prevent post-conflict countries
from sliding back into violence. The sustained attention
and consistent commitment of the international
community and strong national ownership are critical
to achieving lasting peace.

Strengthening formal and informal institutions,
restoring core governance functions and equitable
service delivery, and strengthening domestic
accountability systems in countries emerging from
conflicts are practical expression of sustainable peace.
Institutions take a long time to develop into a solid
forum for inclusive political participation and for the
delivery of security, social services, justice, education
and economic opportunities. The capacities of
Governments to sustain and empower such institutions
remain a key challenge for countries emerging from
conflicts. Strong leadership and political will are
crucial.

Lithuania recognizes the importance of the
main elements contained in the 2012 report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict (S/2012/746), namely, inclusive processes,

Another important element for the peacebuilding
is inclusivity. Elected Governments must keep various
societal and political forces engaged and include them
in the decision-making process. A very important

24/26

14-26914

19/03/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

aspect of inclusivity relates to the participation of
women and youth. We constantly urge the inclusion of
women in peacebuilding processes, but what does that
mean in reality? Women are powerful agents of change
in rebuilding communities affected by conflict. Women
bring their experiences of war to the conference table.
Women make up 80 per cent of refugees. They are often
victims of sexual violence, and war widows. When they
are combatants, they also have different needs and
experiences from those of male combatants. Democratic
governance, security sector reform, land tenure, justice
and the protection of human rights are key elements for
sustainable peace where women’s interests and gender
perspectives should be taken into account.
It is very important to follow the United Nations
seven-point action plan on women’s participation in
peacebuilding, in which the United Nations committed
to ensuring women’s participation in conflict resolution,
post-conflict building and mediation. It also promotes
women’s representation in post-conflict governance.
Today the Council referred to resolution 2122
(2013), which remains a key element in the expanding
framework for women’s contribution to peace.
In order to more effectively help countries affected
by conflict, the efforts of the international community
should be guided by a spirit of partnership that enhances
and better coordinates the links among the United
Nations civilian capacity, Member States, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
civil society. I cannot stress enough the role of the
Peace-building Commission (PBC) in coordinating
and reinforcing the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture in that regard. Increased interaction and
cooperation with the World Bank and collaboration
on the ground are required. The PBC role must not be
reduced to that of a mere fundraiser. The discussion
on how to deepen and focus the advisory and support
role of the PBC is very timely and, in that context, its
upcoming mandated review next year is very important.
The PBC clearly adds more value to our deliberations
in the Security Council. The country-specific
configuration Chairs of the PBC could participate in
Council meetings at which the situation concerning the
country in question is considered. There could also be
greater coordination before and during country visits
by PBC Chairs and Council members.
Finally, we look forward to the Secretary-General’s
next report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of

S/PV.7143

conflict later this year, which we trust will provide a
basis for our deliberations on the lessons learned from
the United Nations response in countries affected by or
emerging from conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Luxembourg.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Ambassador Patriota, and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Porgramme
(UNDP), Ms. Helen Clark, for their presentations.
They highlighted the close links that exist between
the various actors and entities of the United Nations
system, the United Nations Development Group and
the peacebuilding architecture established in 2005.
The Deputy Secretary-General, who was one of the
founding fathers of that architecture, urged the Council
to embark upon a reflection in the light of the in-depth
review of the peacebuilding architecture planned for
2015. I hope we will respond to that call and be able
to continue today’s discussions between now and
the annual debate on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to be held in July, and beyond.
Our briefers underlined in their presentations that
peacebuilding involved everybody. That is a longterm endeavour that must mobilize all the life force
of a country or region as a whole, and the consistent
support of the international community. There are
positive examples that should encourage us in our
efforts — I am referring in particular to Sierra Leone,
where the transition from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone to the United
Nations country team will be completed successfully
at the end of this month. I am also thinking of Guinea,
where the smooth holding of legislative elections in
2013 and the acceptance of their results allowed for the
transition in that country to bear fruit, on the basis of
an inclusive political dialogue facilitated by the United
Nations. In Guinea, all of the key players were directly
involved — the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa, UNDP. United Nations
funds and programmes, the European Union, bilateral
partners and civil society, including women’s groups
and the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which Luxembourg has had the honour to
chair for three years now.
However, examples of relapse into deadly conflict,
as in the Central African Republic and South Sudan,

14-2691425/26

S/PV.7143

Post-conflict peacebuilding

19/03/2014

show that there remains some way to go when it comes
to peacebuilding. Whenever human rights are violated
or dynamics of exclusion or marginalization arise, or
the narrowing of political space threatens the progress
achieved, vigilance and action are required. That is the
crux of the “Rights up front” initiative, launched by the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
last December.

The
Secretary-General’s
action
plan
for
mainstreaming the issue of the equality of women
and men in peacebuilding remains relevant. It is
unacceptable that women continue to be the main
victims of violence during and after conflict and that,
at the same time, they are marginalized when the time
comes to resolve those same conflicts and to rebuild the
country after the conflict.

Peacebuilding and the strengthening of the State
also have a political dimension. We cannot ignore
the realities of the political economy of a country,
the underlying causes of conflict, the risks posed
by corruption, governance that is not conducive to
development, political, economic or social exclusion,
organized crime or political cultures in which the
winner takes all. Building lasting peace requires the
establishment of inclusive political processes and
settlements, competent and accountable national
institutions, and ongoing support and attention from
the international community.

I would also like to say a few words on the regional
dimension of peacebuilding by invoking the example of
the Mano River Union. Three of the four countries of
that region — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — are
being assisted by the Peacebuilding Commission. Last
July, the three country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission organized a joint meeting
with the participation of the Secretary-General of
the Mano River Union in order to discuss challenges
common to the countries of the region. Last October,
those countries adopted a security strategy focused
on border security of the Mano River Union, with the
support of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
The implementation of the strategy should make it
possible to prevent conflicts and thereby build peace at
the regional level.

We welcome the efforts of fragile States in the Group
of Seven Plus and the conclusion of national agreements
under the “New Deal”. Mutual accountability exists
not only between the Government of a fragile State
and its international partners, but also between that
Government and its citizens. Peacebuilding requires
the achievement of a new social compact. The State
should be able to fulfil its regulatory functions that
confer its legitimacy. The State should ensure its
responsibility in the areas of promoting and protecting
human rights, establishing the rule of law and providing
public services for the benefit of its citizens. As others
today have highlighted genuine national ownership is
essential. The process of peacebuilding has to be an
inclusive one. It has to reflect true national consensus.
That is why it is also very important to ensure the
full involvement of women. Women are essential actors
in the peacebuilding process, as shown by the examples
mentioned by the Deputy Secretary-General and some
of the previous speakers. That is true in Guinea, in
Guinea-Bissau, in Liberia and in Yemen.

26/26

To conclude, I would like to come back to the
peacebuilding architecture established in 2005. I think
we need to duly acknowledge the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a consultative body that
could offer advice to the Security Council, and as an
adviser and constructive partner for countries emerging
from conflict. There is considerable scope to maximize
the potential of that body. Let us do that without waiting
for the results of the review scheduled in 2015.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

14-26914
