S/PRST/2004/39*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 October 2004
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5067th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 October 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council commends the Central African authorities, the
political parties and civil society of the Central African Republic for the
efforts they have made for the ongoing success of the transition process. The
Security Council welcomes in particular the spirit of consensus which the
Central African parties have shown and which attests to their determination to
continue the transition process to the end.
“The Security Council encourages the Central Africans to continue their
efforts to ensure the success of the constitutional referendum in November and
the satisfactory organization of free, transparent and democratic presidential
and legislative elections in January 2005.
“The Security Council also pays tribute to the United Nations system in
the Central African Republic and in particular to the Secretary-General’s
Representative, General Lamine Cissé, for his work at the head of the United
Nations Peace-building Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA)
and reaffirms to him its full support. The Security Council is pleased that the
Secretary-General intends to renew the BONUCA mandate until 31 December
2005.
“The Security Council welcomes the assistance provided by the
international community to the stabilization and recovery of the Central
African Republic as well as the considerable efforts made by the member
states of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC)
in the political, economic and security fields.
“The Security Council calls upon international donors and the
international financial institutions to continue to provide resolute support to
the Central African Republic, including on the preparation of the upcoming
legislative and presidential elections. It also emphasizes that their support will
be essential for the country’s economic and social recovery and encourages
them to formulate in close consultation with relevant development agencies
and with the Government of the Central African Republic a concerted
development strategy for the country.
* Reissued for technical reasons.

04-57815* (E) 291004

*0457815*

S/PRST/2004/39

“However, the Security Council expresses its concern at the deterioration
of the state’s finances and of the public sector, and calls on the Central African
authorities to act with determination in order to address this situation.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the CEMAC
multinational force and calls for the continuation of the restructuring of the
Central African Republic’s defence and security forces.
“The Security Council also encourages the Central African authorities to
continue to combat with determination human rights violations.
“The Security Council again expresses its concern at the possible
consequences to the Central African Republic of the crises in the subregion.
Accordingly, it welcomes with satisfaction the Secretary-General’s initiative in
asking BONUCA to assess the implications of developments in neighbouring
countries on the situation in CAR and vice versa.”

2
