112

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

effective control over their natural and all other resources,
wealth and economic activities,
Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international
law and the provisions of the international conventions and
regulations, in particular Convention IV of the Hague of
1907, 4 and the fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949, 5 concerning the obligations and responsibilities of the
occupying Power,
Bearing in mind also the pertinent provisions of its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Regretting that the report of the Secretary-General on
permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, requested in
General Assembly resolution 36/173, was not submitted,
l. Condemns Israel for its exploitation of the national
resources of the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories;
2. Emphasizes the right of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples whose territories are under Israeli occupation
to full and effective permanent sovereignty and control over
their natural and all other resources, wealth and economic
activities;
3. Reaffirms that all measures undertaken by Israel to
exploit the human, natural and all other resources, wealth
and economic activities in the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories are illegal and calls upon Israel to desist
immediately from such measures;
4. Further reaffirms the right of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples subjected to Israeli aggression and occupation to the restitution of and full compensation for the
exploitation, depletion and loss of and damages to their
natural, human and all other resources, wealth and economic
activities, and calls upon Israel to meet their just claims;
5. Calls upon all States to support the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples in the exercise of their above-mentioned
rights;
6. Calls upon all States, international organizations,
specialized agencies, business corporations and all other
institutions not to recognize, or co-operate with or assist in
any manner in, any measures undertaken by Israel to exploit
the national resources of the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories or to effect any changes in the demographic
composition, the character and form of use of their natural
resources or the institutional structure of those territories;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, the two reports requested
in Assembly resolution 36/173.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/136.

Population activities in the regional commissions

The General Assembly,
l. Takes note of decision 80/44 of 27 June 1980 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Pro-

• Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions
and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press),
1915, p. 100.
'United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

gramme on agency support costs 6 and of section I, paragraph
3, of decision 82/20 of 18 June 1982, 7 in which the Council
endorsed the guidelines for the approval of new and continuing intercountry projects that, inter alia, called for the
discontinuation by the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities of infrastructural support to its project-executing
agencies, including the regional commissions; 8
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive secretaries of the regional commissions, to
consider the inclusion in the draft programme budget for
the biennium 1984-1985 of proposals on modalities for the
continuation of activities in the field of population at the
regional level.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/137.

Protection against products harmful to health
and the environment

The General Assembly,
Aware of the damage to health and the environment that
the continued production and export of products that have
been banned and/or permanently withdrawn on grounds of
human health and safety from domestic markets is causing
in the importing countries,
Aware that some products, although they present a certain
usefulness in specific cases and/or under certain conditions,
have been severely restricted in their consumption and/or
sale owing to their toxic effects on health and the
environment,
Aware of the harm to health being caused in importing
countries by the export of pharmaceutical products ultimately intended also for consumption and/or sale in the
home market of the exporting country, but which have not
yet been approved there,
Considering that many developing countries lack the necessary information and expertise to keep up with developments in this field,
Considering the need for countries that have been exporting the above-mentioned products to make available the
necessary information and assistance to enable the importing
countries to protect themselves adequately,
Cognizant of the fact that almost all of these products are
at present manufactured and exported from a limited number
of countries,
Taking into account that the primary responsibility for
consumer protection rests with each State,
Recalling its resolution 36/ 166 of 16 December 1981 and
the report on transnational corporations in the pharmaceutical industry of developing countries, 9 and acting in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /62
of 23 July 1981,
Bearing in mind in this context the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Environment Programme, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the United Nations Centre
on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations,

6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980, Supplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev. l), chap. XI.
7
Ibid., 1982. Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev. l ), annex I.
• See DP/1982/29 and Add. I.
0
EiC. 10/85.
