United Nations

S/PV.6221

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6221st meeting
Wednesday, 18 November 2009, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1846
(2008) (S/2009/590)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-61200 (E)

*0961200*

S/PV.6221

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1846 (2008)
(S/2009/590)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Norway, the Philippines, Seychelles,
Somalia, Spain, Sweden and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/590, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1846 (2008).

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. I now give
him the floor.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: I should like to start by
thanking the Council for its continued interest in and
attention to the situation in Somalia, and specifically to
the issue of piracy there.
I should like to make it clear from the beginning
that piracy is, first and foremost, a very successful
business with outlets in the region and beyond. It is
therefore very important that we see it as it is — a
criminal activity.
Following the adoption of resolution 1846
(2008), we have been working with a number of
organizations within the United Nations system, our
colleagues in Vienna and here at Headquarters, and
other United Nations entities, including the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), to follow up events in Somalia.
The deployment of naval ships and military
aircraft to suppress piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia, as well as better self-protection
of ships transiting the area, have considerably reduced
the number of successful incidents in the region,
especially in the Gulf of Aden. This expanding
maritime presence is playing a critical role in
stabilizing the situation at sea, and there is no doubt
that the number of successful attacks would increase
again if these military assets were reduced. The naval
escorts protecting World Food Programme shipments
are providing crucial protection for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Somalia.
At the same time, the number of pirate attacks
has in no way diminished; the threat remains and, in
some ways, is becoming more entrenched as more
sophisticated methods are being adopted and attacks
are taking place further out at sea. However, this is a
further financial cost to the pirates and their criminal
business — a risk they are nevertheless still ready to
take because they see it as worthwhile.
We have to recognize that the international
maritime presence has dealt a serious blow to the
financial profitability of this criminal activity.
Therefore the approach to combating piracy cannot be
limited to the containment of the problem by
international naval forces alone, no matter how
successful — and I do consider it to be successful. This

09-61200

S/PV.6221

fight must be part of an overall plan which includes
building regional capacity, on the one hand, and
dealing with the root causes, on the other.
In addition to various bilateral initiatives being
undertaken by Member States, regional capacitybuilding is also being carried out through the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), a
specialized United Nations agency steering the
implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct. The
Code of Conduct aims to establish a cooperation
framework among regional States combating piracy at
both the operational and the legal levels. This covers
interdicting ships suspected of piracy, informationsharing among regional States, and the prosecution of
suspected pirates. Piracy’s root causes are being
addressed by my Office and my colleagues in the
United Nations system, whose joint action focuses on
establishing sustainable peace, effective governance,
creating capable rule of law and security institutions,
and — as far as possible — offering the Somali people
lawful alternatives to piracy and banditry. I would like
to address these issues in more detail.
The report before the Council (S/2009/590)
highlights the role played by IMO in promulgating
guidance for Governments, seafarers and the global
maritime industry in suppressing piracy and armed
robbery against ships, and in developing and
implementing a regional strategy for the western Indian
Ocean and the Gulf of Aden. This is the essence of the
Djibouti Code of Conduct, which has been signed by
10 States of the region. IMO and its member States
have long recognized that piracy is a symptom of the
lack of effective Government and the rule of law
ashore. With this aspect in mind, IMO has been
working actively, in partnership with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Vienna and other United Nations bodies, INTERPOL
and navies, to develop regional States’ capacities to
enforce the law at sea and, in particular, to counter
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off
the coast of Somalia.
On the prosecution of suspected pirates caught by
the international naval forces operating off the coast of
Somalia, UNODC has been providing assistance to
regional States. Although all agencies agree that the
ideal solution to the trial of pirates is a fair and
effective court system in Somalia, that goal is still out
of reach. Therefore, UNODC and the Office of Legal
Affairs here at Headquarters are leading on the best

09-61200

alternative: ensuring trial within a sound legal
framework in other regional States.
Through the delivery of support directly to the
police, prosecutors, courts and prisons of Kenya and
Seychelles, UNODC is creating the conditions in
which the arresting States are content to pass suspects
over for trial and improving overall criminal justice
and standards. The programme is being expanded to
other regional States through the conduct of legal
assessments and the delivery of assistance and, in
partnership with UNDP, will develop the prisons —
and later the prosecutors and police investigators — in
some entities within Somalia, such as Somaliland and
Puntland, to create the conditions in which pirates
convicted outside Somalia can be returned home to
serve their prison sentences. The United Nations plans
to implement high-impact interventions, primarily in
Puntland.
Civilian
policing
performance
and
infrastructure — especially communications — in the
strategic corridor from Bossaso to Galkayo through
Qardho and Garowe will be and should be
strengthened. After that, by the middle of next year,
Puntland authorities should roll out police services to
the rural and coastal areas.
In addition to the United Nations working closely
to contain and combat the root causes of piracy, the
United Nations has been closely working with
INTERPOL, whose law enforcement strategy to
combat maritime piracy is threefold: to increase
intelligence-sharing, build regional police capacity and
cooperate with other international and regional
organizations. The goal is to support efforts to identify,
arrest and prosecute pirates, trace and seize ransom
monies and disrupt criminal networks.
The first priority has been promoting
information-sharing with all police and non-police
organizations, including the United Nations and naval
and shipping industry partners. The INTERPOL I-24/7
global secure communications network is designed to
facilitate this type of collaboration, and INTERPOL is
helping to expand access to I-24/7 in the region.
INTERPOL is also working with a number of
Governments, including the United States and the
United Kingdom, on maritime piracy financial
investigations, and will host a maritime piracy
conference early next year.
I would like also to welcome the proposal made
by the regional body, the Intergovernmental Authority

3

S/PV.6221

on Development (IGAD), to establish a blockade of
known ports that are supporting piracy. I believe that
that measure should send a clear message to the
criminals behind the small ports — because some port
facilities are in fact small and harmless — that they
cannot keep defying the law and getting away with it.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that any
long-term effort to address lawlessness at sea must be
complementary to the current political, security,
recovery and development efforts already being
undertaken by the United Nations and the African
Union Mission in Somalia. In this regard I welcome the
intention of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia to coordinate its initiatives with the
International Contact Group on Somalia. Piracy is a
symptom of wider problems ashore in Somalia. The
only sustainable solution will be effective governance,
the establishment of the rule of law and security
institutions and the creation of alternative livelihoods
in Somalia for stable and inclusive economic growth.
In the present Government we have a credible and
legitimate partner with whom to work to achieve this.
It needs more assistance to do so.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his realistic
briefing and for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Security Council resolution 1846
(2008) (S/2009/590). The United Kingdom expresses
its appreciation of the contribution of the United
Nations and its agencies to this effort, including the
Special Representative and his team.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the
achievements of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to address piracy in the region
and the constructive contribution being made to these
efforts by the Transitional Federal Government and the
regional authorities of Somalia. We are pleased to lead
work in the Contact Group on operational coordination
and regional capacity development.
The level of coordination being achieved in the
region by naval forces from a wide range of States is

4

unprecedented and impressive. Close cooperation
among these forces, in particular the establishment of
patrolling of the internationally recommended transit
corridor in the Gulf of Aden, has managed to ensure
that only one ship following that route and adhering to
agreed best practice has been hijacked in the Gulf since
December 2008. The statistics in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the protection of World Food
Programme aid and the supplies of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) underline the
successful role of the military operations in
safeguarding essential shipping. But we cannot
underestimate the significant challenge that we face.
Even though the proportion of successful attacks
continues to fall, the overall number of pirate attacks
continues to increase, and 11 ships and 254 crew
members are currently hijacked.
Pirates are now willing to venture further out to
sea in search of targets, and to counter that, we need a
different type of military response, led by intelligence.
The military commanders know what they need in
terms of military capability, and the international
community must help to deliver it. But one message
from the military commanders remains consistent.
They are shocked by the lack of adherence by sectors
of the merchant shipping community to the guidance
that is given by the International Maritime
Organization and industry bodies. Estimates suggest
that a quarter of merchant shipping fails to follow this
guidance. That failure makes them much easier targets.
We have joined other major flag States in signing the
New York Declaration on Best Management Practices
to Avoid, Deter or Delay Acts of Piracy, and we are
pressing all United Kingdom ships to adopt those
practices when in the region. We urge all flag States to
do the same.
The release of the Spanish fishing boat Alacrana
earlier this week is obviously a welcome development,
and we hope that all other hostages will soon be free,
including British nationals Paul and Rachel Chandler,
who were seized from their yacht on 23 October.
We pay tribute to Kenya for its leadership within
the region in taking forward the detention and
prosecution of pirates. The United Kingdom also
welcomes the agreement by the Republic of Seychelles
to accept pirate suspects for trial and detention. We
stand ready with other partners to provide assistance to
signatories of the Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning
the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against

09-61200

S/PV.6221

Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden
who have undertaken to enact national legislation to
enable the prosecution of pirates. We strongly support
the work being taken forward by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to help the Transitional
Federal Government and regional authorities of
Puntland and Somaliland to deal with suspects within
Somalia.

damage to property and goods. This problem shows no
sign of abating. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590) notes, there were 160 instances of piracy
in the East Africa area from 1 January to 30 September
of this year, up from 136 during the same period last
year. Many of these attacks are now shifting from the
Gulf of Aden to the western Indian Ocean in response
to successful naval operations in the Gulf.

The Secretary-General’s report clearly highlights
the need to address the situation on land in Somalia.
The Contact Group decided on a number of measures
at the meeting of its working group in London this
week. Donors now need to commit themselves to
providing financial and technical support to Somalia
and to States throughout the region, including work on
governance, rule of law, justice, alternative livelihoods
and strategic communications. The implementation of
the Djibouti Code of Conduct remains at the heart of
regional capability development, transforming regional
political will into action.

The deep concern of the international community
over this issue has resulted in extraordinary counterpiracy cooperation off the coast of Somalia. Dozens of
States and international organizations are working
together to suppress piracy and protect vulnerable ships
transiting Somali waters or seeking to deliver badly
needed humanitarian aid to Somalia’s shores. In
particular, the United States commends the efforts of
the European Union’s Operation Atalanta, of NATO’s
Operation Allied Protector and Operation Ocean
Shield, and of the Combined Maritime Force’s Task
Force 151. We also commend the role played by
individual States in these important efforts. The Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction initiative has allowed for
excellent operational and tactical coordination, and we
thank all partners for their participation.

Piracy is only one of the symptoms of instability
in Somalia, and, as the Special Representative has said,
we must also address the root causes of that instability.
I pay tribute to the efforts led by the Special
Representative to support the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia in developing effective
political and security structures. I should like to thank
AMISOM, and in particular Uganda and Burundi, its
two troop-contributing countries, for their outstanding
efforts to support the Government against insurgents. I
hope that others will join them to bring the Mission up
to full strength.
The international community has shown unity
and resolve in taking action to contain the threat of
piracy, but we now need to show more of the same
determination and unity on shore if we are to address
its roots and causes.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
should like to thank Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his comments and for his efforts, and
those of the staff of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia, on behalf of the Somali people. I should
also like to welcome to the Council today the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Duale.
The scourge of piracy off the coast of Somalia
affects us all through increased risk to our citizens, the
disruption of global commercial shipping routes and

09-61200

The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia has also made significant contributions to the
global effort to suppress piracy, and we greatly
appreciate the role that the United Nations has played
here. In cooperation with the Contact Group, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes and the
United Nations Office of the Legal Adviser have
worked to enhance the judicial capacity of States in the
region. We are also grateful to the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) for its work to
coordinate and implement the Djibouti Code of
Conduct. In this regard, we should like to acknowledge
Japan’s generous donation to the IMO’s international
trust fund.
The United States believes that the international
community must continue and intensify efforts to
combat piracy. We should like to raise five issues today
that we think are important in this regard.
First, renewing the authority of Security Council
resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1851(2008) is essential.
These authorities provide a basis for ongoing counterpiracy military operations and allow Member States to
prevent pirates from using Somalia’s territorial waters,
land and air as safe havens to evade forces in the area.

5

S/PV.6221

Secondly, we must continue to share information
and best practices. On 10 September, the United States,
along with several other flag States, signed the New
York Declaration, a political commitment to ensure
that vessels operating under the signatory flags
implement internationally recognized best management
practices for self-protection. These best practices
include guidance from the International Maritime
Organization, the maritime industry and flag States. We
encourage other States to sign the New York
Declaration and require vessels to implement selfprotection measures.
Thirdly, we are concerned that ransom payments
have contributed to the recent increases in piracy, and
encourage all States to adopt a firm no-concessions
policy when dealing with hostage-takers, including
pirates.
Fourthly, the United States believes that affected
States should give favourable consideration to
prosecuting suspected pirates. We encourage States to
enact domestic legislation to enable the prosecution of
piracy as a crime in their national courts. We also urge
support for regional States to enhance their capacities
to prosecute and incarcerate pirates, and we encourage
States to utilize the Contact Group’s multi-donor trust
fund. And we should especially like to commend
States, in particular Kenya, that have taken the lead in
prosecution.
Finally, the United States believes that a focus on
Somalia’s economic development, political stability
and humanitarian needs is critical. Piracy is closely
linked to instability, weak governance and rule of law,
and a lack of opportunity on land. We strongly support
efforts to assist the Transitional Federal Government in
developing its institutions, including its security sector,
and to boost Somalia’s economy and create viable
livelihoods. We also applaud the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia that are helping to stabilize
Somalia and the role of the United Nations in
supporting the Somali people.
We are encouraged that Somalia is taking further
initiatives to address piracy, including plans to
reactivate the coast guard to help patrol Somalia’s
waters. The United States remains committed to
working with the Transitional Federal Government and
the international community to combat piracy. We laud
the excellent cooperation to date and look forward to
seeing it continue.

6

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/590) on piracy
in the context of our consideration of the situation in
Somalia. Having examined the report and paid close
attention to the additional information that has just
been presented to us, we should like to make some
observations.
Due to their frequency and modus operandi, the
activities of the maritime militias off the coast of
Somalia remain a source of extreme concern, making
the search for a comprehensive and viable solution to
the tragedy in Somalia even more difficult. The
statistics given in the report are eloquent and only
confirm the gravity of the problem. Of the 300 attacks
that took place around the world between 1 January
and 30 September, 160 occurred in the region off the
coast of East Africa. This also shows the determination
of the pirates in the face of the reaction of the
international forces in the Indian Ocean.
Despite their limited capacities and the
consequences of the civil war that has raged in the
country for more than a decade, the Somali authorities,
especially those of Puntland, have launched a number
of initiatives to combat piracy and prosecute those
responsible. We welcome these efforts, which led to the
arrest and detention of more than 100 suspects in
Bossaso, and we urge the Somali authorities not to let
down their guard and to continue their fight against
this criminal enterprise.
We also warmly welcome the mobilization of the
international community in response to this scourge,
and we praise the efforts made by States and
international and regional organizations in this area.
The role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development deserves particular notice. We also
welcome the establishment of a Contact Group and the
implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and
the Gulf of Aden.
While we may believe that the considerable
reduction in the number of successful attacks, as
stressed in the report, is the result of dynamic
international cooperation, it is important nevertheless
to bear in mind that the legal cooperation regime
currently in place is an exception and should not be
considered as replacing or modifying the provisions of

09-61200

S/PV.6221

the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which remains the sole legal instrument relevant to
counter-piracy activities.
However, we hope that the momentum of this
international solidarity can go beyond mobilizing
against piracy alone, and would like to see it manifest
in other areas of concern to the population of Somalia,
since it is clear that the proliferation of acts of piracy is
directly related to the overall situation facing Somalia
today. That is clear from the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and of the Monitoring Group on sanctions,
which establish, inter alia, a very clear causal link
between piracy and the violation of the arms embargo
in Somalia.
There is therefore no doubt that it was the
meltdown of the internal situation in Somalia that gave
birth to the maritime militias, which in turn have
become an aggravating factor due precisely to the
complicity between the pirates and the armed groups
active in Somalia.
In that context, cooperation between civil and
military actors in the fight against piracy must be
broadened so that direct bilateral and multilateral
assistance can be offered to the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). Some countries are already taking
steps in that area and their example is worth following.
With that direct assistance, the Somali
Government will be able to consolidate its police force
and security services, exercise better control over its
land and sea territories and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Such assistance should work
in tandem with the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the only international presence on the
ground and whose preponderant role has been
demonstrated, but which sorely lacks the financial and
logistical resources to carry out effectively its mandate
and guarantee the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement.
We welcome efforts by the Secretariat to support
AMISOM pursuant to resolutions 1863 (2009) and
1872 (2009), notably through its support for the
African force. We also support the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a more substantive assistance to AMISOM
so that it can continue to provide support to the
Transitional Federal Government in the maintenance of
peace and security.

09-61200

The new dynamic created by several political
parties participating in the Transitional Federal
Government and establishing themselves now, in fact,
in Mogadishu, is certainly something to be welcomed,
but we have to act quickly to ensure that it does not
crumble, which would plunge the country once again
into chaos.
In conclusion, we would like to thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, for his ongoing efforts on behalf
of and commitment to the people and the authorities of
Somalia.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I would like to
begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and Head of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia for his briefing and introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General, as contained in document
S/2009/590. I also welcome the participation of His
Excellency, Ambassador Duale of Somalia in the
Council’s meeting today.
Viet Nam remains deeply concerned about piracy
off the coast of Somalia. There has been no significant
change in the number of incidents along the East
African coastline, and more dangerously, there has
been a recent surge of alleged attempts and attacks in
the Western Indian Ocean, in which more sophisticated
methods and techniques have been employed.
Against this backdrop, enhanced coordination
among the international stakeholders, regional
organizations and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) is crucial so as to prevent and suppress piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. We
find it encouraging that Member States operating in the
territorial waters and high seas off the coast of Somalia
have developed complex and comprehensive military
naval operations and the necessary coordination
mechanisms.
We believe the Contact Group for Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia with its four supporting working
groups is an effective international cooperation
mechanism and a common point of contact between
and among States, regional and international
organizations on all aspects of the fight against piracy.
Recent coordination efforts between the Contact Group
and the International Contact Group on Somalia have
produced tangible results. Such coordination should be
encouraged and enhanced.

7

S/PV.6221

At the regional level, we welcome the adoption of
the Djibouti Code of Conduct on the Repression of
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the
Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden, and we
are convinced that full implementation of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct will enable States in the region to
develop appropriate regulatory and legislative
frameworks to combat piracy, enhance their capacity to
patrol the waters of the region, intercept suspected
vessels and prosecute suspected pirates.
We welcome, in this connection, the
establishment of the International Trust Fund
Supporting Initiatives of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia and the International Maritime
Organization Djibouti Code trust fund.
Anti-piracy activities by the TFG continue to face
numerous challenges, most notable of which is a lack
of the capacity to thwart, curb or investigate piracy in
areas under the control of the Government. We call
upon the international community and regional
organizations to provide technical and financial
assistance to Somalia, at the request of the TFG and
with notification to the Secretary-General, so as to
strengthen its security institutions and its capacity to
address lawlessness at sea and bring to justice, in
compliance with the international law and relevant
United Nations Security Council resolutions, those
who are using Somali territory to plan, facilitate or
undertake criminal acts of piracy and armed robbery at
sea.
We commend the efforts of the European Union
Naval Force Operation Atalanta and States, acting in
their national capacities, in cooperation with the TFG
and each other, to suppress piracy and to protect
vulnerable ships transiting through the waters off the
coast of Somalia, including those transporting
humanitarian supplies to Somalia and United Nations
supplies to AMISOM.
We commend the significant efforts undertaken
by the Government of Kenya to prosecute suspected
pirates captured by the international community in its
national courts. We also urge all States, especially
those directly harmed by piracy, to provide the Kenyan
Government with the logistical and financial support to
address the challenges of prosecuting suspected pirates.
Finally, we thank the United States delegation for
having prepared the draft resolution on piracy. My
delegation will continue to constructively engage in the

8

efforts to achieve
document.

consensus on

this important

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would also like to thank
Special Representative Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
introduction of the Secretary-General’s report, and his
very helpful briefing this morning.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to pose
a serious threat affecting one of the most important
international transport routes. Japan is deeply
concerned about the loss of lives and assets owing to
the sharp increase of piracy over the past year, despite
our best efforts. While incidents in the Gulf of Aden
have recently declined, they have moved further south
and attacks in the Western Indian Ocean, closer to the
Seychelles, have significantly increased. We should not
tolerate piracy trying to disrupt essential United
Nations activities such as the delivery of food
assistance by the World Food Programme and the
logistical support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).
The fragile security situation in Somalia produces
fertile ground for piracy, and instability caused by
piracy, in turn, affects the situation on land. In order to
achieve stability in Somalia as a whole, international
efforts and assistance must be directed towards dealing
with the unstable conditions in south-central Somalia,
in particular Mogadishu, and assisting counter-piracy
activities along the coastline.
Given the broad scope of the negative effects of
piracy, and in order to protect the vital sea route, a
multifaceted and coordinated approach must be
pursued at three levels: international, regional and
national.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1851
(2008) led to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, which has met four
times at the plenary level. Japan welcomes the progress
the Contact Group has made and the fact that it has
now developed into a coordinating forum for various
counter-piracy activities with increased membership
along with substantive activities on the part of the
working groups.
In recent plenary meeting chaired by Japan, the
Contact Group decided to establish a new international
trust fund to assist initiatives such as the prosecution of
and judicial procedures against arrested pirates.

09-61200

S/PV.6221

We are also pleased that a mechanism for
coordinating the operational aspect of counter-piracy
activities, and is known as the Shared Awareness and
Deconfliction (SHADE) mechanism, is well in place. It
comprises the operations of the European Union’s
Operation Atalanta, NATO, the Combined Maritime
Forces and States such as China, India, Japan and
Russia.
The challenge now is how to enhance
coordination and more effectively share information to
counter pirates who are always changing their tactics.
In this regard, we appreciate the European Union
Naval Force Operation Atalanta for escorting the
delivery of the AMISOM logistical support package.
For its part, Japan deploys two naval vessels and two
P-3C Orion maritime patrol aircraft which are
providing valuable information to all participating
States. It has expanded the scope of escorts to include
foreign vessels, effective June 2009.
It is also important to strengthen the capacity of
ship crews to protect themselves from piracy attacks.
To that end, we welcome the New York Declaration on
the Commitment to Best Management Practices to
Avoid, Deter or Delay Acts of Piracy, which was
originally initiated by the United States and has now
been signed by ten flag State countries, including
Japan. We urge other flag States to join the Declaration
and implement its guidelines.
Together with the global efforts, strong
engagement and coordination are also indispensable at
the regional level. In particular, efforts by the States in
the region, such as Kenya, Yemen and Seychelles, to
ensure prosecution for piracy deserve the support and
assistance of the international community. The
international trust fund to assist the activities of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia must
become operational in a timely manner.
In order to increase the capacity of these States in
their anti-piracy efforts, it is also important to
implement the Djibouti Code of Conduct, which was
adopted by States of the region last January. Japan has
contributed $13.6 million to the Djibouti Code Trust
Fund of the International Maritime Organization. We
hope this support will be speedily utilized by parties
concerned to expedite the launching of regional centres
for information-sharing in Kenya, Tanzania and
Yemen, and a training centre in Djibouti.

09-61200

Piracy activities are closely related to the security
situation on the land. Long-term solutions will require
restoring stability and governance in Somalia. The
Secretary-General’s report emphasizes the crucial
importance of supporting Somalia’s own institutional
capacity in various areas. First, it is essential to
strengthen AMISOM and the Somali security
institutions in south-central Somalia. Secondly, as a
medium-term goal, we need to advance, stability,
capacity and socio-economic development of areas
outside of south-central Somalia, including Puntland,
which is home to many pirates. Thirdly, we would like
to see improved coordination between the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the
International Contact Group chaired by Mr. Ould
Abdallah. We look forward to enhanced coordination in
the next plenary meeting of the Contact Group in
January 2010.
In conclusion, the international community needs
to intensify the coordinated, multi-faceted anti-piracy
efforts at the global, regional and national levels in
order to see to it that they bear fruit. Japan will
contribute positively to the ongoing negotiations on a
draft resolution prepared by the United States for the
renewal of the Security Council authorization.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, the Chinese delegation thanks you for
convening today’s meeting. We thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report on piracy in
Somalia (S/2009/590), as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah for his briefing this morning.
Piracy activities in Somalia have become ever
more rampant, posing a direct threat to the safety of
international humanitarian relief activities and
international navigation and a potential menace to
world economic activities. In his latest report
submitted to the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral points out that since the beginning of 2009, 34
vessels have been hijacked and 450 seafarers abducted
in the waters off Somalia. China is also one of the
victims of the pirate activities of Somalia. We support
the collective efforts by the international community to
address the problem of piracy in Somalia and hope that
the international community will agree on an integrated
approach to doing so at an early date.
Since December 2008, the Chinese Government
has, under United Nations coordination and within the

9

S/PV.6221

framework of relevant Security Council resolutions,
taken an active part in international cooperation in the
fight against Somali piracy. The Chinese navy escort
flotilla will continue to fulfil our Government’s
commitment to protect the safety of Chinese vessels
and people travelling through the Gulf of Aden and the
waters off the coast of Somalia and to protect the
safety of the vessels of the World Food Programme and
other international organizations that are delivering
humanitarian relief supplies.
Our effective fight against piracy in Somalia still
awaits an integrated solution. We believe that the
international community should pay attention to the
following priorities.
First, it is imperative to strictly observe
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions. In fighting piracy in Somalia, we should
strictly observe the relevant rules of international law
as contained in the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea and the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation; act in accordance with the requirements of
relevant Security Council resolutions in full respect of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral
States in particular; and maintain communication and
consultation with the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia.
Secondly, priority should be given to addressing
the domestic problems of Somalia. Without an end to
the domestic crisis in the country, the piracy problem
cannot be rooted out. Only by continuing to
consolidate the domestic process of political
reconciliation in Somalia and promoting its economic
development to enable the people to live and work in
peace and happiness can the security situation in
Somalia have any hope of gradual movement towards
stability and the piracy problem be gradually rooted
out. The fact that the political process of reconciliation
has remained stagnant and the security situation has
not fundamentally improved after so many years is a
cause for concern. The international community should
work harder in this area.
Thirdly, assistance should be rendered to the
regional States for their capacity-building. Ensuring that
peace, tranquillity and safety of navigation in the Gulf
of Aden and Somali waters has a bearing on the interests
of the littoral States and the safety of international
navigation. It also requires the mutual understanding

10

and full cooperation between the regional States and the
international community. China supports the joint
efforts made by the countries in the Red Sea, the Gulf of
Aden and the western Indian Ocean to address the
problem of piracy in Somalia through regional
arrangements. We welcome the signing of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct. The international community should,
through various means, help the countries concerned in
boosting their capacities.
For over a year, despite intensified efforts by
various naval forces to crack down on piracy in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia, pirate
attacks do occur frequently. We believe that, to put an
effective end to pirate attacks, the international
community should further expand maritime escort
operations. Meanwhile, the relevant participating
countries should also improve their coordination in
these escort operations. With that in mind, the
competent departments of China propose that the naval
forces that provide escorts in these waters define areas
of responsibility in order to improve the efficiency of
escorts and to lessen the possibility of pirates
succeeding in their attempts.
At the request of Working Group 1 of the Contact
Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, China
hosted a meeting from 6 to 7 November, on
international maritime escort coordination in the Gulf
of Aden with invited representatives from countries
and organizations that have participated in the fight
against Somali piracy. The meeting further discussed
cooperation in enforcing the concept of areas of
responsibility in the Gulf of Aden.
China has an open attitude towards international
navigational escorts. We are ready to engage in, within
the framework of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, multiple forms of
bilateral and multilateral escort cooperation with all
countries and organizations concerned in a joint
response to the menace of piracy in Somalia.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/590). I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Duale.
In spite of the ongoing multinational naval
operations off the coast of Somalia and around the Gulf
of Aden, which are aimed at increasing maritime

09-61200

S/PV.6221

security and securing the delivery of international
assistance, the acts of piracy in the region remain a
source of concern for the international community. It is
crucial to effectively and robustly address this
problem. We praise the efforts of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, which is definitely an
important international cooperation mechanism in all
aspects of combating piracy. Turkey joined the Group
as a founding member, and we have been actively
contributing to its work. We are pleased to see the
increased interaction between the Group and the
United Nations.
Turkey is of the opinion that that it is crucial for
the Contact Group to continue to play a leading role in
setting up a solid legal framework and practical
arrangements in order to clarify pending legal issues
concerning the arrest, detention, prosecution, trial and
extradition of suspected pirates and to strengthen
related cooperation. Working Group 2 of the Contact
Group has already gone a long way in this regard.
The increase in the number of pirate attacks in
2009 despite all efforts of the international community
indicates that satisfactory deterrence has not been fully
achieved. One of the main factors behind this is
undoubtedly the lack of capacity to detain and punish
perpetrators who are apprehended. If we want to
sustain the success of the ongoing operations, we
should continue to explore legal options for the
effective prosecution of suspected pirates. Hence,
Turkey believes that it would be useful if a mechanism
were to be put in place in one of the countries in the
region, under the supervision of the United Nations, to
effectively prosecute persons suspected of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. That
would no doubt require the support of the international
community for the enhancement of capacity in the
States of the region. We believe that the newly
established trust fund can be utilized in this regard.
Given the vastness of the area, Turkey believes
that it is vital to improve and develop operational and
intelligence support to counter-piracy operations. That
said, we welcome the establishment of the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE) group. It will
no doubt help contribute to interoperability among the
naval forces. Sharing of information should not be
limited to the maritime area, but also be extended to
relevant airspace and mainland with the active
contribution
of
the
regional
countries
and

09-61200

organizations. We welcome the contributions of
INTERPOL in this regard.
Allow me to briefly say a few words about what
Turkey has done in the fight against acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. Thus far, Turkey has taken part,
with four frigates, in the efforts aimed at repressing
such acts under the Standing Maritime Group 2 of
NATO and Combined Task Force 151 (CTF-151).
Indeed, CTF-151 was commanded by Turkish naval
forces from May through August 2009. Today a
Turkish frigate with air assets is operating in the
region, pursuant to the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. To date, the Turkish
naval elements in the region have apprehended some
30 piracy suspects in various operations.
The Turkish maritime authorities are actively
seized of the issue of strengthening situational
awareness for commercial ships and other capabilities.
For that purpose, the document on best management
practices to deter piracy has been widely circulated to
the industry. A national maritime armed robbery
information system has also been initiated.
We should continue to concentrate and cooperate
on the elimination of the root causes of piracy that are
embedded in Somalia. We share the view that measures
taken to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia can yield results only if they are
coupled with the efforts to strengthen the capacity of
both the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his
briefing. We would also like to commend the
significant and ongoing efforts that he and his team
have been making to bring about security, peace and
stability in Somalia.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to
threaten the security and safety of international
navigation off the coast of eastern Africa. Efforts thus
far have not managed to eliminate the threat, although
they have greatly limited piracy. That reaffirms that
piracy is a natural result of the unstable situation in
Somalia in terms of security and the absence of State
authority in general.

11

S/PV.6221

This problem will not be eliminated just by
dispatching naval forces. Dealing with it requires a
more comprehensive and integrated approach. We
share the Secretary-General’s view that one of the
means to guarantee the security of marine navigation
off the coast of Somalia in the long term will be to
achieve stability on the ground through development,
promotion of economic revival in local communities,
consolidation of the rule of law, development of
security institutions and provision of support to the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Any solution must also include capacity-building,
especially for Somali judicial and maritime institutions
at the local and national levels and in the region in
general, the prosecution of those suspected of piracy
and armed robbery at sea and strict compliance with
the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.
If implemented, those measures will eventually
obviate the need for the international marine presence,
which is currently playing an important role in
securing international marine navigation. We would
like to encourage the States and organizations that
participate in those forces to examine a way to
implement capacity-building measures in Somalia and
find a solution to the root causes of piracy. We urge
those States to protect Somali sea resources, in
particular from illegal fishing operations by foreign
vessels, which we believe are one of the main motives
for piracy.
In addition, we encourage the international
community to continue to deploy such naval forces in
strict compliance with the international law of the sea
in order to offer protection to all shipments contracted
by the United Nations and the World Food Programme,
including along the routes used to deliver logistical
support to AMISOM and international maritime trade
routes.
We believe that suspected pirates apprehended off
the Somali coast must be handed over to the
Government of Somalia, which is responsible for
prosecuting them. We urge the international community
to help the Government of Somalia by providing
technical assistance to its judicial bodies. In that
connection, we encourage Member States to contribute
to the international trust fund designed to help defray
the expenses associated with the prosecution of
suspected pirates as well as other activities related to

12

combating piracy. The Government of Somalia can
sign agreements with other countries in the region
providing for the prosecution of suspects apprehended
in those countries and specify where they will serve
their sentences if found guilty.
In closing, we wish to stress that providing
support to the Government of Somalia to help it
establish its authority throughout the country is of the
utmost importance if our efforts to combat piracy and
eliminate its root causes are to be successful. We also
wish to encourage the Contact Group on Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia to coordinate its activities and
initiatives with those of the International Contact
Group on Somalia. In addition, we note the urgent need
to draft an agreement that would protect Somalia’s sea
resources from arbitrary use and would prevent pirates
from launching attacks on navigation in international
waters.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express appreciation for the valuable information
provided by Ambassador Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and to acknowledge his commitment and
efforts and those of his team in seeking solutions to the
problems faced by Somalia. We also welcome the
presence of Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale,
Permanent Representative of Somalia.
We believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/590) is very clear on a number of
points. One of them is that the phenomenon of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia is a
challenge requiring fully coordinated urgent action by
the Transitional Federal Government, the countries of
the region and the international community. One year
ago, the Security Council acted decisively against that
threat by adopting resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1851
(2008).
The
cooperation,
commitment
and
commendable work of many countries has produced a
common front against such acts.
Nevertheless, the number of attacks and
hijackings off the coast of Somalia, in the Gulf of Aden
and in the western Indian Ocean in 2009 is higher than
that recorded in 2008. We are also concerned at the fact
that, in addition to the increase in the number of acts of
piracy and armed robbery committed in recent days,
smaller vessels, such as fishing boats and pleasure
craft, are being attacked.

09-61200

S/PV.6221

We acknowledge the efforts being made by the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, in
particular to promote greater coordination with the
Puntland and Somaliland regions in seeking to
prosecute suspected pirates. We commend the
coordination and cooperation efforts between
Operation Atalanta, NATO, Combined Task Force 151
and Member States and naval forces in the region to
carry out monitoring and escorts. In particular, we pay
tribute to Operation Atalanta for its efforts to escort
and protect vessels related to the World Food
Programme and the African Union Mission in Somalia.
With regard to the Contact Group on Piracy Off
the Coast of Somalia, we recognize as an important
step forward the establishment of the international trust
fund to support the prosecution of suspected pirates
and other initiatives of the Group, as well as the efforts
being made in its working groups to promote greater
coordination and capacity-building, to disseminate best
practices and to strengthen counter-piracy legal
mechanisms. Regarding the latter point, we reaffirm
that those responsible for acts of piracy must be
brought to justice in accordance with the applicable
legal regime, including standards in the area of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Moreover, we also highlight the work done by the
International Maritime Organization in setting out
guidelines and specific actions to be taken by States, as
well as the joint efforts with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to correct the deficiencies of
national legislative systems. In that connection, the
widespread implementation of the Djibouti Code of
Conduct is essential. That would enable States in the
region to take part in actions carried out by
international forces, through the strengthening of their
legal and judicial capacities.
As we have stated on previous occasions, my
delegation believes that piracy off the coast of Somalia
is not a phenomenon isolated from the situation on the
ground and that the solution to both problems requires
a comprehensive approach. This must include, among
other elements, developing the rule of law and security
institutions as a complement to the peace process,
strengthening the Transitional Federal Institutions,
building the capacity of judicial institutions and
prosecuting criminal suspects in order to combat
impunity.
Finally, my delegation has emphasized both in the
Security Council and in the Contact Group on Piracy
09-61200

the negative impact of this phenomenon on the
sanctions regime with regard to Somalia. Such acts, in
addition to being apparent violations of the arms
embargo, undermine the stability and security of the
country and directly affect access of humanitarian aid.
Mexico, in its capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, reaffirms that it is essential
that the States and multinational maritime coalitions
deploying forces to combat piracy cooperate with the
Monitoring Group on Somalia by providing
information in a systematic and timely manner on
actions that violate the sanctions regime and which
have a particularly negative impact on efforts to
promote economic and social development in Somalia
and on the consolidation of the Government and the
institutions of Somalia.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): We, too, would like to
thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his significant
contribution and for the valuable insights he presented
here today. Croatia has aligned itself with the statement
to be delivered later in this debate by the Swedish
presidency of the European Union.
Croatia notes the recent progress that has been
achieved in Somalia but, at the same time, perceives
the scope and the complexity of the challenges still
lying ahead for that country. Undoubtedly, piracy
represents one of the burning issues, threatening not
only the key international shipping lanes and
commerce but also the effective provision of muchneeded humanitarian assistance.
Croatia fully supports the Djibouti Peace
Agreement as a necessary prerequisite for the
sustainable resolution of many pressing challenges in
Somalia. We are of the view that reinforcing Somali
sovereignty, as well as strengthening the capacity of
the Somali Government to provide law and order and
sustainable livelihoods for its people, will significantly
contribute to the eradication of piracy and armed
robbery off the Somali coast.
Let me repeat here the evident and often
reiterated conviction of this Council: there can be no
security along the Somali coast without genuine
security on its land. It is therefore apparent that only an
integrated approach has the possibility of yielding
results. In that context, Croatia commends the African
Union Mission in Somalia for the important role it is

13

S/PV.6221

playing in supporting the Transitional Federal
Government in its efforts to implement the
aforementioned strategy, as well as for its endeavours
to bring about a long-term political security recovery
and development changes.
Croatia welcomes the continuing strong
commitment of the international community to the
Somali Government in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolution and applicable international
law. In that context, we further welcome the Somali
Government’s renewed request for assistance in
securing international and territorial waters off the
coast of Somalia, and the continuing implementation of
the provisions of resolution 1846 (2008).
Croatia believes that the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia is proving to be an effective
coordination
mechanism
of
the
international
community. We welcome its decision to establish a
trust fund with the purpose of supporting adequate
measures against piracy and related activities aimed at
implementing the Group’s objectives. Moreover, we
welcome additional coordinating efforts within the
naval forces operating in the region, including the
establishment of Shared Awareness and Deconfliction
(SHADE), as well as the continuing coordination
between the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia and the International Contact Group on
Somalia.
We are heartened to see such efforts bearing fruit,
the testimony of which is the considerable reduction in
the number of successful pirate attacks registered in
recent months. Croatia believes that the Governments
of the region should play a vital role in establishing
conditions for effectively combating piracy. We
commend the Government of Kenya for its significant
efforts in that regard, and especially for its readiness to
detain and prosecute pirates apprehended by other
participants in the common efforts against piracy. It is
our hope that other countries that have expressed their
willingness will shortly be ready to follow suit.
Similarly, we call on regional States to fully
implement the Djibouti Code of Conduct as an
important
step
towards
assuming
increasing
responsibility in the fight against piracy and robbery at
sea. We particularly welcome further progress in the
field of regional capacity-building, and call upon all
States to continue logistic and financial support of such
regional efforts.

14

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): About a year and a half has now passed since
the Security Council seriously took up the problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia and began to develop
measures to combat this evil. We think it is now time to
offer an interim assessment of the results of the work
done, on the basis of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/590) submitted to the Council under
resolution 1846 (2008).
The situation in the Gulf of Aden is still far from
normal, and the danger of a further increase in piracy
has not been eliminated. Yet much has been done in
mobilizing the international community to counter this
threat. First of all, there is now a firm understanding
that the most important element in resolving the
problem of piracy off the Horn of Africa is the
stabilization of the situation in Somalia: bringing order
on land. We believe that along with maintaining a
naval presence in areas dangerous to shipping, our
other priority must remain the stabilization of the
military and political situation within the country. In
this connection, we note the important part played by
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Russia has
always advocated sustainable peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement, in the interests of strengthening security
and stability in the region.
The world community must broaden its
participation in efforts in the area of security, including
those of the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union and other organizations, with the
focus on building up the potential of the Government
of Somalia to discharge its basic functions. States and
regional
organizations
cooperating
with
the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in
combating piracy are cooperating closely in military,
political and legal areas, and are working to improve
them
through
the
appropriate
coordination
mechanisms. In this context, we would stress the key
part played by the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.
There has been growing awareness in the
international community and the shipping industry of
the methods used by pirates when they attack, and thus
a growing arsenal of measures has been developed to
counter such attacks. We note here the important
contribution
of
the
International
Maritime
Organization. We welcome the initiatives taken by the
United Nations in combating piracy and call for further

09-61200

S/PV.6221

strengthening of its role in this area. We are
particularly grateful to the Secretariat for acting as an
information exchange centre and for its valuable work
relating to peace on land, as well as for its ideas in the
area of capacity-building.
We must combat impunity and give greater
attention to prosecuting people suspected of piracy.
This is not just about ensuring that punishment is
unavoidable, but also about meeting appropriate
standards in the area of human rights. We note the
significance of efforts to resolve this problem at the
level of the national judiciary, and particularly
cooperation on the part of authorities in Kenya and
other countries in the region. We welcome the decision
of the Contact Group on Piracy to set up a trust fund to
support anti-piracy initiatives.
At the same time, as experience shows, it is not
always possible to ensure criminal prosecution of
pirates in national courts. Initiatives aimed at studying
possible additional mechanisms concerning this
problem are therefore still relevant. Work in this area
not only does not contradict efforts at the national
level, it is capable of organically complementing them.
The Russian Federation continues to be actively
involved in combating piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We currently have a group of ships from the Russian
Navy in the area, the third since October 2008. We
intend to build up interaction with other interested
parties in dealing with all aspects of this issue. It is
important to ensure that international anti-piracy
efforts go uninterrupted within the existing mandate. In
this connection, we support the extension of Security
Council sanctions, as requested by the Transitional
Federal Government, on comprehensive measures to
halt piracy and armed robbery at sea under resolutions
1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008).
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing and for the work he is doing in Somalia.
The pirates are still a threat, first of all to the
people of Somalia, since half of all Somalis are now
dependent on international aid, and virtually all of this
aid reaches Somalia by sea. The pirates are also a
threat to the troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as their supplies, again,
essentially come by sea. Lastly, they imperil
international shipping off the coast of Somalia, one of

09-61200

the most dense shipping areas in the world. Many of
the previous speakers have indicated that the deeprooted causes of piracy are to be sought on land, and
that the insecurity prevailing after more than 20 years
of conflict, the lack of a State, the absence of legal
economic possibilities and the actions of criminal
groups have created the conditions that have led to the
appearance of piracy. We are all in agreement that
security and development will in the long term prevail.
In the short term, however, resolute action by the
international community is essential in order to limit
the effects of piracy. Any slackening in our endeavours
would have immediate consequences. France notes that
during the two months in two years when the World
Food Programme (WFP) received no protection for its
ships, it had to cut its shipments by 50 per cent, to the
detriment of the civilian population.
In his report (S/2009/590) the Secretary-General
described the various efforts being deployed by the
international community. Through Operation Atalanta,
the European Union is playing an essential role here,
and regional organizations and national partners, such
as the Russian Federation, China and Japan, are also
involved in these activities. France is playing an active
role through Operation Atalanta as well as in its
national capacity.
In parallel, we have been able to improve
coordination. The Contact Group on Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia, with 45 States members, is playing
an essential role in making political, legal and military
progress. The Shared Awareness and Deconfliction
(SHADE) mechanism in the framework of the Contact
Group’s Working Group 1 is enhancing the exchange
of operational information with a view to working
together more effectively.
We have come along way since the first
operations to protect World Food Programme (WFP)
vessels, in November 2007. Our efforts are beginning
to bear fruit. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590) indicates that while the number of attacks
remains high, a large proportion of them are foiled
thanks to the international presence.
The European Union has committed itself to
continuing Operation Atalanta, deployed in December
2008, at least through December 2010. In that way, it
will continue to provide protection to WFP vessels and
provide resolute support to other vulnerable vessels,
including those chartered by the United Nations in

15

S/PV.6221

order to supply the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). This poses a particularly significant
challenge, as 80 per cent of those convoys have come
under attack in the past.
Operation Atalanta and the countries of the
European Union will be considering the expanded
sphere of operation of the pirates in the Indian Ocean.
France has provided assistance to Seychelles, and the
European Union has signed an anti-piracy agreement
with Seychelles, which will make it possible for pirates
apprehended by Operation Atalanta to be transferred to
Seychelles. Clearly, I support the statement to be made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union presidency.
As we pursuing our efforts we must retain the
legal framework of our activities and extend
resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008) for a further
year, which authorize participating countries, under
strict conditions, to enter Somali territorial waters and
take action against pirates. I am grateful to the
delegation of the United States for its draft resolution
and trust that the Council will adopt it in the coming
days.
Effective action also requires diversification, and
we have begun to do that. Beyond the military aspects,
it is essential that we improve legal redress for acts of
piracy, as mentioned by the representative of the
Russian Federation. In the near future, the international
community must provide material assistance to
Somalia and other countries of the region to enable
them to apprehend, prosecute and punish pirates. Here,
France commends Kenya’s endeavours in that regard
and supports the trust fund that the Contact Group
decided on 10 September to establish, to which we
shall be making a contribution. We also encourage all
States to amend their legislation to make it possible to
try acts of piracy within their jurisdictions.
Finally, we must continue to address more directly
the root causes of piracy. The European Union has
begun to consider this and has indicated its willingness
to provide enhanced support to the Transitional Federal
Government, for instance, in combating illegal fishing.
We must continue such efforts, while ensuring that
naval forces combating piracy off the coast of Somalia
are not faced with tasks that are too numerous, too
diverse or too far from their mission.
The true significance of Security Council action
off the coast of Somalia is seen when we consider the

16

Council’s comprehensive strategy for that country.
Provisions adopted by the Council include support for
the Transitional Federal Government, resolute support
for AMISOM, including the use of United Nations
resources, and a sanctions regime that has been
renewed and enhanced by resolution 1844 (2008). We
still must make progress on all those fronts. France
wishes in particular to see the pirates and their
supporters punished as individuals.
I wish in conclusion to note that the Security
Council was innovative in adopting resolution 1816
(2008) on 2 June 2008, with the aim of combating
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The international
community has been able to make use of the new tools
that the Council has provided through its resolutions.
International mobilization is strikingly broad and is
complemented by the development, through the
Contact Group, of a new framework for cooperation, in
close association with the United Nations Secretariat.
This encourages us that the Council will continue its
work in Somalia, beyond the issue of piracy, in the
framework of a specific and pragmatic strategy.
Once again, I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for helping ensure that the
international community takes consistent action on
Somalia. I assure him of our full support.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his briefing. I wish also to welcome the
presence among us of Ambassador Duale.
Over the past year, fighting piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of the Horn of Africa has been a
focus of the international community, leading to the
implementation of a number of initiatives by States,
organizations and international naval forces. We
welcome those coordinated efforts. The number of
attacks has fallen, and there is relative stability along
this important economic route, which is also needed for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the region.
But we have some doubts about whether these
achievements can be sustained, given that this
phenomenon — which began as a low-level local
activity — has become a big business with sophisticated
equipment for attacks and multi-million-dollar profits. It
can thus be assumed that it is supported by complex
transnational structures. In our view it is important that
future reports the Secretary-General make reference to

09-61200

S/PV.6221

that element and consider possible sources of support
and financing for piracy in the area.
Alongside initiatives to deal with maritime
attacks in the area, it is also important to build the
capacity to investigate and prosecute those suspected
of these acts. Combating impunity is without doubt a
deterrent for anyone who is thinking of carrying out
illegal activities. Here, we commend Kenya for its
action to put suspects on trial, and we urge other
countries, including Somalia, to strengthen their
legislation, procedures and capacities so that they can
hold such trials. Assistance from the United Nations
and other international organizations, along with the
implementation of legal instruments such as the
Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning the Repression
of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the
Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden, would
also be very important in achieving results.
As everyone knows, piracy and armed robbery in
Somalia are symptoms of a far deeper crisis in that
country. Hence, we should very carefully consider the
root causes of Somalia’s problems. When we analyse
the situation there, we must do so in the framework of
a long-term strategy for the restoration of normality
that would include the humanitarian, political, security
and development dimensions.
In Costa Rica’s view there are four interrelated
areas that demand the attention of this Council and the
international community.
First, we must continue to support the
Transitional Federal Government so that it can achieve
an effective framework for security, augment control of
the territory and of the means for cohesion and
promote an inclusive political process. The Djibouti
peace process offers an adequate setting for working
towards those goals.
Secondly, we have to intensify efforts to further
strengthen the rule of law and to provide proper
training for the Somali security forces. Costa Rica
recognizes the work being done by the Transitional
Federal Government and by AMISOM with the support
of the United Nations. Strict compliance with the arms
embargo in Somalia is an indispensable instrument.
Also, we support the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and call for cooperation with it to help with compliance
with the obligations deriving from the resolutions
adopted by this Council.

09-61200

Thirdly, we must maintain and strengthen efforts
to deal with the humanitarian situation in Somalia. It is
essential to ensure delivery of assistance for the fifty
per cent of the people who depend on it. Attacks on
humanitarian organs and their personnel must cease. In
parallel, we have to ensure that we promote
development assistance so that sustainable economic
activities can grow and dependence on humanitarian
aid can be reduced.
Lastly, financing the various initiatives to help
Somalia overcome the crisis must continue being one
of the main concerns of the international community.
Costa Rica urges States and donors to continue to
provide resources to the trust funds. In doing so, they
will confirm their commitment to peace and stability in
that region.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his briefing this morning, and I
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Mr. Duale, in today’s
Council meeting.
One of the many negative consequences of the
conflict in Somalia and of the absence of strong
institutions in the country is piracy. It started around
the coast of Somalia, but it has now expanded further
out, to international waters. Piracy is negatively
impacting international trade and tourism, fuelling the
illegal arms trade and the financing of insurgents and
terrorism in Somalia and beyond.
Given the disruptive nature of piracy, it is only
fitting that the international community responds to the
problem appropriately. In that regard we support
multinational and regional efforts aimed at combating
and suppressing piracy and armed robbery at sea.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/590)
outlines the measures in place or being put in place and
those proposed to address the problem of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The deployment of naval assets,
including those under the European Union’s Operation
Atalanta, NATO’s maritime forces, the United Statesled Combined Maritime Forces and those of individual
States, have all contributed to checking the incidences
of piracy in the coastal region neighbouring Somalia,
thus affording some level of protection for
international trade and delivery of humanitarian
supplies to Somalia. Furthermore, the creation of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia to

17

S/PV.6221

help coordinate the various efforts is a notable
contribution in the fight against piracy.
Commendable as these efforts may be, the
struggle against piracy will be won not on the high seas
but on land, in Somalia. The amount of resources that
have been deployed either directly on the high seas or
indirectly through targeting off-shore solutions to the
problem of piracy is enormous and must be running in
billions of dollars each year. Yet, much as the
incidences have been checked, piracy persists and will
persist for as long as the instability on mainland
Somalia remains and State institutions remain fragile.
As outlined in Secretary-General’s report, there is
a big difference between, on the one hand, the robust
and concrete responses by States acting either
individually or in cooperation with others in deploying
resources at sea and, on the other, the cautious and
incremental stance by the international community
when it comes to addressing the root causes of piracy
on mainland Somalia.
While we support the measures that have been
deployed at sea by Member States to deal effectively
with the problem of piracy, equally robust measures
should be put in place on mainland Somalia, backed by
similar, or more, resources. Such measures should
include enhancing support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to enable the force to
effectively implement its mandate and providing it
with additional personnel so that it reaches its
authorized capacity of 8,000 troops in preparation for
its eventual re-hatting. Equally, it is imperative that the
Transitional Federal Government be sufficiently
supported to strengthen State institutions, particularly
in the security sector. Strengthening State institutions is
the most effective durable way of combating piracy in
the waters off Somalia.
Lastly, we thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Ould Abdallah, and the staff of
United Nations agencies and the humanitarian agencies
for the support extended to the Somali people in
difficult circumstances.

Nations family in these very difficult circumstances —
including, in particular, the International Maritime
Organization and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. I would also like to welcome the presence
of His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this meeting by Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. Allow me to add a few additional
points.
My delegation agrees with previous speakers that
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Aden are
directly linked to the lack of stability and the disastrous
economic situation in Somalia. At the same time,
piracy contributes to the deterioration of the security
situation and may play a role in financing embargo
violations. As some merchant vessels are choosing
different routes, piracy also hurts the economic
situation of the region. Moreover, it negatively affects
the delivery of much-needed aid to Somalia.
Austria expresses its deep concern about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Somalia and its dire consequences for the civilian
population, in particular women and children.
The European Union Naval Force Operation
Atalanta aims to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia, with the primary goal of protecting vessels of
the World Food Programme delivering food aid. We
would also like to commend the naval engagement of
other States and organizations cooperating in the fight
against piracy in the framework of the international
Contact Group.
The implementation of the pertinent international
legal regime — particularly the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1988
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation — presents
considerable challenges for States parties to those
conventions in the region.

The President: I shall now deliver a statement in
my national capacity.

Austria attaches great importance to full respect
for all applicable norms of international law, in
particular international human rights law, including the
right to a fair trial and non-refoulement.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his presentation and for his work in
Somalia, as well as the efforts of the entire United

We welcome the fact that the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) contributes to
countering maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa
through a programme to increase regional capacities to

18

09-61200

S/PV.6221

deter, arrest, prosecute and detain pirates. As the
Secretary-General noted in his report (S/2009/590), the
prosecution of suspected pirates apprehended off the
coast of Somalia is a burden for regional States,
especially Kenya and the Seychelles. In that regard, we
welcome the Contact Group’s establishment of the
international trust fund, administered by the UNODC.
We believe that in addition to the naval
operations, the development of rule of law and security
institutions in Somalia, improvement in livelihoods and
education are important factors for the durable
eradication of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Elmi
Ahmed Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to participate in this meeting and to
make a brief statement.

that they can be deployed in areas where they are most
needed, in north-eastern Somalia. The coast guard will
be able to exert greater control if it is enabled not only
to fight piracy at the local level, but also to control the
illegal fishing, the dumping of toxic waste and the
smuggling of arms and drugs, for which Somalia can
be used as a conduit for smuggling to all neighbouring
and regional countries.
Finally, I hope that the Security Council will
renew the mandate, as the Transitional Federal
Government has already requested. In that connection,
our Government once again conveys its sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Council members and the
regional and international organizations assisting in the
challenge of combating the scourge of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. It has requested that the Council
renew its approval contained in resolution 1846 (2008)
and welcomes the renewal, for a period of twelve
months, of the authority provided in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1851 (2008) to those combating the scourge
of piracy on the high seas off the coast of Somalia.

First of all, I welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/590) and support the statement by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. We also support the
efforts by the International Maritime Organization in
the implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct,
with which we agree fully.

We are also grateful for the support we have so
far received from our regional groups: the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, without which, I
believe, the Transitional Federal Government would
have been in a much worse situation.

Before I go any further, allow me, on behalf of
my Government and my Mission, to voice our grave
concern and convey our sincere and heartfelt sympathy
for all the crew and the two British citizens who are
still at the mercy of pirates. We hope that they will
soon be released.

I also fully subscribe to the statements by Council
members, particularly when you, Sir, summarized the
point regarding support for the Somali Transitional
Federal Government to enable it to control Somali
ports against piracy and also to better control any
illegal fishing or dumping of toxic waste, which are
what the pirates now claim to be acting against.

As has been stated here by all Council members
and mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report, and as
you, Sir, said in a nutshell, the piracy problem is a
symptom of the major problems that have been
bedevilling Somalia for a long time — nearly two
decades. As many have stated here, that requires a
concerted, coordinated effort at the international,
regional and local, country level.
Towards that end I am pleased to state that
Somalia has created a coast guard body and has already
trained 1,000 coast guard personnel. The plan is to
train and deploy up to 10,000. However, as has been
mentioned, further training, equipment and other
assistance is required to make them effective and so

09-61200

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
Acts of piracy are illegal and can never be
tolerated. The ongoing naval operations off the coast of
Somalia have increased maritime security and secured
the delivery of international assistance. The Contact

19

S/PV.6221

Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has
facilitated policy cooperation and coordination. In this
framework, we have also managed to establish an
efficient coordination mechanism — the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction group — among the
multinational, regional and national naval forces
operating in the area. All actors should support existing
coordination efforts.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia can be eradicated
only if the situation on the mainland is stabilized. We
have to address the root causes. Somalia remains a
country in conflict and insecurity is widespread there.
Governance is fragmented. The Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) is constantly under attack from
insurgent groups and has not been able to protect its
citizens or uphold law and order.

More can be done besides engaging in
coordinated efforts to protect vessels. We need to
improve our dialogue on maritime issues with the local
Somali communities. Other illegal activities besides
piracy should be acknowledged and discussed.
Collaboration should be encouraged between Somalia
and other countries in the region with more experience
in licensing of fishing and unlicensed fishing. Previous
United Nations studies on Somalia regarding illegal
fishing and illegal dumping should be updated.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government and the ongoing
Djibouti process. The political process has to be
accompanied by a comprehensive and coordinated
approach to achieving a lasting settlement. This
includes covering political, security, development and
humanitarian aspects of the crisis. Clearly articulated
political commitments and priorities on behalf of the
Transitional Federal Government are key to efficient
support. In this regard, we welcome the first steps
taken by the TFG to establish accountable financing
systems.

We should continue to explore legal options for
suspected pirates who are apprehended. Efficient and
credible trials of suspected pirates are essential to
sustaining the progress made through the ongoing
operations. Kenya has made a very significant
contribution through the transfer agreement with the
European Union regarding prosecution. Kenya has so
far agreed to detain and prosecute 75 suspected pirates
whom the European Union has apprehended. The
European Union appreciates that a similar arrangement
was concluded recently with Seychelles. We support
the decision of the Contact Group to establish a trust
fund in order to support the detention, prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates. Besides the pirates, we must
also take measures to target the criminal networks, not
only in Somalia but also beyond, that finance and
organize piracy.
The European Union continues to contribute
successfully to maritime security in the area through
the naval Operation Atalanta. We have decided to
extend the mandate until the end of 2010 subject to the
decision by the Security Council to extend the
authorization in resolution 1846 (2008). Since
December 2008, Atalanta has provided vital protection
to 50 World Food Programme vessels delivering
roughly 300,000 tons of food to the direct benefit of
1.6 million Somalis. It has also provided protection to
vessels carrying shipments to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to other vulnerable
vessels. Atalanta has also had a leading role in the
coordination of the different operations in the area.

20

In July, the European Union decided to step up its
engagement in promoting peace and development in
Somalia. For us, it is essential to support the TFG in its
efforts to increase security and stability in its territory.
Besides ongoing support to AMISOM, the European
Union is therefore considering a possible mission to
contribute to the training of the security forces of the
Transitional Federal Government. We continue to be an
active member of the International Contact Group on
Somalia and to deliver substantial humanitarian and
development aid.
Acts of piracy can have an impact on human life,
the environment and the safety of navigation and of
crew members. In Somalia, piracy can also affect the
delivery of humanitarian aid to 3.8 million people in
need of relief. It is a threat to international commerce,
and ultimately to peace and security in the region. The
regional dimension has been emphasized lately by the
expanding activities of the pirates. It is in the interests
of Somalia, the region and the international community
to address the menace of piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Together, we can do that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): On behalf of the
Ukrainian delegation, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for holding this important meeting and for inviting
Ukraine to participate. I would also like to wish the

09-61200

S/PV.6221

Austrian delegation and you personally every success
in fulfilling your highly responsible duties as the
Security Council President.

fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia, which have
also contributed to reducing the number of successful
hijackings.

Our appreciation also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for presenting the second
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/590) pursuant
to resolution 1846 (2008), dealing with the issue of
piracy off the coast of Somalia.

Ukraine takes the challenge of piracy with the
utmost seriousness. Ranking fifth among the countries
whose citizens are contracted to the international
merchant fleet, Ukraine is seriously suffering from acts
of piracy. At the time of this meeting, Somali pirates
continue to hold hostage 24 Ukrainians, the crew of the
vessel Ariana captured on 2 May. Over the past five
years, 15 vessels with Ukrainians on board have been
hijacked by pirates. Sixty-seven of my compatriots
have been captured by the Somali pirates, among whom
one has been shot dead and one seriously injured.

Aligning ourselves with the statement of the
European Union, my delegation would like to point out
some issues of particular relevance to Ukraine.
Like the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/146), the document before the Security
Council today details a worldwide surge in the number
of incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea against
vessels. It convincingly testifies that this challenge is
no longer confined to the Gulf of Aden. It has become
global, requiring a global, coordinated and integrated
response. Ukraine believes that the United Nations
should play a lead role in these efforts.
Ukraine welcomes actions taken by the Security
Council to counter piracy, including the adoption of
resolution 1846 (2008), which my country co-sponsored.
We support the adoption of its successor resolution with
the aim of extending and fine-tuning the anti-piracy
measures put in place by the Security Council. My
delegation strongly believes that the Security Council
should remain actively seized of this matter.
Ukraine commends the activity of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, which has
already proved to be instrumental in facilitating
coordination among the major actors, aimed at
combating piracy in all its aspects. We look forward to
the early launching of the trust fund to support counterpiracy initiatives off the coast of Somalia. My country
appreciates the standing invitation to participate in the
meetings of the Contact Group and is ready to
contribute to its fulfilling its mandate in every practical
way.
Ukraine considers European Union naval force
Operation Atalanta to be an important element of the
international community’s efforts aimed at enhancing
the safety of navigation and at preventing and
combating piracy. We take positive note of the efforts
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
United States-led Combined Maritime Forces, aimed at

09-61200

In his address to international organizations,
President of Ukraine Victor Yushchenko urged the
international community to redouble its practical
efforts to fight piracy at sea. A number of proposals
have been put forward to this end, some of which, such
as the establishment of regional coordination centres
for navigation safety, are already being implemented.
With a focus on the legal and methodological
aspects of the global anti-piracy campaign, Ukraine, in
the framework of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), was one of the initiators of the
IMO resolution on piracy and armed robbery of ships
in waters off the coast of Somalia, which preceded
relevant Security Council resolutions. The political
decision was taken by the President of Ukraine to join
the European Union Operation Atalanta. At this stage,
we are carefully studying the modalities of our
involvement in this maritime coalition, either through
intelligence, logistical or military support. Ukraine is
also considering making a contribution to the trust fund
to support counter-piracy initiatives.
We welcome recent international meetings on
piracy, which reveal the strong political resolve of the
United Nations Member States to deal with this
challenge. In order to maintain this positive dynamic,
Ukraine is ready to host one such future event under
the auspices of the United Nations.
It is obvious that the roots of piracy lie on the
ground and not at sea. They are closely linked to
political, economic and social conditions, mainly
extreme poverty and lack of food. Fully backing the
comprehensive and coherent United Nations policy
recognizing the interconnected nature of security and
development, this year Ukraine has become a donor to

21

S/PV.6221

the World Food Programme,
totalling more than $500,000.

with

contributions

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the strong
commitment of Ukraine to contribute to the efforts of
the Security Council aimed at countering maritime
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his important presentation here
today and for the work he is doing under difficult
circumstances. I am also pleased to see my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Somalia, participating
in our meeting, and I listened carefully to his important
statement as well.
Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden continue to threaten
the people of Somalia, the whole region and a series of
protected interests. Those interests include innocent
lives, humanitarian supplies and international
commerce and navigation. Some 1,000 Norwegianowned ships pass through the Gulf of Aden every year.
We, too, are directly affected, and we are acting
accordingly.
The root of piracy and armed robbery is
instability and the weakening of Government
institutions in Somalia. Consequently, in order to
restore order on the seas we must work to restore order
on land in Somalia. Bringing peace and stability to
Somalia and re-establishing effective Government
institutions in the country is essential to a long-term
solution to piracy as well. Humanitarian, development
and security assistance is therefore needed. Norway is
conscious of this and we are shouldering our part.
Norway will also be chairing the next meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which will take place here in New York in January.
We are beginning to see the effects of preventive
measures taken by the shipping industry itself. The best
management practices adopted by the Contact Group
on piracy are thus serving their purpose, and
implementation by all needs to be further encouraged.
Moreover, the naval operations in the waters outside
Somalia have prevented new captures even if we have
not prevented them all. Those operations are well

22

coordinated and may set a good example on how
nations and international organizations can cooperate
in order to solve an international security problem.
Norway has experienced this first-hand through our
participation with a frigate in the European Union’s
Operation Atalanta. We appreciate the contributions of
a great number of countries and organizations.
Now, we must make sure that pirates captured are
brought to justice. We greatly appreciate the
contributions of countries in the region, in particular
Kenya and Seychelles. We recognize that there is a
need for increased capacity in those, the most affected
countries. That is why Norway has decided to
contribute €500,000 to the trust fund established under
the auspices of the Contact Group on piracy.
Public perceptions are also important. We know
that many Somalis consider piracy to be a criminal
activity. We know less about how the entire
international engagement is perceived in Somalia. We
therefore believe that the Contact Group should
implement a communication and information strategy
for Somalia. We must be able to convince the Somalis
that this operation is also serving their interests and to
counter any notion that piracy is seen as a just cause by
parts of Somali society.
In conclusion, Norway will continue to support
the Security Council in its efforts to address piracy of
the coast of Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): At the outset,
Mr. President, the Philippines congratulates you on
Austria’s assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of November, and thanks you for
convening this very important meeting to discuss
piracy in the territorial waters and even on the high
seas off the coast of Somalia. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report on piracy in Somalia (S/2009/590).
The Philippines is extremely alarmed and gravely
concerned over the resurgence of piracy, a detestable
crime condemned by the civilized world, committed
against innocent vessels and their officers and crew
members particularly in waters off the coast of
Somalia. This resurgence, carried on with blatant
disregard for the public outcry of the international

09-61200

S/PV.6221

community against it, has resulted in the capture and
detention as hostages of many Philippine nationals on
board these vessels.
As the supplier of a third of the world’s shipping
manpower, with over 270,000 Filipino seafarers aboard
international shipping vessels, the Philippines is
directly affected by piracy off the coast of Somalia. In
the first quarter of this year alone, 120 out of 300
hostages taken by pirates were from the Philippines,
the largest national contingent of the group. As of
5 November, more than 160 Filipino seafarers on board
various merchant vessels had been abducted by pirates
off the coast of Somalia since January. This month
alone, 16 Filipino seamen were abducted by these
pirates in a span of just one week. Piracy in the area
now constitutes a threat to the lives of many
Philippines nationals.
The Philippines joins the call for concrete efforts
from the international community to address piracy off
the coast of Somalia and to increase efforts to assist
seamen from all nations who have suffered as a result
of these heinous acts. The Philippines recognizes the
efforts undertaken by the Security Council to address
these acts of piracy in waters off the coast of Somalia,
as best evidenced by its adoption of resolutions 1816
(2008), 1838 (2008), 1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008).
The Philippines looks forward to further, bolder steps
to be taken by the Security Council to counter piracy.
Moreover, the Philippines expects that future actions
by the Security Council will take into full
consideration the safety and security of the lives of the
hostages.
The Philippines also fully supports efforts led by
the United Nations and concerned countries and
international organizations to assist in the stabilization
of Somalia, in partnership with the Government of
Somalia, and in finding a long-term solution to this
international crisis. The Philippines is doing its part to
help Somalia. During the African Union Summit held
in Tripoli on 31 August, President Gloria MacapagalArroyo met with Somali President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed and offered the Philippines’ assistance
in training and strengthening the capabilities of the
Somali coast guard. As a result, the Philippines is
pleased to report that a high-level Somali delegation
led by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of
Fisheries and Marine Resources will arrive in Manila
this month of November to discuss the details of this
capacity-building exercise. Somalia was also invited to

09-61200

join some 80 representatives from 26 countries
participating in the capacity-building workshop on
regional cooperation against piracy and armed robbery
in Asia, held in Manila from 10 to 12 November. The
Philippines has also made a financial contribution in
support of the Somali security institutions.
In conclusion, the Philippines hopes that the
international community’s attention and efforts to
address the clear and present danger of piracy off the
coast of Somalia will not wane, but instead intensify
with the goal of ending this scourge.
The President: I call
Representative of Seychelles.

on

the

Permanent

Mr. Jumeau (Seychelles): I should like to thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council, the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/590) and Special Representative Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah for his briefing.
Seychelles is by far the smallest and most
vulnerable country to be directly impacted by the
spillover of the instability in Somalia. By spillover I
mean, of course, the piracy that, as the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out in his report, continues to
spread farther East and South into the Indian Ocean, in
and around the waters of Seychelles and beyond.
To us in Seychelles, the scourge of piracy is not
just affecting the freedom of the seas, maritime trade,
humanitarian aid or the security of international
shipping. To Seychelles, piracy in the Indian Ocean is
severely endangering our national security, territorial
integrity and economic development, stability and
viability.
The greatest handicap Seychelles faces in
combating piracy is that its 115 far-flung islands are
sprinkled over an exclusive economic zone of
1.4 million square kilometres. This vast ocean territory
is larger than France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg combined. Despite
Seychelles having a population of just 85,000 and,
consequently, very limited naval and military
resources, the Government has had to stationed troops
on our outlying islands to protect our territorial
integrity and national security. We are drawing up new
anti-piracy legislation and beefing up our coast guard
and relevant investigative, prosecutorial, judicial and
custodial institutions as best we can within our limited
resources.

23

S/PV.6221

While it is true we are receiving some help here
from our bilateral and multilateral partners, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, more is needed.
This is because Seychelles is having to divert scarce
funds from its economic and social development to
defend the country against pirates. This is happening at
a time when the country is quickly losing much-needed
revenue and suffering escalating unforeseen costs
because of the pirate attacks, while at the same time
struggling through difficult but vital budget-cutting
economic reforms in collaboration with the
International Monetary Fund.
For example, pirate attacks in and around
Seychelles have slashed our revenue from fishing, the
second most important pillar of our economy after
tourism, by more than half. The tuna catch by fishing
boats operating out of our capital Port Victoria has also
tumbled by 50 per cent to the lowest figure since the
1980s. Several distant-water fishing vessels which
were operating out of Port Victoria have left the Indian
Ocean altogether. The number of boats seeking
licences to fish in Seychelles’s exclusive economic
zone is declining, and even our own domestic
fishermen fear putting out to sea. We finally had to
allow foreign boats to take troops or armed security
guards on board to protect them while fishing.
More than 80 per cent of what we consume is
imported, mostly by sea. The cost of maritime
insurance has shot up, and some cargo ships are now
bypassing Seychelles and unloading goods destined for
our islands in other ports. All this has helped push up
prices and the cost of living.
Some cruise ships
have cancelled their cruises in and around Seychelles,
and private yachting is on the decline. Sea travel to our
most distant islands has to be done by convoy.
Unable to effectively protect such a vast territory
on our own, we have had to turn to our friends abroad
for help. As a result, our population has watched with a
mixed sense of anxiety and reassurance as Seychelles
has fast become an increasingly important hub in the
fight against piracy as it spreads farther and farther into
the Indian Ocean.
A signatory of the Djibouti Code of Conduct,
Seychelles has also signed status of forces agreements
and/or memorandums of understanding with the United
States, the European Union, France, Britain and
Belgium. Further agreements are being negotiated with

24

NATO and the United Arab Emirates, and we have
active military cooperation with India, Russia and
other friendly countries. We have allowed the United
States to station unmanned aerial vehicles or drones in
Seychelles to supplement the multinational military
surveillance aircraft flying from our islands to seek out
pirates and alert naval forces and international shipping
as to their whereabouts. Meanwhile, we await various
kinds of assistance that have been promised to us to
help boost our own contribution to the fight against
piracy, and we would welcome more.
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of
an international trust fund by the Contact Group on
piracy to complement the Djibouti Code of Conduct
trust fund. The Seychelles Government would also
support an arrangement whereby pirates convicted in
other countries could serve their prison terms in
Somalia.
As the Council can see, Seychelles is both in the
thick of it and on the front line, but not of our own
choosing. We have no choice, as we are the only
country in the Indian Ocean to be under siege from
pirate attacks, not against us per se, but against
anything they see moving in and around our waters.
Despite the escalating international military
build-up in the Indian Ocean, the biggest in any one
region in recent times, we in Seychelles are under no
illusion that the long-term solution to piracy in the
region and to the security and economic problems it is
causing our islands lies in addressing the root cause —
the unrest in Somalia itself. The Seychelles
Government therefore supports the Secretary-General’s
call to strengthen the capabilities of the Somali
Transitional Federal Government and of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, to restore the rule of law,
peace, security and progress to Somalia and, in doing
so, to also help eradicate piracy from its shores.
Peace will not return to the waters of the Indian
Ocean, nor tranquillity to the paradise islands of
Seychelles, until there is peace in Somalia. Until then,
Seychelles will remain committed to and active in the
fight against piracy in the region, but only as far as its
resources allow.
The President: I call on then representative of
Spain.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation, of course, endorses the statement made

09-61200

S/PV.6221

earlier in this debate by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.
The incidents that continue to occur in the waters
off Somalia demonstrate every day that piracy is not a
problem of the past but constitutes a grave threat to
international maritime navigation and legitimate
fishing activities. Spain firmly condemns all acts of
piracy and believes that it is necessary to join forces
internationally to put an end to this scourge.
The means used in the seizures off the coast of
Somalia have evolved in recent times. The pirates
undertake daring and highly organized operations,
perpetrating their crimes at ever-increasing distances
from the coast. It is therefore necessary to enhance
means of protection so that the delivery of
humanitarian aid, international navigation and
commercial activities can be safe once again in those
waters.
As stated in the 13 November report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/590), introduced to the
Council by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ould Abdallah, the coordination of the
efforts of the international community and the Somali
authorities will be crucial in order to successfully deter
pirates and armed robbery in the region.
Spain is one of the many States behind the
European Union naval Operation Atalanta, a fine
model for contribution to safety at sea, together with
forces deployed by NATO and regional States and
organizations. Through coordination of its own forces
and those of third parties, the World Food Programme
seeks to protect its vessels as they deliver humanitarian
aid to Somalia. Secure maritime corridors have been
established in the Gulf of Aden for the vessels of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
their provisions.
As the Permanent Representative of Sweden
noted earlier, the European Union has decided to
extend Operation Atalanta to December 2010. Spain
and the entire European Union believe that it would be
important to receive a strengthened Security Council
mandate in order to provide more effective coverage to
the entire area under threat.
One of the greatest challenges to be met is the
rise in piracy that is affecting the security and
economic development of the region as a whole. Much
remains to be done, as shown by the high number of

09-61200

vessels and crews still being held by pirates, including
Spanish vessels. The most recent incident was the
capture of the fishing vessel Alakrana, which was
fortunately freed yesterday.
On behalf of the Government of Spain, I would
like to express my thanks for the cooperation of the
countries of the region in this fight, in particular
Kenya, whose contribution is crucial to apprehending
and trying the pirates. We would also like to thank the
Republic of Seychelles for its cooperation. I would also
like to emphasize the assistance of the African Union
through AMISOM and of the troop-contributing
countries, in particular Uganda and Burundi.
Spain has played a full part in the work of the
Security Council on that issue, together with other
Member States with a particular interest in combating
piracy. We have sponsored the various resolutions that
have been adopted on the matter. We will therefore be
pleased to co-sponsor a draft resolution allowing the
Council to extend the mandate set out in the provisions
of resolution 1846 (2008) and subsequent resolutions.
The Government of Spain is aware that the deeprooted causes of piracy in the waters off the coast of
Somalia are to be found not at sea, but on land.
Somalia continues to be beset by a cruel civil conflict
that has cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of
Somalis over decades of chaos and hostilities.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner
Office for Refugees, the number of internally displaced
persons is approaching 1.5 million.
Hence, the international community must
strengthen its support for the Transitional Federal
Government, the legitimate Government of Somalia.
The Government of Spain, inter alia, participated
actively in the donor conference for Somalia held in
Brussels in April. On that occasion, Spain committed
nearly €8 million, which has already been disbursed.
Spain trusts that, with the resolute support of the
international community, the Transitional Federal
Government will be able to complete the reconciliation
process under way and, pursuant to the Djibouti
agreement, achieve progress on an inclusive national
dialogue embracing the largest possible number of
stakeholders from Somali society. We also believe it
necessary to decisively address security sector reform
and to work on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration projects.

25

S/PV.6221

We need to define a comprehensive strategy for
Somalia here at the United Nations, and it is therefore
necessary to rely on the African Union, the European
Union,
the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development and other regional actors involved.
The European Union is taking important steps to
reinforce security through the preparation and future
approval of a joint mission to train the security forces
of the Transitional Federal Government. Spain is
willing to play its part in that operation and, indeed, to
lead it. That will mark our ongoing contribution to the
Somali police via the African Union, now standing at
$8 million.
Spain, as President of the European Union as of
January 2010, will lend all its support to ensuring that
identification of a common strategy for Somalia
remains at the fore of the international agenda. To that
end, Spain intends to convene an international
conference on Somalia in the first half of 2010, in
coordination with the efforts of the international
community in support of the Transitional Federal
Government. We trust that the outcome of that
international conference will be a political strategy that
will make a decisive contribution to bringing peace,
good governance and reconstruction to Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, to respond to comments and
questions.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: At the outset, I would like to
thank all those who have had such kind words of
support for my Office and me and, in particular the
Permanent Representatives of the United Kingdom and
France, who I am meeting today for the first time.
Everyone agrees that in order to address the issue
of piracy, land security needs to exist. There is no
dispute on that point. However, how do we achieve that
goal? To do so, first of all, donors must, in my opinion,
deliver financial and other assistance to the Somali
Transitional Federal Government, as pledged in
Brussels last April. The difference between pledges and
effective delivery is stark. We have to deliver what has
been promised.
Secondly, it is vital that the salaries of police
officers be paid. The police in Somalia have not been
paid in 16 months. That is a fact, so there is little point
in training more officers if we are not sure of being

26

able to provide them with salaries, equipment and the
means to make their living. If we cannot do that, they
will take it from the streets. They will turn to extortion.
I have to be honest with the Council — this is a
problem. How can we train if we are not sure we can
pay to equip?
Thirdly, training without stipends will simply
make them, as I said, more effective and violent on the
street. We have to help the Government to be capable
of delivering, to take responsibility vis-à-vis its
population and to be able to be our partner.
To be fair, the burden of providing security in
Somalia, especially in Mogadishu, should not be left to
AMISOM alone, and I mean to the troops from Uganda
and Burundi. They are doing a great job under difficult
circumstances. Pledges made in Brussels to support
them should be fulfilled without delay. And we must
acknowledge the role played in this regard by the
African Union Commission and its Chair, Libya, with
which my Office has an excellent working relationship.
I offer many thanks for something new: countries
that have initiated and put into effect a mechanism —
not to analyze the crisis in Somalia, to say that it is bad
or good and so on — but to pay effectively and to help.
Working with an international auditing firm, they help
with the mechanism.
But very few countries — China, Libya, Norway
and the United States of America — have contributed.
They have contributed, not with analyses but by
helping the Government to deliver. Other countries —
Algeria, Djibouti, Kenya and Yemen — have
contributed in their own way. That is how the
Government has been able to resist armed and funded
external aggression.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
encourage the millions in the Somali diaspora in
Europe, America and Australia to do all they can to
help bring peace and security to their country of origin,
so that they can have a place that they would happily
call home.
Finally, in terms of the political situation and
peace in Somalia, I would like to remind all those who
advise — and they should advise, as advice is always
important — that the Government is legal and
legitimate and has, on its own, survived armed and
foreign-supported aggression for two months.
AMISOM has helped, I should add. It needs to be

09-61200

S/PV.6221

strengthened, and this is why I am grateful to the
countries I mentioned earlier, which have provided
immediate assistance, not only humanitarian, but with
cash to pay police. That can strengthen the Government
and help it continue the dialogue it is having with the
opposition.
The Secretary of State for Defence is from the
opposition. Many members of the Government are
from the opposition. We have to continue our work —
as we did in Burundi, Liberia and everywhere else —
implement the Djibouti agreement and call for new
reconciliation. A new conference could weaken the
Government and encourage the radicals and the
business around them. By that, I mean piracy.
Our problem is that many people are against
peace. It prevents them from enjoying lucrative profits.

09-61200

So there is a need for more discussion among Somalis
in Somalia, but the so-called panacea of international
conferences held externally could do more harm than
help. We must always operate first and foremost under
the principle of “do no harm”. Reconciliation efforts
should be done in Somalia. That is what is good for the
country and good for the United Nations.
I thank the presidency of the Council, as well as
its embassy in Nairobi with which we work very
closely, as we do with the Council here.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

27
