General Auemblr-Thirtieth Seuion

98

institutions which will enable women at the lowest leve!
in rural and urban areas to obtain credit and loans to
improve their economic activities and integration in
national development;
3. Urges Govemments and the organizations of the
United Nations development system, including specialized agencies and non-govemmental organizations, to
incorporate, in their training programmes, workshops
and seminars, courses designed to improve the efficiency of women in business and financial management.
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3523 (XXX).

W ornen in rw-al areas

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3276 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974, in which it decided to consider at its thirtieth
session an ítem entitled "lntemational Women's Year,
including the proposals and recommendations of the
Conference of the Intemational Women's Year",
Taking into account resolution 21 66 adopted by the
World Conference of the lnternational Women's Year,
held at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975, the
principies contained in the Declaration of Mexico on
the Equality of Women and Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,67 the World Plan of Action
for the lmplementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year68 and the relevant resolutions
bearing on the contribution of women to equality, peace
and development,
Realizing the importance of adherence to the recommendations of the World Plan of Action, especially
those related to women in rural and low-income areas,
Considering the vital role rural women play, not only
within the family unit but also in the process of national development, through agriculture and particularly through food production and distribution,
Bearing in mind that in many parts of the world illiteracy, lack of education and training, inadequate distribution of human and economic resources, and severe
unemployment and underemployment problems for
women have hindered them from contributing fully to
national development efforts,
Convinced that the struggle for development is a
primary responsibility of all peoples and Govemments,
taking into account the principies of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States69 and the Declaration and the Programme of Aotion on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic Order, 70
Noting the need for both quantitative and qualitative
data on the position of women and their role in ali
rural activities,
Noting also the activities relating to rural women undertaken to date by the United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies conoemed,
Noting further the need for co-ord:nated and systematic examination of the situation of rural women and
their role in all rural activities,
l. Urges all Governments to accord, within their
respective plans, higher priority for:
66 Ibid.
67 lbid., chap. l.
68 lbid., chap. 11, sect. A.

69 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
70 Re~lutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

(a) Gathering relevant data on the status and role
of women in rural and low-income areas;
( b) Achieving socio-economic conditions based on
the realization of the full and equal partnership of men
and women in the development of society, both in law
and in fact;
(e) Promoting agricultura! productivity, agrobased industries and integrated rural development programmes;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit, through the Economic and Social Council, on
the basis of the views of relevant United Nations bodies
and specialized agencies as well as those of Govemments, guidelines for non-formal educational programmes designed to enable rural women to use fully
their capabilities and to contribute to the development
of society;
3. Urges United Nations organizations, specialized
agencies, regional commissions and intemational financia! institutions to accord special attention to government programmes and projeots aimed at the full integration of rural women in development;
~-. Urges all Governments to develop extensive
trammg programmes relevant to women and to malee
full use of ali existing and proposed research institutes
and centres, particularly the regional and international
institutes and centres for the advancement of women
in rural areas;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with Member States and the specialized agencies and
organizations of the United Nations system, to report
to !he G~neral A~emb!Y biennially on the progress
ach1eved 10 connex100 w1th the work referred to in the
previous paragraphs.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3524 (XXX). Measures for the integration of
women in development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 Dccember 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Recalling also its resolution 3505 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, adopted on the recommendation of the
Second Committee,
Having considered the report of the World Conference of the lntemational Women's Year 71 held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975 ~hich contains the resolutions adopred by the Conf~rence72 and
the World Plan of Action for the Imple'm.entation of
the Objectives of the International Women's Year 73
'
Noting tha! the World Plan of Action set forth guidance on action programmes for the integration of
women in development,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing the Intemational Development Strategy
!or th~ Second United Nations Development Decade,
10 • w~ch the General Assembly included among the
obJectives of the Strategy the full integration of women
in the total development effort, and recalling also that
71 UIJ'ited Naüons publication, Sales No. E.76 IV 1

72 I bid., c.hap. III.

7 3 !bid., chap. II, sect. A.

.

. '

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

the majority of the specialized agencies, other United
Nations bodies and Member States have already advocated similar action, as have individual donor agencies,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3342 (XXIX) of
17 December 1974, it invited the Unired N ations system to provide increased assistance to those programmes, projects and activities that will encourage
and promote the further integration of women in national, regional and interregional economic development activities,
Recommends that ali organs of the United Nations
development system, including the United Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies,

..

99

and other intemational technical and financial assistance programmes and agencies should:
(a) Give sustained attention to the integrati9n of
women in the formulation, design and implementation
of development projects and programmes;
( b) Assist Govemments that so request to incorporate in their development plans, their programme and
sector analyses and their programme and project documents an impact statement of how such proposed programmes will affect women as participants and beneficiaries.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

*

*

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council74
(ltem 12)

At its 2383rd plenary meeting, on 10 October 1975, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,711 decided to invite the ChairmanRapporteur of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights
in Chile, established by the Commission on Human Rights under its resolution 8
(XXXI) of 27 February 1975,76 to assist the Third Committee in its consideration of the progress report of the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
(ltem 68 (b))
World social situation
(ltem 71)
Policies and programmes relating to youth
(ltem 72)
Elimination of ali forms of religious intolerance
(ltem 79)
National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress
(ltem 81)

Freedom of information
(Item 83)
Status of the lnternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the Oplional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
(ltem 84)
74 See resolution 3448 (XXX).

7~ Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12,
documentA/10284,para.4.
78 See Ofjicial Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/S63S), chap. XXIII.
