United Nations

S/PV.6706

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6706th meeting
Tuesday, 24 January 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ebrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21354 (E)

*1221354*

S/PV.6706

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Malaysia, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 January 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which is contained in document S/2012/56 and which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which is to
be held on Tuesday, 24 January 2012, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.

the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: After 15 months of
absence of direct talks, I am pleased to report that
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators started meeting on
3 January in Amman under the auspices of King
Abdullah and Minister for Foreign Affairs Judeh of
Jordan and in the presence of Quartet envoys and
Quartet representative Blair. Since that first meeting, a
series of direct preparatory talks have been held under
Jordanian auspices. The parties began discussing
important issues related to territory and security, in
accordance with the Quartet statement of 23 September
2011. They are also discussing ways to build
confidence and create a positive environment for those
talks to succeed.
The
Secretary-General
commended
the
Palestinian and Israeli leaders on those important first
steps and expressed his appreciation to His Majesty
King Abdullah of Jordan for his initiative to facilitate
talks and give new impetus to the Middle East peace
process. The Secretary-General, who was in Lebanon
10 days ago, will soon visit the region again to support
the search for peace.
We remain hopeful that the preparatory meetings
between Israeli and Palestinian negotiators will
continue and ultimately lead to serious negotiations
based on comprehensive proposals on territory and
security, and reaching an agreement for a two-State
solution by the end of this year, as envisaged by the
Quartet. In the short term, it is essential that
provocations stop, as called for by the Quartet, and that
early progress be made to build confidence among the
parties and sustain these nascent talks.

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

Neither the international community nor the
parties can afford to let this opportunity pass by. The
Secretary-General continues to call on the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to show vision, courage and
determination to reach a historical peace agreement
that would meet the legitimate aspirations of the people
on both sides.

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of

Unfortunately, actions on the ground continue to
contribute to tensions. Settlement activity in the West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem, continued during

2

12-21354

S/PV.6706

the reporting period, and Under-Secretary-General
Amos briefed this Council last week on the current
situation. Violence between Israeli settlers and
Palestinians also remains troubling. On 25 December,
an Israeli woman was injured by stones thrown at her
car near Hebron. On 9 January, seven Palestinians were
arrested by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) near
Ramallah for throwing stones and Molotov cocktails at
vehicles travelling on road 443 through the occupied
territory. Settlers injured 12 Palestinians, including
four children. Three Palestinian children were hit and
injured by Israeli vehicles in Hebron and Nablus
between 10 and 12 January. On 11 January, a mosque
near the Palestinian town of Salfit was desecrated with
Hebrew graffiti referencing “price tag” in connection
with the dismantlement of an outpost. Settler attacks on
Palestinian orchards also resulted in injuries and more
than 100 Palestinian trees being uprooted.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished structures related to a number of
unauthorized outposts. The demolition of outposts is an
Israeli commitment under the Road Map. However, in
parallel, new initiatives to retroactively legalize some
outposts were advanced by the Government and in the
Knesset. Israeli authorities also demolished 88
Palestinian structures in different locations of the West
Bank during the reporting period, including seven in
East Jerusalem, citing lack of building permits.
Demolitions included 21 residences and 25 waterrelated structures.
Citing security, the Israel Defense Forces
conducted 336 operations in the occupied West Bank,
during which 74 Palestinians, including three children,
were injured and 273 arrested. Two IDF soldiers were
also injured. The IDF arrested nine Palestinians
allegedly in possession of illegal weapons and
ammunition. On 4 January, the IDF shot and injured a
Palestinian at a checkpoint near Bethlehem. On
22 January, a Palestinian man reportedly carrying a
metal object was shot and injured by IDF soldiers at
the Qalandia checkpoint.
In another concerning development, several
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC)
have been arrested by Israeli security forces. On
19 January, two Hamas members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council, including Speaker Aziz Dweik,
were arrested. On 23 January, Israeli security forces
entered the compound of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Jerusalem and detained the

12-21354

two remaining Palestinian Legislative Council
members who had sought refuge there since July 2010.
Last night, another Hamas PLC member was arrested
from his home in Ramallah. Two other PLC members
were previously arrested at the ICRC building and
transferred to Ramallah in 2011. The Palestinian
negotiator subsequently delivered a letter to his Israeli
counterpart complaining about the detention of the
PLC Speaker, referencing Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli custody in general and calling for their release.
We are troubled by reports that the Israeli authorities
have subjected Mr. Dweik and possibly others to
administrative detention.
Palestinian security forces continued to maintain
law and order in the parts of the West Bank under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. On 29 December,
Palestinian security forces seized and defused an
improvised explosive device, and on 6 January they
arrested eight Palestinians on criminal charges in
Hebron. On 14 January, Palestinian firefighters put out
a blaze on an Israeli bus travelling south of Hebron and
evacuated Israeli passengers. We also would like to
remind the parties of their Road Map commitments to
end incitement. In this regard, we have noted with
concern the statement of the Palestinian Authority
Mufti on 9 January.
The Palestinian Authority continues to build its
institutions, which in April 2011 had already achieved
a level sufficient for a functioning Government of a
State. However, in a meeting with Special Coordinator
Serry on 16 January, Prime Minister Fayyad expressed
his grave concern about the financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority. In 2011, direct budget support
amounted to only $742 million out of the $1 billion
that had been expected. Continued shortfalls could
challenge the impressive progress realized through the
State-building agenda. The United Nations encourages
donors to deliver their contributions for 2012 as early
as possible in the year.
The pace of economic growth slowed in the third
quarter of 2011, increasing by only 0.5 per cent over
the previous quarter. This, however, was still a 12 per
cent increase over the third quarter of 2010. During the
third quarter of 2011, the West Bank actually saw its
real economy shrink by 0.3 per cent, whereas the Gaza
Strip experienced an economic expansion of 2.6 per
cent in real terms. The structure of gross domestic
product in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
reveals a continued concentration of economic activity

3

S/PV.6706

in non-tradable sectors, including certain services,
public administration and construction. Sustained
growth will require an expansion of this productive
base and the tradable goods sector. Increased measures
to enable this and to reduce access impediments will be
essential for continued growth, such as in
manufacturing, mining and agriculture.
Weekly demonstrations continued in the West
Bank against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 2004. Clashes with
the Israel Defense Forces left 28 Palestinians injured;
one Israeli soldier was injured by rock-throwing.
Turning now to the situation in Gaza, a total of 29
rockets and 12 mortar shells fired from Gaza hit Israel
without resulting in injuries or damage. The Israel
Defense Forces conducted six incursions and 10
airstrikes into Gala, resulting in four Palestinian
militants being killed and seven injured, and 15
Palestinian civilians injured. We condemn in the
strongest terms any indiscriminate firing towards
civilian areas and call on Israel to show maximum
restraint. Obligations under international humanitarian
law must be respected for the protection of civilians. It
is essential to strengthen the calm in order to improve
the conditions of the population in Gaza.
We continue to call for the lifting of the closure
in the framework of resolution 1860 (2009). In the
short term, we believe that the full opening for the
import of construction materials would bolster the
legitimate Gazan economy and enable much needed
reconstruction activities. It is important that exports be
allowed to resume at scale, including transfers to the
West Bank and Israel. These changes could be applied
with due consideration for Israel’s legitimate security
concerns and could make a significant difference in the
lives of many Gazans. We will continue to work with
the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
in this regard.
At present, the United Nations has received
approvals for a total of approximately $270 million of
works requiring construction materials that are still
classified as dual use. However, three key housing
projects of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
totalling over $60 million, have yet to be approved.
Efforts between the factions to advance Palestinian
reconciliation are continuing. Fatah and Hamas

4

representatives met again in Cairo on 21 December to
that end. On 14 January, the Palestinian Central
Election Commission obtained permission to reopen its
offices in Gaza.
We continue to support Palestinian unity within
the framework of the commitments of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization (PLO), the positions of the
Quartet, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Allow me to turn to the situation in Lebanon.
From 13 to 15 January, the Secretary-General visited
Lebanon and held talks with President Sleiman, Prime
Minister Mikati and Speaker Berri, as well as a number
of representatives of Lebanese parties. The SecretaryGeneral also paid a visit to the headquarters of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
Naqoura, in support of the mission and efforts of
UNIFIL peacekeepers, who play a crucial role in
preserving the calm along the Blue Line.
In his discussions with Lebanese interlocutors,
the Secretary-General reiterated the United Nations
unwavering commitment to Lebanon’s stability and
security, as well as the need for Lebanon to meet all its
international obligations, including those under the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Не strongly
encouraged President Slеiman’s effort to reconvene the
national dialogue, including the effort to enable
progress on the development of a national defence
strategy that would address the question of arms
outside the control of the State.
A number of security incidents that illustrate the
continued fragility and vulnerability of conditions in
UNIFIL areas of operation took place during the
reporting period. On 19 December, four rockets were
found, and subsequently removed, by the Lebanese
armed forces near Wadi Khancha. A UNIFIL
investigation is ongoing. On 28 December, an
explosion — the third since mid-November — took
place in Tyre in front of a restaurant, causing minor
damage. The Lebanese authorities are conducting
investigations into the explosions. All these incidents
are violations of resolution 1701 (2006) as they
manifest the presence of unauthorized weapons and
related material in the UNIFIL area of operations.
The investigations into the rocket launchings
towards Israel on 29 November and 11 December and
the attack against UNIFIL personnel on 9 December in
the vicinity of Tyre are still ongoing. UNIFIL, in
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces,

12-21354

S/PV.6706

intensified its operational activities and maintains a
high level of vigilance in order to prevent any hostile
activities.

and unhindered access to
organizations and Arab and
throughout the country.

In an ongoing violation of resolution 1701
(2006), almost daily Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace continued during the reporting period.

The plan also calls on the Syrian authorities and
the opposition to engage in a serious dialogue under
the auspices of the Arab League with the objective of
forming a transitional national unity Government to
oversee a peaceful transition to a democratic and
pluralistic political system. The Arab League resolution
envisages that the Secretary-General of the Arab
League and the Chairman of the Arab League
Committee on Syria inform this Council and seek its
support. The Arab League ministers also decided to
extend the Arab observer mission by one month, and
requested Mr. Elaraby to continue his cooperation with
the United Nations Secretary-General in providing
assistance to the Arab League observer mission. The
Syrian authorities rejected the resolution, which they
described as a flagrant interference in Syria’s internal
affairs with the aim of drawing foreign interference.

The situation along the Lebanese-Syrian border
remains of concern. On 27 December, three Lebanese
nationals were killed and one injured in the area of
Wadi Khaled by gunfire from the Syrian side of the
border. President Sleiman condemned the killing and
called for an investigation of the incident. On
21 January, a 16-year-old Lebanese fisherman was
killed at sea off the coast of Arida at the LebaneseSyrian border. Two other fishermen were detained by
Syrian security forces and subsequently released.
The United Nations continues to monitor the
influx of Syrian refugees into Lebanon. As of
13 January, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
Government had registered over 5,660 Syrian refugees
in Lebanon. The significant increase in number is due
largely to intensified registration with UNHCR and the
Government. The United Nations continues to
coordinate closely with the Government of Lebanon on
the provision of assistance to the displaced.
While in Lebanon, the Secretary-General also
attended a conference on reform and transitions to
democracy in the Arab world, organized by the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia. In his keynote address to the meeting, the
Secretary-General outlined the United Nations firm
commitment to helping Arab countries through the
transitions that they have embarked upon. The
Secretary-General also reiterated his clear call on
President Al-Assad to stop the violence and the killing
of people.
For over 10 months now, Syria has continued to
be engulfed in a violent political crisis, with a rising
death toll on a daily basis. The foreign ministers of the
League of Arab States met in Cairo on 22 January and
adopted a resolution that proposes a political plan, with
a specific timeline, for resolving the crisis in Syria.
The plan calls for all violence and acts of killing to
stop. It reminds the Syrian authorities of their
obligations to withdraw all military forces from cities
and population centres, release all prisoners, and
ensure the freedom of peaceful demonstration and full

12-21354

the Arab League
international media

Time is pressing for the violence and human
rights violations to stop and for a credible, inclusive
and Syrian-led political process to start in Syria, with
the aim of effectively addressing the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and ensuring the full
exercise of their fundamental freedoms. We hope that
the international community will act in a concerted and
coherent manner in support of ongoing efforts to
achieve a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
Turning back to the Middle East peace process,
let me conclude by reiterating our determination to
contribute to the ongoing talks, help the parties build
mutual confidence, and develop concrete proposals on
territory and security. Leadership is needed to ensure
that the process moves forward with the support of
regional and international partners. As the SecretaryGeneral recalled in Beirut, a two-State solution is long
overdue. The status quo offers only the guarantee of
future conflict. We must all do our part to secure a
lasting peace that will end the occupation and the
conflict and realize the legitimate rights of all.
The parties should now redouble their efforts to
resolve all permanent status issues, end the conflict and
establish an independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
with a secure Israel, in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

5

S/PV.6706

The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.

recently extended recognition from different corners of
the globe.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

The start of a new year brings new hopes and
renewed commitments. Despite all odds, the resilient
Palestinian people remain hopeful that this year will
bring long-awaited freedom, justice, peace, dignity and
security in their homeland. With international support,
they continue to strive for their inalienable rights,
including to self-determination and return. They
remain convinced that justice and the rule of law will
prevail, and they hope that this will be the year that
brings an end to the Israeli occupation and that also
brings the independence of the State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

Mr. Mansour: On behalf of Palestine, I
congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly country South
Africa on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency and on your wise stewardship of the
Council. We are honoured by your presence as you
preside over this important meeting today. We also
express appreciation to the Russian Federation for its
very skilled leadership of the Council in December.
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing today.
Today, I also wish to renew Palestine’s warmest
congratulations to the new Security Council members,
the friendly countries of Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo, which are also members
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), joining the
current members of the NAM caucus on the Council.
We are confident in their commitment to upholding the
Charter, international law and the Security Council’s
resolutions, and we wish them all success in fulfilling
their high responsibilities.
I also convey Palestine’s deep appreciation to the
members whose terms ended in December — the
friendly countries of Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Gabon, Nigeria and the Arab representative on the
Security Council, Lebanon — which all served with
dedication to the pursuit of peace and security,
including with regard to the question of Palestine.
We are grateful for the efforts exerted during
their tenure in support of the rights of the Palestinian
people and aimed at reaching a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
That includes their efforts in connection with
Palestine’s legitimate and worthy application for
United Nations membership, which remains before the
Security Council awaiting recommendation after the
rendering of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members on 11 November 2011. In
that regard, I reaffirm our conviction that recognition
of the State of Palestine constitutes a genuine
investment in the two-State solution for peace. We
reiterate our deepest gratitude to all States that have
recognized Palestine, including those that most

6

The Palestinian leadership continues to spare no
effort to achieve peace. Despite the many obstacles
placed by Israel, the occupying Power, in the path of
peace, Palestine has fully cooperated with the current
efforts of the Quartet aimed at advancing the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders, and has
submitted comprehensive proposals on borders and
security, as called for by the Quartet. We express
appreciation to Jordan for the initiative of His Majesty
King Abdullah II to revive the ailing peace process,
and we affirm that Palestine has engaged in good faith
in that effort, based on positions of historic
compromise rooted in international law and justice.
Moreover, we continue our efforts to promote
Palestinian reconciliation based on our legitimate
national interests and aspirations and the commitments
of the Palestine Liberation Organization. We hope soon
to restore the unity of our people and land, and we are
grateful for the support being given in that regard by
Egypt, our Arab brethren and other concerned members
of the international community.
However, despite those positive developments,
the situation on the ground remains appalling and
totally contradictory to all legal norms, undermining
any peace efforts. Rather than acting to bring the
occupation to an end, Israel is entrenching it, causing
more human suffering and prolonging the conflict.
Especially destructive has been its settlement
campaign, deliberately waged in violation of the
Fourth
Geneva
Convention,
United
Nations
resolutions, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and the Road Map, and in defiance of
global demands for complete cessation.

12-21354

S/PV.6706

In 2011, as revealed by the Israeli organization
Peace Now, Israeli settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, actually
exceeded that of all past years, creating thousands of
illegal facts on the ground. From the expansion of
existing settlements to the construction of new ones;
from the construction of the wall and Israeli-only roads
to the confiscation of land and the demolition of
homes; and from the establishment of hundreds of
checkpoints and roadblocks to the displacement of
Palestinians and permitting the vile aggression of
settlers against Palestinian civilians and property —
none of that has stopped, not for a single day.
Recent reports by Peace Now, confirmed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and highlighted during the important briefing to the
Council last week by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, attest to the
intensity and vastly detrimental impact of Israeli
settlement policies on the Palestinian people, the
contiguity of Palestinian land, humanitarian conditions
and the prospects for peace.
In fact, Israeli settlement activities increased by
at least 20 per cent in the past year, with construction
initiated on 1,850 units and at least 3,500 units under
construction in 2011 in 142 illegal settlements and socalled outposts in the West Bank. The settlement drive
has been most fierce in and around East Jerusalem and
in the Jordan Valley deep inside the territory, as well as
in other areas referred to as “Area C” — an area
amounting to at least 62 per cent of the land where the
occupying Power prohibits an official Palestinian
presence.
The occupying Power continues its illegal
measures aimed at Judaizing East Jerusalem and to
alter its Palestinian, Arab, Muslim and Christian
demography, character, identity and heritage.
Settlement activities, home demolitions, the revocation
of residency rights, the closure of Palestinian
institutions, the transformation of Palestinian
neighbourhoods into walled ghettos, excavations and
countless other measures are deepening the crisis in
East Jerusalem, further isolating it from its natural
Palestinian environs to the north and south, impairing
its socio-economic and cultural fabric, and fuelling
tensions and religious sensitivities in the City.
In the Jordan Valley, Israel continues to seize vast
tracts of Palestinian land, to demolish homes, water

12-21354

wells and farms, and to displace hundreds of
Palestinian families, in addition to the hundreds of
thousands already displaced. Since 1967, it is estimated
that the population has been reduced from more than
300,000 people to only 56,000 today. Such
displacement is otherwise known around the world as
ethnic cleansing. The Palestinian Bedouin community,
an indigenous population the majority of whom are
refugees and whose livelihood and sustenance are tied
to the land, has been especially hard hit by those illegal
actions. It is no coincidence that much of the land from
which the Bedouins are being forcibly removed is
linked to planned settlement expansion and other
colonization activities aimed at advancing Israel’s
illegal, de facto annexation of Palestinian land.
Terror and crimes by Israeli settlers are also on
the rise, with a record 40 per cent increase in attacks in
the past year and a 165 per cent increase since the year
2009. Most recently, wilful attacks and provocations
have included the beating, killing and injury of
Palestinian civilians, including children and elderly
shepherds; the destruction and vandalism of homes,
vehicles, farmlands and olive orchards; and the
vandalism and burning of numerous mosques and
churches.
All of this is being perpetrated under the watch
and protection of the Israeli occupying forces, with
nearly zero accountability for such crimes. Those
deplorable attacks are not isolated incidents, but rather
part of the deliberate agenda of extremist settlers and
their supporters in the Government to terrorize the
Palestinian people, make their living conditions
unbearable, and remove them from their land.
In the Gaza Strip, the Palestinian civilian
population continues to suffer from the occupying
Power’s illegal policies, particularly the grave effects
of the Israeli blockade by land, air and sea.
Humanitarian conditions remain critical, with the most
vulnerable plagued by poverty, high unemployment
and food insecurity. Moreover, it has now been three
years since the military aggression against Gaza, and
Israel continues to evade responsibility for the massive
crimes perpetrated against the Palestinian people and to
obstruct the reconstruction and rehabilitation needed to
rebuild the communities, infrastructure, economy and
lives destroyed by that aggression. In that connection,
we recognize the remarkable effort by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to assist the Palestine

7

S/PV.6706

refuges in the Gaza Strip and in all other areas of its
operation at this critical time. We reiterate our call for
Israel to be held accountable for the crimes it has
committed against the Palestinian people, and we call
again for the full lifting of the Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip.
In that regard, while Israel, as an occupying
Power, is obliged under international humanitarian law
to protect the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory, it seems clear that it is
forfeiting that responsibility. In addition to the
colonization and collective punishment measures I
have mentioned, that stance is reflected in the
occupying Power’s violent military raids and
continuing arrests of Palestinian civilians, including
children, as a result of which thousands of Palestinians
remain unjustly imprisoned in Israeli jails, including
several elected officials, some of whom were recently
rearrested. It is also evidenced by Israel’s use of
excessive force against peaceful protesters, killing and
injuring innocent Palestinians who are defending their
land and their people’s rights, including 28-year-old
Mustafa Tamimi on 9 December 2011.
We therefore call on the international community,
in particular the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, to protect the Palestinian people
in a manner consistent with its obligation to ensure the
protection of all civilians in armed conflict. In that
regard, I wish to inform the Security Council that the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) has mandated its
Chair to request Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary State, to undertake the necessary measures,
in line with the relevant resolutions, to convene a
conference of the high contracting parties to ensure
respect for the Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We stress the value
of such a conference in determining measures to
uphold the law and pressuring Israel to cease its illegal
practices and comply with its obligations.
The two-State solution is withering with every
inch of Palestinian land that is seized by the occupying
Power, every settlement unit constructed, every Israeli
settler transferred, every wall erected, every home
demolished and every Palestinian family displaced.
Israel’s colonization and oppressive collective
punishment of the Palestinian people are rapidly
eroding hopes and beliefs that peace is possible on the
basis of the two-State solution, to which not only the
Palestinian side has committed, but also to which the

8

international community has committed and greatly
invested in.
Yet, the Israeli Government wildly insists that its
settlement enterprise is not the main obstacle to peace,
as reiterated days ago by the Israeli Ambassador to the
United Nations, who illogically and insensitively
insisted that it is the Palestinians’ call for freedom,
justice and their human rights — mainly the right to
return — that is the main obstacle. That begs the
question: how is the illegal colonization of Palestinian
land conducive to the realization of the two-State
solution, by which an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is to coexist with Israel on the
basis of the 1967 borders? What kind of two-State
solution for peace does Israel envision as it continues
its settlement and theft of Palestinian land beyond the
Green Line? It is surely not the same vision of peace
articulated and pursued by the Council, the Quartet and
the international community as a whole, and not the
vision that brought us to the table in Amman.
If not ceased, what Israel is doing in the occupied
Palestinian territory will ensure that the two-State
solution never comes to be and will give further
validity to alternative options. The urgency of stopping
that illegal campaign therefore cannot be overstated.
That would not only be an act of good faith that would
lend credibility to peace efforts, but is also obligatory
for Israel under the law and the road map, with which
it cannot continue to selectively comply and to which it
must be held accountable.
The truth of Israel’s commitment to peace cannot
be measured by empty lip service to peace or the mere
presence of its negotiators at the table. It must be
measured by Israel’s deeds. When negotiators come to
the table absent good faith and genuine peace
proposals and when the Israeli Government continues
its deceitful, belligerent conduct in the occupied
Palestinian territory, we must truly question whether or
not Israel is interested in the just and lasting peace that
we seek to achieve — a peace based on United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the road map.
For decades, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
invoked the Security Council’s responsibility under the
Charter. Yet, the Council remains paralysed, failing to
uphold its duties and allowing the conflict to fester,
with broad political, security and humanitarian

12-21354

S/PV.6706

consequences. We remain convinced that holding Israel
responsible for its crimes will be the only way to bring
those illegal actions to a halt, prevent the further
deterioration of the situation and salvage the prospects
for peace. We therefore call again on the Council to
take serious measures that will send a clear message to
compel Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately
cease all of its illegal actions and to commit to the
long-held parameters of the peace process.
The Palestinian people and their leadership
remain committed to a peaceful solution and to peace
negotiations. Moreover, we have not given up our
conviction in international law and the United Nations
system as central pillars in our efforts to achieve a just
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects,
including the Palestine refugee problem, to bring an
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to achieve
our freedom and rights. We will therefore continue our
efforts to mobilize the Security Council, as well our
efforts in the General Assembly and all other relevant
United Nations organs, to make that a reality. In that
regard, we appeal for the strong and valuable support
of all Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): As this is the first time that I
address the Security Council in the new year, let me
congratulate the five new Council members on their
election. I wish each of them the best of luck in
navigating the sometimes stormy debates of the
Chamber.
As we gather in the Chamber, an alarm bell is
ringing. Never has it been so clear that Iran is seeking
to build a nuclear weapon. That is the single greatest
threat to the security of the entire world. Now is the
time to act. Tomorrow is too late. The stakes are too
high. The price of inaction is too great.
The latest International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) reports prove beyond any doubt that Iran has a
nuclear weapons programme, which it is rapidly
advancing. Iran recently announced that it would
enrich uranium to 20 per cent at its nuclear facility in
Qom. There is no plausible civilian justification for
that action. It blatantly violates numerous resolutions
of the Council and will bring Iran significantly closer
to producing weapons-grade, highly enriched uranium.

12-21354

Each and every Member of the United Nations —
particularly those of the Council — should lie awake at
night thinking about what would happen if the regime
in Tehran gets a hold of the most dangerous weapon on
Earth. Only the pressure of a united international
community can stop Iran from continuing its march
towards nuclear weapons. The political and economic
price that Iran will pay must be clear. Israel commends
the recent steps taken by the United States, the
European Union and others in that regard. Although
those are very important steps, we must judge them
based on their results. It is time for the rest of the
international community and the Council to join those
efforts.
We come together today after a year of turmoil in
the Middle East. Great challenges lie on the horizon.
People are demanding dignity and seeking liberty after
generations of oppression. Extremism threatens fragile
societies. Human rights continue to be trampled.
Unrest has shaken the foundation of the political order
from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Persian Gulf to the
Caspian Sea. And what issue has the Council deemed
to be the most pressing in its monthly debate on the
Middle East? Surprise, surprise — it is the status of
municipal building applications in the West Bank. In
the last two monthly briefings by the Secretariat,
barely a square inch of Jerusalem or the West Bank has
been left unexamined. Yet entire Middle Eastern
countries where people are being killed, repressed and
tortured daily continue to go without mention. That is
logic turned on its head. Let me be clear — perfectly
clear. Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
important on its own merits, so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But the misallocation of the Security
Council’s time, energy and resources erodes its
credibility.
How many times have members of this Council —
and many others — repeated the statement that the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the central conflict in the
Middle East and that if we solve that conflict we solve
all the other conflicts in the region? Today one would
ridicule that statement. It is obvious that Yemen, Syria,
Egypt, Bahrain and other conflicts in the Middle East
have nothing to do with Israel. The constant repetition of
the statement does not make it true. How many times
have members of this Council — and many others —
repeated that settlements are the primary obstacle to

9

S/PV.6706

peace? Similarly, repetition of that statement does not
make it true.
The primary obstacle to peace is not settlements.
The primary obstacle to peace is the so-called claim of
return. Let me repeat that. The major hurdle to peace is
the Palestinians’ insistence on the so-called claim of
return. No one will ever hear Palestinian leaders — not
even here in this Chamber — say “two States for two
peoples”. If anyone ever hears them say “two States for
two peoples”, I would ask them to phone me at my
office immediately — to and call me collect, in the
event of such an unprecedented occurrence. No one
will hear them say “two States for two peoples”
because today the Palestinian leadership is calling for
an independent Palestinian State but insists that its
people return to the Jewish State. That would mean the
destruction of Israel.
The idea that Israel will be flooded with millions
of Palestinians will never be accepted. The
international community knows it, the Palestinian
leadership knows it, but the Palestinian people are not
hearing it. To substantiate that, in a poll conducted by
the Palestinian Center for Public Opinion last
November, 90 per cent of Palestinians said that they
would not give up the claim of return. That gap
between their perception and reality is and will remain
the major obstacle to peace.
Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to tell the
Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the truth.
It has the responsibility to stand up and say that the socalled claim of return is a non-starter. Yet many around
this table who never miss an opportunity to tell Israel
what it has to do for peace conveniently lose their
voices when it comes to telling the Palestinian people
about the basic compromises they will have to make
for peace.
The Palestinian refusal to recognize Israel’s right
to exist as a Jewish State goes hand in hand with a
culture of incitement in mosques, in schools and in the
media. Day after day, children are taught to pursue
violence and to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis
and Jews. Let me be clear. I am talking not only about
Hamas in Gaza, but also about the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank, where one cannot turn a
corner without seeing terrorists and terrorism glorified.
This month, on 9 January, as Mr. FernandezTaranco mentioned — and I will go into it because he

10

mentioned it only in passing — Palestinian Authority
television broadcast the proceedings of an event
celebrating Fatah’s forty-seventh anniversary. It
featured a sermon by the Authority’s most senior
religious leader, Mufti Muhammad Hussein, who
presented the killing of Jews as a sacred goal for all
Muslims. His comments were deeply disturbing. But
what was even more disturbing is that no one from the
Palestinian leadership stood up and condemned his
comments, denounced his actions or dissociated
themselves from his message. Not only did they not
condemn his words, they even broadcast them on
public Palestinian television channels. The Palestinian
leadership said nothing — and its silence speaks
volumes.
The path to peace is clear. The international
community must tell the Palestinians unequivocally
that unilateralism is a dead end and that direct
negotiations are the only way forward. Recent talks in
Amman are a positive step in this regard, and I would
like to take this opportunity to thank King Abdullah
and everyone else for helping to facilitate those
meetings. Now Israelis and Palestinians must take the
next step towards peace together. It is time to stop
negotiating about negotiating. It is time to stop meeting
about meeting. It is time to stop talking about talking.
Yet instead of taking steps toward peace with Israel,
President Abbas continues to flirt with the dangers of
unity with Hamas.
Hamas is another subject that has not been
mentioned here. Hamas is a terrorist organization
funded, supported and trained by the Iranian regime. It
has diverted nearly every resource in Gaza to
oppressing its own people or attacking ours. Women
are subjugated, political opponents are jailed and
murdered, and children are used as human shields and
suicide bombers. That is the reality on the ground in
Gaza today, as we speak, yet we did not hear one word
or even syllable about it in today’s briefing.
The Quartet has long applied three principles that
Hamas must adopt to become a legitimate actor in the
peace process. It must renounce violence, recognize
Israel and abide by prior Palestinian agreements. The
bar could not be set any lower, yet at no point has
Hamas satisfied those conditions or indicated any
intention to do so. It says no to negotiation, it says no
to recognition of Israel and it continues to carry out
violence against Israel day after day. Any who suggest
that Hamas is a partner for peace should take a trip to

12-21354

S/PV.6706

the Gaza Strip. The area remains a launching ground
for constant rocket attacks targeting Israeli cities and
civilians. Last year, some 700 rockets were fired into
Israel. That is an average of almost two rockets fired
every single day.
Let me state clearly what I have said in numerous
letters to the Security Council and in previous debates.
The situation in Gaza is very serious. One spark could
ignite a dangerous escalation. The Security Council has
an obligation to act boldly and immediately. Yet the
Council still has not found the time or the will to utter
a single syllable of condemnation against the attacks,
and the silence is deafening.
No people should be expected to live under such
terror. No Government should be expected to stand idle
in the face of such violence. Later this month, the
Secretary-General will visit Israel and see the threats
we face with his own eyes. Let us hope that his trip
brings a bit of new perspective to this Organization
about the real obstacles to peace and security and the
real issues of extremism, terrorism and incitement in
our region.
The challenges facing the Middle East are
growing every day. They stand clearly before the
Council. They threaten all of us. It is on the Council’s
shoulders to confront them with courage and with
leadership. Tired rhetoric and misplaced focus have too
often characterized this debate. They will no longer
suffice. As Iran inches closer to acquiring a nuclear
weapon, as extremists spread terrorism and hate, and as
the enemies of peace test the resolve of the
international community, silence is not an option.
Confronting these fundamental threats will not be
easy. It will require struggle and sacrifice. As Winston
Churchill once said, “We must be united, we must be
undaunted, we must be inflexible”. At this critical
moment, for the sake of our children and our common
future, the world has no other choice.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.
I will begin on a welcome and even hopeful note.
King Abdullah and the Jordanian Government have
taken a bold step and shown tremendous leadership in
bringing the parties together for direct meetings in

12-21354

coordination with the Quartet. The discussions are
showing promise, and we are encouraged that the
parties have already met several times this month in
Amman. We believe strongly that the Council’s focus
should be on offering support to the Jordanian effort
and on urging the parties to take full advantage of this
opportunity.
Last Wednesday, the Council discussed the
humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza, as
well as in southern Israel. The discussion today has
already focused a great deal on counterproductive
actions taken by both sides. I want to encourage my
colleagues on the Council to join in encouraging the
parties to refrain from unhelpful actions and to
promote an environment that is conducive to progress.
We join in condemning in the strongest possible terms
both incitement to violence and continued terrorist
attacks on civilians in Israel, including rocket attacks
from Gaza. We also reiterate our ongoing concern
about the humanitarian situation in Gaza and our
support for increased measures to ensure the safety and
well-being of Gazans. We likewise urge Israel to
continue and to step up its efforts to deter, confront and
prosecute anti-Palestinian violence and extremist hate
crimes. Let me also reiterate that we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity.
We should not lose sight of our shared goal of a
comprehensive, just and lasting resolution to this
conflict. Last year, in May, President Obama laid out
his vision for a lasting peace that would involve two
States, for two peoples: Israel as a Jewish State and the
homeland for the Jewish people and the State of
Palestine as the homeland for the Palestinian people,
each State enjoying self-determination, mutual
recognition and peace. President Obama reiterated that
goal in his speech before the General Assembly in
September (see A/66/PV.11). He reaffirmed the basis
for successful negotiations, which is well known to all
of us. Israelis must know that any agreement provides
assurances for their security, and Palestinians deserve
to know the territorial basis of their State.
In an effort to operationalize the President’s
vision, on 23 September 2001 the Quartet issued a
statement calling on the parties “to overcome the
current obstacles and resume direct, bilateral IsraeliPalestinian
negotiations
without
delay
or
preconditions.” (see SG/2178) That statement, taken as
a whole, presents a robust framework for resuming
direct negotiations between the parties. We are now at

11

S/PV.6706

a critical juncture. The Government of Jordan deserves
our gratitude for facilitating re-engagement by the
parties. With Jordan and the Quartet’s help, the parties
have begun a difficult but necessary process. It is
imperative that we do everything we can to contribute
to the success of that pathway.
I shall turn now to Syria. The situation there
continues to deteriorate dramatically. Despite the
presence of Arab League monitors, the Al-Assad
regime is ignoring its commitments to the Arab league
plan, including by failing to end all acts of violence
and to protect Syrian civilians. Scores of civilians are
killed every day. Thousands of political detainees
remain incarcerated across the country, many at serious
risk of torture. As a result of the regime’s failure to
fulfil the requirements of the Arab League plan, there
are more and more calls from the region for Security
Council involvement.
On Sunday in Cairo, the Arab League approved a
resolution that calls for Al-Assad to hand over powers
to his Vice-President in order to form a unity
Government, enabling a political transition to begin in
Syria. We welcome the Arab League’s continued
leadership and efforts to facilitate a transition and
broker a political solution to the more than 10 months
of brutality by the Al-Assad regime. We believe that it
is essential that the international community work
together to support a stable transition, and we
commend the Arab League for putting forth a transition
plan. The Council should fully support the Arab
League’s efforts to broker an end to the bloodshed and
a peaceful transition to democracy in Syria.
The United States has been very clear in our
approach to the crisis in Syria. We have long said that
Al-Assad, who has shunned all opportunities to
institute real reforms that address basic human rights
issues, needs to step aside and let a peaceful transition
in Syria occur. We first imposed sanctions on the
Al-Assad regime and its enablers last spring, and have
increased them as Al-Assad has refused to end the
violence. Many others in the international community
have enacted similar measures. The European Union
approved yet more sanctions yesterday, and sanctions
have been part of the Arab League’s initiative since last
November. It is long past time that the Council adopt a
strong resolution that supports the Arab League’s
efforts to end the crisis and restore peace to Syria.

12

We call again on the Syrian Government to
permit access to the commission of inquiry created by
the United Nations Human Rights Council in August.
The United States fully supports the Syrian people’s
demands for a democratic, representative and inclusive
Government that respects human rights and provides
equal protection under the law for all citizens,
regardless of sect, ethnicity or gender.
The United States continues to call on the
opposition to refrain from violence, while recognizing
that exercising such restraint becomes more and more
difficult as the regime ratchets up its repression. The
Arab League’s Secretary General stated very clearly in
his report this week that
“the opposition had to carry arms in response to
the excessive use of force by the Syrian
Government to counter protests, the use of
repression, detention and torture and violations of
human rights by security agencies”.
We hold the Syrian regime fully responsible for the
worsening cycle of violence.
We are concerned by recent reports of shipments
of arms and munitions to the Syrian Government. We
call on supplier countries to voluntarily halt arms
transfers to the regime. We encourage all nations to
join the widening effort to stop the flow of weapons to
the Al-Assad regime.
I will conclude with the situation in Lebanon. We
remain committed to the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006),
and urge the Government of Lebanon to adhere to
those and other international obligations and
commitments, including with respect to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon. We condemn the terrorist attack
against peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon on 9 December 2011, the third such
attack in less than a year. The United States calls on the
Government of Lebanon to investigate those incidents
and bring those responsible to justice. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recent visit to Lebanon, including
his remarks on the importance of disarming Hizbullah,
an international obligation established by resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
The United States continues to support the
Lebanese Armed Forces and recognizes the critical role
that they and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) play in maintaining stability

12-21354

S/PV.6706

throughout Lebanon. We thank Major General Alberto
Asarta Cuevas for his leadership during his tenure and
welcome incoming UNIFIL Force Commander
Brigadier General Paolo Serra.

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, clearly
indicate that the increasing trend of settlement
activities in Palestinian lands is not compatible with
the two-State solution.

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council and to thank you for presiding over
this meeting. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing, as well His Excellency Mr. Ron Prosor,
Permanent Representative of Israel, and His
Excellency Mr. Riyad Mansour, Permanent Observer of
Palestine, for their statements.

Settlement activities have also exacerbated the
humanitarian problems of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. Because more than
43 per cent of the West Bank is outside the control of
the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian people have
been deprived of access to their natural resources and
prevented from undertaking their rightful economic,
social and cultural activities. The situation has resulted
in a large number of Palestinian people losing their
homes and access to their farms and their livelihoods.
Settlement activities have also led to violence and have
aggravated social tension between settlers and the
Palestinian population. We therefore reiterate our call
for Israel to stop all settlement activities.

Today’s open debate is taking place at a crucial
time when the international community is engaged with
Israel and Palestine to restart direct peace talks. On
23 September — the day when President Mahmoud
Abbas filed an application with the Secretary-General
for Palestine’s for membership in the United
Nations — the Quartet issued a statement proposing a
series of steps to restart the peace process (see
SG/2178). The steps included a preparatory meeting
between the parties within a month and a commitment
of the parties to submit their preliminary proposals on
territory and security within three months, to make
substantive progress within six months, and to hold a
donor conference and to reach an agreement on the
final status issues by the end of 2012.
During the last four months, the Quartet engaged
with the parties separately, met with them several times
and sought proposals on security and the border. Those
actions were followed by a series of meetings in
Amman this month under the auspices of King
Abdullah II. While the prospect of direct talks has
remained elusive, it is encouraging that the parties
have remained engaged in those processes. We believe
that such engagements need to become more serious
and purposeful with a view to resolving the issues in a
time-bound manner.
To realize the Quartet’s time frame for reaching
an agreement by the end of the year, it is necessary for
Israel to completely stop settlement activities.
Continuing settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, besides being illegal under
international law, are undermining the efforts of the
international community to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution. Several reports, including those of the Office

12-21354

In Gaza, the blockade and restrictions on exports
continue to have far-reaching consequences. Poverty
and aid dependency have increased, and demands for
emergency services like health, water, sanitation,
education and temporary shelter have overstretched the
resources of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). There is an urgent need to further ease
restrictions on humanitarian supplies to the Gaza Strip.
Established channels for such supplies should be used
even as the capacity of such channels is improved.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an important
issue that needs no emphasis. We support the efforts of
the Palestinian leadership to expedite implementation
of the reconciliation agreement reached last year
between the Palestinian factions.
It is also necessary that all violence come to an
end. We condemn all attacks that cause harm to the
civilian population and damage civilian infrastructure.
For a comprehensive and durable peace in the
region, other issues relating to the Arab lands
remaining under occupation are also important. For the
Middle East peace process to succeed, progress must
also be made on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks. Those
critical issues must not be lost sight of amid the
unprecedented social and political upheaval that the
region is witnessing.
In fact, developments in the region call for
consolidation of the collective efforts of the

13

S/PV.6706

international community to assist the countries in
undertaking inclusive political processes and
implementing reforms to meet the legitimate
aspirations of their people. In such collective efforts,
we must respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all countries. It is important that
the grievances of the people be addressed through
dialogue and negotiations rather than through resort to
arms. No action should be taken from outside that
might exacerbate the problems and give rise to
extremism.
India has been steadfast in its support for the
Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet Road Map. That support was reiterated to the
Palestinian leadership last week when our Minister for
External Affairs visited Ramallah.
India also remains committed to continuing its
development cooperation with Palestine through direct
budgetary support, training of personnel in various
areas, annual contributions to UNRWA and projects
under the India, Brazil and South Africa (IВSA) Fund.
Palestine is recognized by more than two thirds
of the membership of the United Nations. That was
clearly demonstrated by the overwhelming vote in
Paris on 31 October 2011 in favour of Palestine’s
membership in UNESCO. As the first non-Arab
country to have recognized Palestine, in 1988, India
remains convinced that Palestine meets all criteria for
United Nations membership, as set out in the United
Nations Charter, and deserves to become a full-fledged
member of the Organization. We hope that the Security
Council will support Palestine’s application for
membership in the United Nations sooner than later.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s support for
the Quartet’s efforts to find a lasting resolution for the
Israel-Palestinian issues, based on the two-State
solution. India stands ready to play its role in the
Council’s collective endeavour to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Middle East, at the core of which is the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, retains the attention of the
Security Council, which today is devoting a public

14

debate to the topic. I would like to congratulate the
South African presidency for giving the Council, once
again, the opportunity to take up this issue, which is of
concern to the Council and to the delegation of Togo. I
would also like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.
The peace process between Israel and Palestine
continues to experience difficulties. There has been
little progress on the ground. Unfortunately, acts of
violence continue to be perpetrated by both sides. The
lack of trust between the parties, above all the absence
of political will, and the pressure of national public
opinion are in part at the root of the stagnating
situation.
At a time when the Palestinian Authority is
carrying out efforts to garner international recognition
of Palestine with a view to the creation of a State of
that name, diplomacy has not yet produced the desired
results on the ground, even as the international
community continues to rest its hope for a lasting
peace based on the principle of land for peace.
Moreover, the announcement in the last quarter of 2011
of new settlements and the approval on 27 November
2011 of a plan for the construction of a hundred
housing units in Shilo in the West Bank are hardly
conducive to lasting peace in the region.
In the Gaza Strip, the situation continues to be
difficult due to the blockade, which, in the view of
Togo, should be lifted. The issue of refugees in
Palestinian camps also continues to be a source of great
concern and raises the issue of respect for human
rights.
That is why we hailed the praiseworthy work
undertaken by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
call upon the international community to continue to
provide it with substantial material and financial
support, as recently expressed in its appeal for funding.
On the other hand, rocket fire on Israel and the taking
of extremist positions, which lead to reprisals, must
end, so as to create conditions conducive to sustained
discussions between the two parties.
Against that grim background, we can welcome
some positive acts, such as the release of several
hundred Palestinian prisoners and of the Israeli soldier,
Shalit. Also, the decision to resume transferring the
customs and tax revenues to the Palestinian Authority,
which were frozen after the vote in UNESCO, and the

12-21354

S/PV.6706

willingness demonstrated by the two parties to resume
direct negotiations, as called for by the Quartet in its
statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178), should
be welcomed.
On that last point, Togo would like to note once
again the remarkable work by the envoys of the
Quartet and its representative, Mr. Tony Blair, who, in
the framework of the three cycles of separate meetings,
prepared parties for direct negotiations. The recent
initiative of Jordan to host a meeting of representatives
of the Quartet and Israeli and Palestinian negotiators is
part of the efforts for the resumption of the
negotiations, which have been suspended since
September 2010. This is why dialogue must always be
encouraged, for we know that the progress obtained in
the region, albeit limited, was possible only thanks to
negotiations.
Togo reiterates its support to the Quartet and calls
on the two parties to overcome their differences and to
bear in mind the interests of their peoples and the
future of the region as they engage in direct
negotiations with the objective of reaching a definitive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Togo, which has good relations with Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, believes that there can be no
peace without negotiations carried out in good faith by
the two parties. My country’s position has always been
for the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within secure and internationally
recognized borders. I also wish to urge our friends in
Israel and Palestine to encourage and support the peace
process.
Along those lines, all acts inciting violence, from
either side, must end. Israel must also be recognized by
all Palestinian parties as a partner and interlocutor with
whom they must negotiate. The Quartet, which is the
facilitator of these negotiations, must also be the
guarantor of the application on the ground of the
outcome of the negotiations.
The Security Council should continue to seek a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Of course, it
is difficult to agree on this issue within the Council,
but the Council’s responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security
requires that it bring sufficient pressure to bear on the
two sides to ensure that they negotiate in good faith so
as to come to a definitive solution to the conflict,

12-21354

which has pitted these two sides against each other for
too long. It is undeniable that the settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in a just and sustainable
manner will have positive repercussions for peace and
security throughout the Middle East.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President,
and thanking you for travelling to New York to preside
over today’s meeting in the Security Council. I also
wish to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his detailed
report this morning on the current situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Once again, Colombia reiterates its view that the
process for achieving a lasting peace in the Middle
East must be comprehensive, well structured and based
on the principles of the United Nations Charter and the
lofty goals of international peace and security. We
therefore believe that the creation of a viable
Palestinian State, living in peace beside Israel and
having clearly defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders, must be the result of direct
negotiations between the parties. That will ensure
coexistence between those two peoples.
We make particular mention of the meetings that
have been held in Amman between the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators. We welcome these meetings.
They were held in the framework of the plan put
forward by the Quartet on 23 September (see SG/2178)
and under the good auspices of the King of Jordan. We
ask the parties to continue these talks, which could lead
to the prompt resumption of the negotiating process in
a spirit of mutual trust that guarantees the achievement
of lasting and stable peace for which we all hope.
Each of the parties must make efforts to remove
what are considered obstacles in the path of
negotiations, as we have heard today from the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. On the one
hand, the settlements in the occupied territories and the
blockade of Gaza have an adverse impact on the wellbeing of the populations and on the human rights
situation, as well as on access by those people to basic
services, particularly with regard to health and
education, as revealed recently by Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos to the Council. We also must find
solutions to the legitimate concerns of Israel with
regard to its security and must put an end to all acts of
violence against its people.

15

S/PV.6706

We believe that in order to achieve lasting peace,
the parties must abstain from adopting unilateral
measures that contravene international law and are
aimed at harming or endangering civilians. The
international community, in turn, must do everything
possible to ensure that the parties take effective
measures to guarantee respect for and enjoyment of the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people.
My delegation wishes to stress the achievements
of the Palestinian Authority in preparing its institutions
for the creation of a State. We therefore support the
actions of the international community to strengthen
the capacities of the Palestinian institutions to make a
viable, independent sovereign State possible for the
well-being of its people.
With regard to Syria, we remain concerned at the
extremely serious human rights situation in that
country and the lack of progress in implementing the
various initiatives put forward by the Arab League. We
insist on the absolute need to put an end to all acts of
violence. We welcome the efforts of the Arab League
to avoid further worsening of the situation and to find a
political solution to the crisis in Syria. We urge the
Government of Syria and the opposition to initiate a
political dialogue aimed at the establishment of a
government of national unity and at setting favourable
conditions for calling elections.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by greeting you, Mr. President, and thanking
you for being here to preside over our meeting. I wish
to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing, which
was quite complete.
The Palestinian question has been deadlocked for
a number of years now, after a great many efforts.
Today, we see that we are at a critical and historic
juncture. The peace process in the Middle East now
faces major challenges as a result of the obstacles put
in its path by Israel. We note that there is a lack of
political will to allow the Palestinian people to enjoy
their rights and establish an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Those obstacles and
procrastination tactics — along with the ongoing
crises, especially with regard to the settlements policy,
home demolitions and the confiscation of Palestinian
land and property, including villages and towns being
cut off as a result of the construction of the separation
wall, in spite of international and Arab peace

16

initiatives — mean that, unfortunately, the two-State
solution cannot be achieved.
Last week, Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, spoke about the current state of
affairs and provided us with figures and statistics that
clearly illustrate the negative and dangerous impact of
the settlements policy, in particular with regard to the
economic, social and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people. That also has a negative impact on
reaching a durable solution at the international level. In
addition, some Israeli settlers carry out systematic and
repeated attacks against the Palestinian people, which
the Israeli authorities do not deter or punish.
The Israeli occupying authorities in Jerusalem
have stepped up settlement activities, both in Jerusalem
in general as well as in East Jerusalem and
neighbouring areas. A number of excavations are taken
place under the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in blatant violation
of international norms. We must ensure respect for this
pivotal city in order to arrive at a solution to the
Middle East issue. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility and help to find a solution to
this very complex problem involving a city of great
importance to all monotheistic religions.
The Council should work quickly to meet the
legal, moral and political obligations incumbent upon it
and the Organization vis-à-vis the Palestinian people,
whose right to establish an independent State should be
realized. As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Morocco supports all international and
regional efforts aimed at relaunching the peace process,
in particular with regard to the Jordanian initiative,
which we truly hope will make it possible to resume
negotiations. Once the desire and political will for
peace are made clear by both parties, especially by the
Israeli people in rejecting anything that obstructs
peace, my delegation will not hesitate to promote every
effort aimed at comprehensive and just peace based on
international legitimacy.
This conflict has lasted far too long. We must find
a lasting and comprehensive peace. A great number of
regional and international initiatives have been
launched, with Arab States putting forward a bold
initiative demonstrating our good faith and
commitment to achieve peace. The elements of an
ultimate solution are now clear to everyone, as are the
details. Israel must demonstrate political will and

12-21354

S/PV.6706

determination to arrive at a genuine solution that takes
into account the aspirations and rights of the
Palestinian side. Israel must demonstrate on the ground
its desire to negotiate sincerely in order to achieve
peace, security and cooperation. We all want to see
peace in the region, which has suffered more than any
other part of the world. This is a region that has
suffered from wars and tragedies and whose people
year for peace, coexistence and cooperation.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this debate
today. I would also like to thank Mr. FernandezTaranco for his briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
It has been more than one year since the start of
the revolution in Tunisia, which sparked the wave of
calls for democratization across the Middle East. The
process of change and reform continues in Tunisia,
Egypt, Yemen and Libya. Although the process will be
long and difficult, we believe that it will result in the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of the peoples
of all four countries. We, our international partners and
the United Nations will continue to support the process
of reform in every way we can. But we are clear that
the primary responsibility for shaping the future in all
those nations lies with the people themselves.
In Syria the struggle for freedom continues to be
crushed with horrific brutality by a regime that has
failed to recognize the unstoppable momentum of its
people’s desire to win their legitimate universal rights.
It is simply a fact, borne out by countless examples
over recent history, that autocratic regimes that use
repression to cling to power do not survive indefinitely.
The Syrian regime must now stop its prevarication,
procrastination and deception. In accordance with the
League of Arab States plan of action and its
communiqué of 22 January, the regime must
immediately and verifiably put an end to the violence,
release all those who have been arrested during the
protests, withdraw all military and security forces from
cities and towns and allow free access to international
media. It is time for the Security Council to take robust
action in support of the Arab League, with the
objective of stopping the violence and, as the
communiqué makes clear, ushering in a rapid Syrianled political transition that leads to free and fair
elections.

12-21354

In that context, we are concerned about the
supply of weapons into Syria — whether sales to the
Government or illegal smuggling to the regime or the
opposition. When questioned by the BBC on
16 January about the supply of weapons to the Syrian
Government, the representative of one Council member
responded that continued sales of arms to Syria had
“no effect on the situation at all”. We fundamentally
disagree. It is glaringly obvious that transferring
weapons into a volatile and violent situation is
irresponsible and will only fuel the bloodshed.
Against the backdrop of changes across the
Middle East, it is as crucial as ever to ensure that the
Palestinians too secure their legitimate rights. The
creation of a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State is long
overdue. The new talks taking place in Jordan have,
thankfully, ended the protracted impasse. But those
must be much more than just talks or an attempt by one
side or the other to shift the blame for failure. Both
sides must now present concrete plans on borders and
security as the basis of substantial negotiations of two
of the core issues.
In order for those talks to be successful, they
need to be conducted in an atmosphere conducive to
making progress. It is difficult to see how such an
environment can be created while settlement-building
and settler violence continue. Israel’s continued
settlement announcements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, send a devastating
message. The systematic and deliberate expansion of
settlements not only damages the prospects for a
negotiated settlement, it threatens the very idea of the
future Palestinian State. Along with the other European
members of the Council, as well as a number of other
Council members, we were clear, following last
month’s briefing (see S/PV.6692), that all settlement
activity, including in East Jerusalem, must cease
immediately and that Israel should reverse its
announced plans.
We believe that a negotiated solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict is achievable. The parameters
are well known to all: borders based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps; security arrangements that respect
Palestinian sovereignty and demonstrate that the
occupation is over, while protecting Israeli security; a
fair and agreed solution for refugees; and Jerusalem as
the capital of both States.

17

S/PV.6706

If the parties fail to present and negotiate on
concrete proposals on borders and security, it will not
be because of a lack of solutions. There have been
many options aired over decades of negotiations.
Failure will be a direct result of a lack of political will.
Neither party can afford to demonstrate such
complacency in the context of a radically changing
region.
Mr. Wittig
(Germany):
I
thank
you,
Mr. President, for guiding our meeting today. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. Germany
aligns itself with the European Union statement to be
delivered later on.
On many occasions, we have deplored the
political stalemate in the Middle East. We have
consistently urged for efforts to find a political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to be intensified.
Therefore, we very warmly welcome the Jordanian
initiative in support of Quartet efforts to facilitate
direct contacts between the parties with the aim of
resuming direct and meaningful negotiations.
Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
peace. The viability of a two-State solution must not be
jeopardized by developments on the ground, in
particular, continued settlement construction in
Jerusalem and Area C. At the end of December, we
discussed the settlement issue in depth in the Council
and, together with France, the United Kingdom and
Portugal, outlined our concerns. As a matter of
urgency, we want to see comprehensive proposals on
borders and security, as envisaged by the Quartet
statement of 23 September of last year, and confidencebuilding measures that help to build trust between the
parties and that demonstrate a genuine commitment to
start meaningful negotiations. Any statements or
developments referring to possible settlement plans for
the area around Jerusalem called E1 are of particular
concern. Pushing forward with such plans would mean
cutting off East Jerusalem from the West Bank. That
would have a highly negative impact on the viability
and contiguity of a Palestinian State in the occupied
territories in the context of a two-State solution, if not
make it possible.
We welcome measures taken by the Israeli
authorities in response to increasing settler violence.
We trust that determined law enforcement will bring

18

the perpetrators to justice, in compliance with the
obligation to protect civilians under international law.
Forced relocations of Palestinians in Area C must
be halted and the implementation of demolition orders
in that Area must be stopped. Restrictions on access
and movement should be further lifted. Palestinians
must be allowed to use their natural resources in
Area C.
On Gaza, import capacity has increased but we
are still at only 40 per cent of the weekly volume of the
first half of 2007. Much more, also with regard to
exports, is needed to allow the Gaza economy to
recover and to generate jobs. Further progress on
access and movement would also contribute to easing
legitimate Israeli security concerns as it would
strengthen the business sector, at the expense of radical
forces, and could help dry up the financial basis for
Hamas provided by the tunnel business.
Rockets targeting the Israeli civilian population
continue to be launched from Gaza. We strongly
condemn those attacks. There is no justification for that
indiscriminate violence. It must end.
There was mention of the Mufti of Jerusalem’s
inflammatory speech on 9 January at a rally marking
the forty-seventh anniversary of the founding of Fatah.
We strongly condemn that speech. Such incitement
against the Jewish people is repulsive, unacceptable
and purely anti-Semitic. Jerusalem is a city sacred to
three faiths and all its religious leaders should promote
respect and tolerance.
On its tenth anniversary, the Arab Peace Initiative
also deserves renewed attention. The Arab Spring has
demonstrated that the peoples in the region want to
shape the future on a peaceful basis through
negotiations and discussions, not by the use of
violence. Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That
ambition must be turned into reality — the creation of
a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with the State of Israel.
On Syria, we welcome the important decision
taken by the League of Arab States just two days ago.
A clear signal from the Council that supports the
initiative of the League of Arab States in all its aspects
is needed. The Council should condemn the continued
and systematic human rights violations and the use of

12-21354

S/PV.6706

force against civilians by the Syrian authorities and
demand an immediate end to all violence. It must recall
that all those responsible for all violence and human
rights violations should be held accountable. It must
build on the decisions of the League of Arab States, in
particular those taken last Sunday.
We fully support the efforts of the League of Arab
States in all their aspects. We welcome the intention of
the Arab League to appoint a special representative on
Syria and to seize the Security Council of the situation
in Syria. We would therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States and the President
of the ministerial follow-up committee briefing the
Security Council as soon as possible on the Arab
League’s initiative to solve the crisis in Syria.
To solve the Syrian crisis there should be Arab
ownership, but with the strong unified support of the
Security Council. With the steps taken by the Arab
League, a page has been turned, and the Security
Council now needs to respond with one voice.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to join
others in welcoming you, Mr. Minister, to the Council
and to thank you for chairing our debate. I also thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his very thorough
briefing, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements. Portugal naturally associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later by Ambassador
Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European Union.
We are at the dawn of the defining moment of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Tomorrow, the
parties will meet for the fifth time in Amman since the
beginning of January. Portugal commends King
Abdullah II and the Jordanian Government for their
endeavours in facilitating direct talks between Israelis
and Palestinians on the basis of the September Quartet
statement. We are encouraged by those developments,
and we urge both sides to continue to engage seriously
in this important process and to take concrete steps
towards the full and timely implementation of the
Quartet’s 23 September statement in all its elements.
Portugal welcomes the submission of the
Palestinian proposals on borders and security by the
Palestinian negotiator to his Israeli counterpart. We
also take note that Israel has responded by presenting a
number of issues for discussion. We strongly encourage
Israel to take a step further and also submit its views
on borders and security in clear terms.

12-21354

The creation of an independent and viable
Palestinian State is long overdue. As I have repeatedly
stated, the only solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict lies in a political and comprehensive
agreement based on two States living side by side in
peace and security. Portugal therefore fully supports
the Quartet process and efforts to reach an agreement
between the parties on all core issues on the basis of
the internationally endorsed parameters by the end of
2012, at the latest. If that is to succeed, the parties must
commit themselves seriously to negotiations, show
good faith and refrain from provocative actions that
undermine confidence in each other.
Last week, the Council was briefed by UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos on the dire humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. As she made perfectly
clear, the humanitarian dimension of the Israeli
occupation is of the gravest concern. In Gaza, the
blockade has just been reinforced with the removal of
Karni crossing infrastructure, leaving Kerem
Shalom — which has considerably less capacity — as
the sole commercial crossing between Gaza and Israel.
We regret this development, and urge the Government
of Israel to fully implement resolution 1860 (2009) in
order to allow the reconstruction of the destroyed and
damaged infrastructure and the recovery of the Gaza
economy,
thereby
reducing
the
population’s
dependence on international aid.
On its part, Hamas, as the de facto authority in
Gaza, must end all rocket attacks against Israel, which
we vehemently condemn. All parties must refrain from
actions that exacerbate tensions and threaten calm and
security in and around Gaza. Israel’s right to security
and to protect its own citizens, which is
unquestionable, must not be secured at the cost of
unnecessary human suffering in Gaza.
In the West Bank, the situation in Area C and
East Jerusalem is most troubling. Here, settlement
expansion, increasing settler violence, stringent zoning
and planning regimes, evictions and demolitions,
restrictions on access and movement that deny
Palestinians essential services, and the use of their land
and resources are fostering the forced displacement of
Palestinian communities. As Valerie Amos also recalled
on Wednesday, in the West Bank 46 per cent of land is
off-limits to Palestinians, who are faced with a severely
constrained and shrinking living space in which to
sustain their livelihoods.

19

S/PV.6706

The human and political toll of these policies and
developments on the ground is absolutely devastating.
By increasingly expanding settlements, which are
illegal under international law, fragmenting the West
Bank and isolating East Jerusalem from other
Palestinian territory, Israel is actively destroying the
viability of a contiguous and sovereign Palestinian
State, and consequently the prospects for peace.
Pending a political agreement that solves all final
status issues, Israel must halt its illegal actions and
fully abide by its obligations under international law.
The peace we all envision for the Middle East is a
lasting and comprehensive one. This year will mark the
tenth anniversary of the Arab Peace Initiative. Its
premises and elements remain as valid today as they
were a decade ago. We call upon Israelis and Arabs,
alongside the Quartet efforts on the Israeli-Palestinian
track, to seriously engage on the other dimensions of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. The full implementation of
the Arab Peace Initiative would enable Israel’s
integration into its regional environment and the
normalization of its relations with the Arab and
Muslim world, thus enabling a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all in the Middle East.
A year ago, the people of Tunisia took to the
streets to demand freedom and democracy, and set in
motion a wave that quickly changed the face of the
Arab world. As the past year has shown, political
transition and societal transformation are complex and
challenge-ridden, but we trust that the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and
Yemen will be fulfilled. It is essential that those
charged
with
implementing
transition
and
transformation do so on the basis of dialogue,
inclusiveness, equal rights for all citizens, and the rule
of law. Exclusion, repression and violence are simply
not the answer. They are never the answer.
In this context, Portugal remains gravely
concerned about the continuing violence and the daily
loss of life in Syria. Notwithstanding the deployment
of the observer mission of the League of Arab States,
the Syrian authorities have not altered their brutal
repression of the Syrian people, and continue with the
widespread and systematic violation of human rights.
Thus, the situation continues to spiral dangerously out
of control, with the risk of plunging Syria and the
region into a bloody sectarian conflict.

20

Portugal fully supports and commends the efforts
of the League of Arab States in seeking a solution to
the current crisis, and urges the Syrian authorities to
abide by their commitment to immediately and fully
implementing the Arab plan of action of 2 November
2011 and the League of Arab States proposals for a
peaceful transition in Syria.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I welcome you, Sir, to
the Security Council and thank you for convening
today’s debate.
I should like to thank Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for a very difficult assessment, which he gave in a very
honest fashion. I also align my delegation with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Egypt and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively.
As members are well aware, Pakistan has stood
by its Palestinian brethren in their six-decade quest for
the realization of their inalienable right to selfdetermination. Today, the protagonists of the Arab
Spring, citing democracy, have said much the same
thing with respect to many parts of the world. We
therefore call upon the Security Council to transform
its words into resolute action, notwithstanding the very
welcome recent Quartet activities in the Middle East.
The Council should ensure a mechanism to implement
its decisions on Israel and Palestine; if it fails to do so,
it will further undermine its own credibility.
While we deliberate endlessly in the Security
Council, the Palestinian observer showcased today how
his people continue to suffer at the hands of what they
call an occupation force. I am not terribly sure whether
his cry for help is condemned to be unheard here or
whether his people’s dreams of peace and tranquility
are not shared by others while they continue to draw
world attention to their encirclement and the
uncrossable barriers surrounding them.
The settlement activity of Israel continues sadly
unabated. The Middle East Quartet and the
international community seem to be in a haze of
suspended promises. The Palestinians want a halt to
this settlement activity — a demand that is endorsed by
the Council and universally supported — yet there is
seemingly no recourse on the matter. As some speakers
have mentioned today, last week Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos informed the Council

12-21354

S/PV.6706

that settlement activity had rendered 43 per cent of the
West Bank unusable for Palestinians, and had impeded
access to services, leading to increased violence and
severe starvation in the territory.
The Gaza strangulation and starvation are neither
legally justifiable nor morally tenable. They are
systematically eradicating the space for the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State. In my
mind, they also constitute a major roadblock to peace.
Settlement activity and peace are mutually exclusive.
This strangulation was further extended and enforced
by a decree with effect from 2 January. So life in Gaza
will not, cannot, return to normal. We therefore call for
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). We
would like to join the civilized world and suggest that,
to stop strangulation and starvation, the United Nations
should arrange a flotilla of its own to carry relief
supplies to the hapless Gazans. Surely the Israelis
cannot deny United Nations humanitarian supplies
under United Nations auspices.
I would like to mention that, to my mind, the
progress that the Palestinians have made in establishing
State institutions over the past couple of years, despite
overwhelming obstacles, has been extraordinary — a
fact that was not only accepted by a number of
independent observers but that was also manifested in
the acceptance of its membership last year by
UNESCO. There is no gainsaying the fact that the
Palestinians are working towards full United Nations
membership as a just reward.
I would like now to come to a point that has been
whispered about in certain corridors of late. Someone
asked “Have you noticed how often we mention Iran,
Syria, Nigeria, Libya and the Sudan?” They wonder,
and I wonder with them, whether we should be afraid,
being a Muslim, since all those countries seem to come
from that category. A lot of people say that the way
things are going, we are going to be the next 70 per
cent of Council work; should we not get a permanent
seat as well? I wonder if we are doing right in
frightening the world into religious ethnicities. I do not
think it is beneficial to the Council or this institution.
While I say that with just a passing reference, I do wish
to say it because people are talking about it. I think that
when talk starts, it is a matter of time before people get
worried about things. That is a sort of worriment that I
would respect many of my colleagues here in
addressing in a fashion that says it is not so. I hope it is
not so.

12-21354

Having said that, let me also say that I am
confident that that sort of scare will not be encouraged
by the Council and that, as was mentioned by various
people in various aspects, we will be referring to other
important aspects of the world under discussion here
today, in a fashion that promotes democracy,
representative Government, et cetera. But, as they say,
why does this get mentioned as regime change? Should
not regime change be an outward feeling of everyone
within their own countries to motivate change? What
happens if that change takes on some other aspect that
is not acceptable to those surveying the scene from faroff shores? I believe that this may not sound too
reasonable, but I do wish we would be reasonable and
not allow something like this to emanate from the
sacred halls of the Chamber.
Therefore, Pakistan supports lasting peace for all
the inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of
religion, ethnicity or nationality. That is important. The
framework for peace in the Middle East is laid down
elaborately in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), as well as in the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.
We hope that the international community will
lend its rightfully so moral and political weight to
nudge the process towards our common objective of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine, as
has been decided by the international comity many
times for years, living side by side and in peace with
all its neighbours, including Israel.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez- Taranco for his briefing.
The region of the Middle East is undergoing
sweeping transformations. We understand people’s
yearning to take their destiny into their own hands by
fundamentally changing the direction of their internal
and social-economic systems. The role of the
international community should consist of helping
them to find the most effective and least painful route
towards achieving that goal. Attempts by outside forces
to manipulate the situation from afar or to bring to
power certain political, ethnic or religious groups
rather than others to serve their own interests are
fraught with grave consequences as much for the

21

S/PV.6706

people of individual countries as for regional stability
and international peace and security.
The turmoil in the Middle East should not
obscure the need for a Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
Moreover, as the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Abbas, underscored during his recent trip to
Moscow, intensifying efforts to break the stalemate in
the Palestinian-Israel peace process on the universally
accepted basis of international law constitutes an
important factor in regional stability that, in turn,
would favour Israeli security.
The yearnings of the Palestinian people are well
known, namely, the swiftest possible settlement of the
conflict, the establishment of an independent, viable
and territorially indivisible State with its capital in East
Jerusalem, according to the 1967 borders, living side
by side in peace and security as good neighbours with
Israel, and a resolution of the issue of refugees.
As with other crises, the solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli problem can be found only through
negotiations, and not through force. In that respect, we
are seriously concerned by the continued periodic
isolation of the Gaza Strip. We call upon all sides to
refrain from the use of force and to prevent armed
clashes. We welcome the beginning in Amman, thanks
to Jordan’s assistance, of direct Palestinian-Israeli
contacts with a view to resuming a substantive
negotiating process and achieving an equitable, lasting
solution on the basis of international law. We believe
that both sides will be able to show a constructive
approach, that they will uphold their obligations under
the road map — inter alia, that they will draw up and
implement confidence-building measures — and that
they will refrain from unilateral acts of provocation.
Along with other members of the Quartet of
international mediators, Russia will work towards
relaunching
the
substantive
Palestinian-Israeli
negotiation process and towards establishing an
atmosphere conducive to that end.
Of particular importance in that context is the
immediate cessation of Israeli settlement activities on
the West Bank of the Jordan River and in East
Jerusalem. Such activity is illegal and seriously
undermines international efforts to achieve a settlement
on the basis of a two-State solution. We cannot help but
be concerned by the rise in violence towards
Palestinians and their property in the West Bank, which
has been subjected to settler aggression that goes

22

virtually unpunished. The demolition of Palestinian
buildings, the expropriation of Palestinian property,
restriction of their freedom of movement and other
violations of international humanitarian law have
unfortunately become a daily fact of life. That must be
brought to a halt.
In our view, the arrest by the Israeli military of
Palestinian members of Government is inappropriate.
We were particularly concerned to learn of the
detention of a leader of the Palestinian Legal Council
who was elected in 2006. That kind of action is hardly
conducive to building the atmosphere of trust required
for conducting a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli
peace process.
We call on the Israeli Government to take strong
measures to swiftly normalize the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip: lift the blockade and help
restore its effective trade with the outside world.
The Palestinian people have an undeniable right
to full membership in international organizations and
can count on Russia’s support in that regard.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Ebrahim, the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, and thank
him for presiding over today’s open debate. I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing. I have listened attentively to the
statements delivered by the observer of Palestine and
the representative of Israel.
The Middle East peace process is currently at an
impasse, which is a source of great concern to China.
We consistently advocate the settlement of disputes
through political negotiations on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map for peace in the Middle East, with a
view to ultimately realizing an independent Palestinian
State living in peace with Israel.
China welcomes and supports any and all
measures that would help to break the current deadlock
in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations and relaunch the
dialogue. We appreciate the recent efforts of Jordan
and the Middle East Quartet to facilitate direct contact
between the parties. We hope that the relevant efforts
to promote peace will help to ensure the early
resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations
and achieve substantive results. China supports a

12-21354

S/PV.6706

greater role for the Security Council in resolving the
Middle East issue.
Israel’s settlement activities are a major obstacle
to the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace
negotiations. China expresses its serious concern at
Israel’s recent approval of plans to build new
settlements. China has always opposed Israel’s
establishment of Jewish settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We urge
Israel to immediately cease settlement construction, to
act prudently and to actively align itself with
international efforts to promote peace so as to create
conditions for the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations.
The security and humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Gaza, remains
grim. China hopes that the relevant parties will
exercise restraint, avoid any escalation of tensions in
Gaza, effectively implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions and fully lift the blockade of Gaza.
China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people as they work to regain their
legitimate national rights. We have consistently held
that the building of an independent State is the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people and is a basis
for the implementation of the two-State solution. China
supports the establishment of a fully sovereign,
independent Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. China
supports Palestinian membership in the United
Nations.
The Syrian-Israeli and Lebanonese-Israeli tracks
are also important components of the Middle East
peace process. A comprehensive solution to the Middle
East issue is inextricably linked to peace negotiations
between Syria and Israel and between Lebanon and
Israel. China firmly supports the just cause of Lebanon
and Syria to maintain their sovereignty and territorial
integrity and recover their occupied territories. China
supports the Arab countries in their strategic choice in
seeking a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank your country, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s open debate, and you, Sir, for
presiding over this meeting. We extend our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernández-Taranco for his informative briefing. We

12-21354

have also listened carefully to the statements made by
the representative of Israel and the observer of
Palestine.
Over the past two years, the situation in the
Middle East has gained increasing attention on the
agenda of the Security Council and also in
international public opinion. Events have evolved at
dizzying speed, often demonstrating contradictory
trends.
The so-called Arab Spring has inspired many who
call for societies that are more democratic, more
participatory and more tolerant, and where social
justice prevails. As was foreseeable, however, the
concrete expression of those popular demands varies
from one country to another and has so far produced
differing outcomes. The refreshing and stimulating
winds also bring signs of growing tensions, both within
countries and between States. In accordance with this
Council’s mandate to maintain international peace and
security, we are obliged to closely follow unfolding
events, keeping clearly in mind that the primary
responsibility for resolving intra-State conflicts lies
with the citizens of the country concerned.
In the spirit of Chapter VI of the Charter, we
believe that whatever action the Council takes to
support the parties directly involved in processes that
involve conflicts should give priority to preventivediplomacy measures. In our opinion, invoking Chapter
VII is a last resort. Moreover, in keeping with the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, we advocate working
very closely with regional and subregional entities, in
this case with the League of Arab States.
I will mention only a few specific issues
pertaining to the Middle East region.
In regard to Lebanon, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent visit and his productive meetings with
its Government officials and main political
stakeholders. We commend the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia for having organized the
high-level meeting on reform and transitions to
democracy. We urge the Government of Lebanon to
continue meeting all of its international obligations,
especially those related to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon and those derived from resolution 1701
(2006). We support the efforts to maintain its security,
and we also underscore the need to cease violations of
Lebanese airspace, which, in our opinion, are
unacceptable.

23

S/PV.6706

I now turn to what is perhaps the most urgent
topic on the before the Council in the Middle East: the
situation in Syria. We support demanding that the
parties immediately cease the use of force and adopt
concrete measures that will lead to reconciliation.
However, the term “parties” is an abstract
concept. We believe that popular demands expressed in
a peaceful way cannot be compared to a Government
responding with force to those demands. That type of
situation, as we have learned far too well in many Latin
American countries, tends inevitably to devolve into
violations of civilians’ human rights, posing a serious
danger of free-falling into a dynamic whereby
repression provokes armed resistance, leading to a
spiral of violence with unforeseeable consequences.
That is precisely the situation that the Secretary
General of the League of Arab States described in his
report of 22 January to that body’s Council. We trust
that the presence of Arab League monitors and the
search for what is called an Arab solution to the
situation will help keep Syria from the brink. We
support the agreement proposed by the Arab League
Council at its meeting last Sunday. That matter will no
doubt require some type of collective pronouncement
by the Security Council.
I would now like to address the age-old dispute
between Israel and Palestine, which is always a
background to the tensions that affect the Middle East.
For our part, we favour the creation of a viable,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living in
peace and harmony within secure and defensible
borders next to the State of Israel. We understand that
realizing that vision falls to both parties, Israel and
Palestine, through direct negotiations on all
outstanding issues. Based on our belief that supporting
such negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis is
the only means to resolve their current differences, we
welcome the direct meetings held between the parties
in recent weeks in Amman — the first of their kind in
more than a year and a half. Moreover, we believe that
the Council must continue to support the actions of the
Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative, and at the same
time guarantee that the peace process moves forward
so that the parties can achieve a definitive solution.
However, we also note an increasing divergence
between the suggestions offered by the Quartet and the
political realities on the ground. The Council must
therefore address those obstacles, which include,
among others, illegal settlement expansion in the

24

occupied territories, which greatly complicates
progress in the peace process. Our position on the
settlements is that they are illegal under international
law and that they constitute a serious obstacle for
peace, undermining the requirements for a two-State
solution. At the same time, we are aware of the need to
address the legitimate security concerns expressed by
Israel.
In conclusion, in each of the unique Middle East
situations on the Security Council agenda, it behoves
us to call upon opposing parties to renounce the use of
violence and to search for negotiated solutions to their
differences. For that to occur, the demands welling up
from the grass roots of the various societies must be
heard and addressed. Finding peaceful outcomes to the
various points of tension in the region — each one with
its unique characteristics — is in the interest not only
of the region but of the whole world.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome Mr. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim,
Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation of the Republic of South Africa, and to
thank the South African presidency for convening this
very important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. We are grateful for the briefing on the
subject by Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco.
Azerbaijan welcomes the valuable efforts of
Jordan to revive negotiations and expresses its hope
that the ongoing discussions in Amman will help to
restart the peace process towards the achievement of a
long-awaited comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
It should be made clear that, in contrast to some other
well-known situations involving groundless and
illegitimate territorial claims — including those under
the far-fetched pretext of care for ethnic minority
groups — the people of Palestine have been recognized
as having the right to self-determination and statehood.
That has been affirmed in a number of United Nations
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice in
its advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the
Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (see A/ES-10/273). We support the
application of Palestine for admission to membership
in the United Nations and look forward to a solution to
the issue based on international law.
Azerbaijan also supports the ongoing efforts
towards Palestinian reconciliation and expresses its

12-21354

S/PV.6706

hope that Palestinian unity will soon be achieved. At
the same time, as we have repeatedly stated on a
number of occasions in the past, the lack of agreement
on political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
disrespect for international humanitarian and human
rights law. Indeed, the prolonged occupation of the
Palestinian territories has placed a tremendous burden
on civilians.
We are particularly concerned at the continued
settlement policy and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The reports from both the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations in
that regard are self-evident. Most alarming is that,
apart from their impact on the rights, freedoms and
everyday lives of the Palestinians, settlements cause
serious damage to the peace process and, more
specifically, threaten a two-State solution and the
emergence of a viable Palestinian State. As was
recently noted by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
“continuing settlement construction, expansion
and encroachment on Palestinian land is an
integral part of the ongoing fragmentation of the
West Bank, including the isolation of the East
Jerusalem.”
There is no doubt that such fragmentation undermines
the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, which is to be realized with the creation
of a viable and contiguous Palestinian State alongside
Israel.
Regardless of whether settlements are new or old,
they are illegal under international law and must be
seized immediately, completely and unconditionally.
Pursuant to article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
territory it occupies. That constitutes the basis and
expression of a rule of law prohibiting the
establishment of settlements in the occupied territories
consisting of the population of the occupying Power or
of persons encouraged by the Power to settle those
territories with the intention, expressed or otherwise, of
changing the demographic balance. We proceed from
the importance of reaffirming, with respect to the
occupied Palestinian territories and similar situations
in different parts of the world, the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,

12-21354

achieving the invalidation of activities aimed at the
consolidation of military occupations, initiating urgent
measures towards removing the adverse effects of such
activities and discouraging any further practices of the
same or similar nature.
We are of the view that the Security Council
cannot remain indifferent to situations involving
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. In carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council must react adequately
to put an end to illegal practices and policies and to
ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are
observed and respected.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned at the continuing
destabilization, violence and widespread human rights
violations in Syria, which have resulted in the deaths of
thousands of people. The position of my country in this
regard has been clearly reflected in our support for the
recently adopted General Assembly resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
(Assembly resolution 66/176).
Azerbaijan fully supports the efforts of the
League of Arab States to address all aspects of the
situation in Syria, including its steps aimed at ending
the crisis and acts of violence.
We are strongly of the view that the only solution
to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and
Syrian-led political process. It is important that
obligations with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Syria and all
other States in the region are fully observed and
respected.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the Middle
East. It confirmed our concerns regarding the limited
prospects for a resumption of the peace process, the
continuing repression in Syria and the resulting and
growing threats to the stability of the region.
We hail the diplomatic efforts conducted under
the auspices of the King of Jordan, but our
expectations are limited. The absence of a renewed
method for bringing the parties back to the table is, for
us, a serious stumbling block. For a year we have been
asking that parameters adopted by the international
community frame this resumption of negotiations by
giving the parties a solid basis for trust. Neither the

25

S/PV.6706

Quartet nor the Council has been able to achieve this
objective. These failures have demonstrated that the
will of the parties is not enough.
France believes that only a follow-up mechanism
enlarged to include all stakeholders able to contribute
to a definitive solution, including the United Nations
and this Council, will enable the creation of the
dynamic needed to resolve issues that touch on the
foundations of Israeli and Palestinian national identity.
That said, this is not to lift responsibilities from the
parties themselves. It is to launch a call to all
stakeholders, in this year laden with internal
constraints, to make possible the emergence of
conditions that will allow a credible resumption of
peace talks.
The will of the parties is not enough, but it is
essential. We were struck by the dangerous
developments that characterized the situation on the
ground in 2011, particularly the acceleration of Israeli
settlement activity to a level not seen for a decade. Last
20 December, the four European members of this
Council noted their concern regarding a systematic,
premeditated and deliberate policy of illegal
construction, contravening the vision of a two-State
solution and in violation of international law and the
resolutions of this Council. In the West Bank as well as
in East Jerusalem, the Israeli authorities must
immediately end this policy, which is a threat to the
territorial and economic integrity of the future
Palestinian State.
Regarding the attempt to isolate East
Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank or the forced
displacements of the Palestinian population in Area C,
the changes in the demographic realities on the ground
in violation of the Geneva Convention — as noted by
my Azerbaijani colleague — must be condemned by
the international community. We deplore that the
Council has not been up to the task of issuing a
judgment, of reasserting the principles at the heart of
the two-State solution, when those principles are
threatened.
In Gaza, a radical change in policy is also
required. Ms. Amos indicated this to the Council. In
2011, the blockade, far from having been lifted as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009), instead became
stronger with the closure of the Karni crossing. The
dependence of the economy of Gaza on international

26

aid has been reinforced, as has the control of Hamas
over the destiny of the population.
It is not a question of compromising the security
of Israel, which continues to be the target of rocket
attacks, which we condemn. However, measures must
be undertaken quickly to lighten the weight of the
blockade on the people, who are held hostage. The
viability of the political process also depends on our
support for the partners in the peace process, in
preserving their legitimacy, given the hopes expressed
by their populations.
France is committed to supporting the Palestinian
Authority and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas,
in particular in the context of the Paris Conference,
which contributed to efforts to build Palestinian
institutions. But financial assistance, like the reforms
implemented by Prime Minister Fayyad, come up
against the lack of political perspectives. While
President Abbas has revived efforts to foster
Palestinian reconciliation, he must be supported be so
that the principles of negotiation and peaceful
settlement of conflict, endorsed by the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, may prevail.
I now to turn another topic of concern and
indignation, and that is the situation in Syria. The
repression led by the Syrian leaders against their
people and the systematic and massive violations of
human rights to suppress the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people continue with complete impunity.
More than 5,500 Syrians have lost their lives since last
March in what now can be characterized as crimes
against humanity.
The Syrian regime is dragging its people into
chaos, and the entire region is threatened: refugees
flow
into
neighbouring
countries,
Lebanese
sovereignty is repeatedly challenged, fears for the
future of minorities and of fragile religious
equilibriums are growing, and there are known
violations of the arms embargo imposed on Iran, with
arms flowing to Syria. It is unacceptable that certain
countries, including some in this Council, continue to
provide the very means by which violence is
committed against the Syrian people.
Given the silence of the Council, the Arab League
has taken up the issue. It proposed an action plan to the
Syrian regime last November and sent a monitoring
mission to guarantee the implementation of the plan on
the ground. This weekend, one month since the

12-21354

S/PV.6706

mission’s deployment, the Arab League could report
only the failure of Damascus to uphold its obligations.
None of the League’s four requirements — cessation of
violence, withdrawal of armed forces from cities,
release of political prisoners and free access to the
international media — has been met. The Arab League
has drawn the inevitable conclusions and called for a
peaceful political transition by which President Bashar
Al-Assad would hand over power.
We fully support the Arab League’s plan for
resolving the crisis. It is the only way likely to return
stability to Syria and to preserve stability in the region.
We welcome the Arab League’s request that its
Secretary-General, along with the Chair of the
Interministerial Committee on Syria, be allowed to
report to the Security Council on the situation. It is
indeed crucial that the United Nations to provide all
the necessary assistance to the regional organization
concerned. It is still more necessary that the Security
Council get past the blockages so as to underscore the
legitimacy of this initiative by providing it unanimous
support of the United Nations.
The Council’s ability to contribute to the
resolution of these crises is also a matter of the
credibility of its action at the regional level.
Lebanon, to which the Secretary-General has just
paid a visit, is a country threatened by the spectre of
the civil war unleashed in Syria. In this context, we
call on the Lebanese authorities to continue to work
with all the component parts of Lebanese society. We
hail their commitment to respect all their international
obligations, including those pertaining to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.
In Egypt the people voted in elections that met
the criteria for free democratic expression. The
elections were an important step in the democratic
transition, which must be continued. Power should be
transferred to the elected civilian authorities. The
rights of women and minorities, the rules of free
democratic expression and the basic principle of
rejecting all violence must all be upheld.
In conclusion, I appeal for consistent action on
the part of the Security Council. The Arab Spring has
brought unprecedented upheaval to the Middle East.
The Council must necessarily adapt its actions to the
new reality. We now have a moral obligation to address
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.
That obligation underscores the absolute necessity for

12-21354

the Council to respond unanimously to the crisis in
Syria, which is threatening the entire region. While the
Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council of Arab
States are actively contributing to resolving the
regional crises, it is a matter of the very legitimacy of
the Security Council in the region for it to fully uphold
its responsibilities to maintain international peace and
security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Deputy Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation of the Republic of South
Africa.
South Africa expresses its appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing to the Security Council. We thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements to be delivered later today by the
representatives of Benin and Egypt, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of African States and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
The historical celebrations that took place in
South Africa on 8 January, marking the 100th
anniversary of the African National Congress, the
oldest modern liberation movement in Africa, were a
stark reminder of the resilience of the human spirit. In
1994, after decades of struggle for liberation, South
Africa emerged from the scourge of apartheid to
become an equal among the nations of the world.
The year 2012 marks 45 years since Israel first
occupied Palestinian land. Drawing lessons from our
own experience, we are certain that the Palestinians,
with the assistance of the international community, will
prevail in their quest for a viable State of their own. We
should all play our part in fulfilling the aspirations of
the Palestinian people, who have long yearned for
freedom and who continue to endure the harshness of
Israeli occupation.
In that regard, South Africa remains convinced
that Palestine meets all the criteria for United Nations
membership as set out in the United Nations Charter
and deserves to become a full Member of the
Organization. In addition, we must work towards a
solution that maintains Israel’s right to exist and
ensures long-term peace and stability for its people.

27

S/PV.6706

We have come to the beginning of a new year,
and yet peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis
continues to be elusive. South Africa remains
disappointed that since 23 September 2011, when the
Quartet committed itself to assisting the parties to
make progress in the peace process, tangible progress
has yet to be registered.
We appreciate the efforts of the Quartet over the
past two months, in particular its facilitation of
meetings with the parties, albeit separately. We also
support the Quartet’s appeal urging the parties to begin
direct
negotiations
immediately
and
without
preconditions and to submit proposals on borders and
security. Palestine’s submission of proposals on those
issues is emblematic of its commitment to the prompt
and peaceful resolution of the conflict with its
neighbour. Conversely, Israel’s failure to comply by
omitting to submit proposals as required by the Quartet
on the same issues is disappointing.
My delegation further welcomes the efforts of
Jordan in its attempt to restart direct peace talks. We
can only hope that such discussions will yield positive
results and culminate in an earnest beginning of direct
negotiations between the parties.
It is perhaps opportune that, as the international
community, we ask ourselves some questions, namely,
is it not time to assess the effectiveness of the Quartet
model? And what more can the Security Council do to
help the parties resume negotiations and find lasting
peace?
What is of concern is that, despite attempts to
resuscitate the negotiations, the prospects for direct
talks seem non-existent, as the Israeli Government
continues its acts of aggression, such as ongoing illegal
settlement construction, home demolitions, illegal
excavations of religious sites and restricting the access
and movement of the Palestinian people. It is worth
noting that in the midst of attempts to reinvigorate the
peace process, Israel has continued to issue tenders for
new illegal settlements, including on 3 January, the
same day that deliberations between the parties began
in Jordan. Those illegal actions cast a shadow over the
sincerity of Israel as a partner for peace, especially
since settlements have led to the fragmentation of the
West Bank and the isolation of Jerusalem from the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territories, undermining the
feasibility of a contiguous Palestinian State.

28

Those are antagonistic acts that make the reality
of a two-State solution, as called for by the
international community, a distant dream, if not a pipe
dream. It is the Security Council’s responsibility to act
against such actions, as they violate international law,
including the resolutions of the Council. The last time
that the Council attempted to take action on the
settlements was in February 2011, and we failed to
fulfil our responsibility, despite all of us agreeing that
the settlements are indeed illegal.
Another disturbing development is the escalation
of settler violence in the occupied Palestinian territory.
In that regard, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) recently reported that
settler attacks against Palestinian civilians had
increased by at least 50 per cent. Settler attacks on
civilians, the desecration of Palestinian mosques and
churches and the destruction of property, including the
cutting down of olive trees, should be unequivocally
condemned. It is vital for the Israeli Government, as
the occupying Power, to prevent such acts of violence
and take action against perpetrators. The failure of the
Israeli Government to address violence perpetrated by
settlers has led to a state of impunity that, according to
OCHA, encourages further violence and undermines
the physical security and livelihoods of Palestinians.
We welcome the implementation of the second
stage of the prisoner release agreement, which we hope
will serve as a positive confidence-building measure.
We reiterate that that is a positive step towards greater
cooperation between Israel and Palestine that should be
maintained and built upon. With regard to the
remaining prisoners, we urge the Israeli Government to
fulfil its obligations under international humanitarian
law by ensuring their safety, allowing access to them
by family members and respecting their basic human
rights.
South Africa has always maintained that the
future of Palestine is significantly dependent on the
unity of its people. The Arab Spring augurs well for the
Palestinian struggle. In that regard, we encourage the
Palestinians to take advantage of the new regional
context and strive for greater unity among various
political groupings. In particular, we urge Hamas and
Fatah to implement the Cairo reconciliation agreement
and collectively consolidate the gains of the Palestinian
people. Having learned from our own experience, we
believe that intra-Palestinian unity is essential for longterm reconciliation and sustainable peace in Palestine.

12-21354

S/PV.6706

With regard to the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel’s continued
blockade. We concur with the call made by the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie
Amos, after her visit to Gaza last year, for an end to the
man-made and protracted humanitarian situation
through the lifting of the blockade on Gaza. The
blockade and the restrictions it imposes are in violation
of international humanitarian law, including article 23
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and contrary to the
will of the international community, as expressed in
various Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009). Violence and rocket attacks against Israel
emanating from Gaza are also of concern and should be
condemned. Those actions are indiscriminate and in no
way advance the legitimate Palestinian cause.
On Syria, South Africa has taken note of the
outcome of the Arab League ministerial meeting on
22 January. We welcome the League’s decision to
extend its observer mission and the League’s efforts at
achieving a peaceful resolution of the situation. We
remain deeply concerned about the ongoing violence
by all sides, including the recent spate of car bombings
and the resultant loss of life and injuries. South Africa
emphasizes that the primary goal is for the violence to
cease in Syria. We reiterate that any solution to the
Syrian crisis should be Syrian-led, based on genuine
national dialogue, devoid of any form of intimidation
and free of interference from outside. My delegation
has also taken note of the draft resolution submitted by
the Russian Federation, and we will continue to
participate constructively in the negotiations on the
text.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to not more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this critical juncture
of the Council’s efforts to address the situation in the
Middle East. I should like to start by expressing the
Movement’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council, as well as our thanks for the briefing given
today by Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firmly
convinced of the urgent need for the international
community to renew its resolve to act collectively to
uphold its long-standing commitment to the realization
of the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on the basis of international law and the wellestablished terms of reference of the peace process.
The international consensus that we must reach is the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Serious international action in
a timely manner is immediately required, as the
window of opportunity for actualizing the two-State
solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders is
rapidly closing.

In conclusion, we believe that the current
developments in the Arab world will undoubtedly have
a bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In our
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, it is
now more than ever clear that we should not lose sight
of the broader regional question to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the Council
and other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and the Syrian tracks.

It is regrettable that all serious efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including the
latest initiatives by the Quartet in its 23 September
2011 statement (see SG/2178), and the time frame it set
forth, which will end on 26 January 2012, as well as
the valuable efforts by Jordan to revive negotiations
between the two sides, have been unable to make the
desired progress, due to Israel’s refusal to respect and
adhere to the well-known, clear parameters and the
occupying Power’s insistence to continue illegally and
aggressively changing facts on the ground.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Israel’s actions are in total contradiction to the
two-State solution and to its claim that it accepts the
solution, accepts the Quartet statement and the road
map and actually seeks to end the conflict. Quite the

12-21354

29

S/PV.6706

opposite, Israel’s illegal measures in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly its massive illegal settlement campaign,
are entrenching its nearly 45 years of occupation and
prolonging the conflict and injustice.
In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
recalls that the final status negotiations, which began
with great hopes in September 2010 under the auspices
of United States President Barack Obama, with the
participation of the Quartet, Egypt and Jordan, which
aimed at concluding an agreement within one year,
collapsed just a few weeks later, due to Israel’s refusal
to renew its moratorium on settlement activities, cease
its illegal settlement campaign and abide by the
internationally endorsed parameters for negotiations,
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map.
Even while claiming to cooperate with the
Quartet, Israel has continued daily to violate its road
map obligation to cease all settlement activities,
including as regards natural growth, and to dismantle
all settlement outposts. Israel’s credibility as a peace
partner consequently remains in serious doubt and,
even more dangerously, the two-State formula — as the
most viable solution at the core of a comprehensive
peace settlement — is gravely threatened.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s
continuing pursuit of illegal settlement activities in all
its manifestations, along with the many other illegal
policies and practices it continues to carry out in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls for their immediate and complete
cessation. NAM stresses that all such unlawful
attempts to alter the demographic composition,
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, remains rejected
and unrecognized by the international community. We
call on the Security Council to act for the
implementation of its many resolutions in that regard
and for serious efforts to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations of international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law.
In that connection, NAM calls for the immediate
implementation of the recommendations made by
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, in her recent briefing to the Security

30

Council on 18 January, regarding the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, and to
address specifically the grave impact of Israel’s
settlement policies on the Palestinian people and their
land. Israel’s illegal colonization of the occupied land,
its displacement of the Palestinian civilian population
and its imposition of brutal forms of collective
punishment continue to increase humanitarian suffering
among the Palestinian people, deepen hopelessness and
despair, fragment the territory and undermine its
contiguity and integrity, and raise tensions and
instability. It is a critical situation that must be a cause
for serious concern for the Security Council, in line
with its duty under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
NAM believes that such illegal actions are not
only undermining peace efforts and obstructing the
resumption of credible, direct negotiations but, if they
are not stopped and reversed immediately, they will
actually make it physically impossible to realize the
two-State solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967
borders. The announcements in recent months
regarding the establishment of thousands more
settlement units, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, and the continued Israeli demolition of
Palestinian homes and properties and devious attempts
by the Israeli Government to legitimize its illegitimate
settlement schemes require urgent reaction by the
international community, and specifically by the
Security Council, if the two-State solution to this
conflict is to be salvaged. A strong message must be
sent in rejection of the occupying Power’s continued
settlements, annexation and occupation and in favour
of peace, security, respect of human rights and the rule
of law. The future of both peoples and of the region as
a whole is dependent on that message.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to act and demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations, without exception. Empty pretexts and
illogical justifications for illegal actions must not be
tolerated. It is high time to end the impunity that has
gone on for far too long, to the detriment of regional
and global peace and security. That is why the
Movement firmly believes that calls for compliance
must be backed by credible action, consistent with the
Council’s Charter duties, and as a result of the clear
conclusion that the occupying Power is deliberately
obstructing the attainment of peace and security in our

12-21354

S/PV.6706

region. Israel must be called upon and compelled to
abide by all of its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the road map. That is the real key to advancing the
resumption of direct negotiations and a peaceful
settlement based on the two-State solution to the
conflict.
With regard to the critical humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, NAM emphasizes the need to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to lift fully its illegal
blockade, in accordance with its obligations under
international law, resolution 1860 (2009) and other
relevant United Nations resolutions. Member States
must remain firm in their demand that this
unacceptable and unsustainable situation be brought to
an end, as it continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian people and to negatively impact
international and regional efforts to promote peace.
NAM also wishes to utilize this opportunity to
express its support to the Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be shepherded by Egypt. We
hope that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the
interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people. NAM looks forward to that
achievement and to the holding of Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections in the coming
period.
The members of the Movement share the global
hope that comes with each new year. We are hopeful
that this will finally be the year that brings peace and
justice to the Palestinian people and that finally brings
an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in all aspects.
We are convinced that achieving the two-State solution
to this conflict requires respect for international law
and United Nations resolutions. We insist that the
Security Council has a leading role, which it must play,
in this regard.
The Security Council must demand that Israel
respect its legal obligations. It must also assist the
parties by setting forth clear parameters, as enshrined
in its own resolutions, for peace negotiations that will
actually bring to fruition the two-State solution on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, thereby achieving the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and all its neighbours.
The larger United Nations membership also has a
crucial role to play in upholding international law and

12-21354

United Nations resolutions and advancing a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. In that regard, NAM
continues to believe that concrete efforts by the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
ensure respect for the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, would
be a vital contribution. Accordingly, as mandated by
the Movement, on 16 January, the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau addressed another letter to
Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions, requesting the undertaking of measures,
in conformity with relevant United Nations resolutions,
to convene a conference of the high contracting parties
for that purpose.
At a time when the two-State solution is being
severely weakened and should be strengthened, we
recall the application submitted by Palestine on
23 September 2011 for admission to United Nations
membership. We await Security Council action that
recognizes the legitimate and historic rights of the
Palestinian people and contributes to the peace effort.
Indeed, we are at a critical juncture and must do all we
can collectively to prevent further destabilization and
continuation of this tragic and destructive conflict, and
instead promote peace, justice and security.
Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement condemns Israel’s ongoing violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and the recurrence of serious
breaches of resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement
calls on all concerned parties to implement fullу
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility and to avoid the recurrence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
Finally, in my national capacity, let me say that it
was really regrettable that Ambassador Ron Prosor,
Permanent Representative of Israel, whom I have
known for many years and in different capacities,

31

S/PV.6706

chose to characterize the uprising by the Arab peoples,
including in my country, Egypt, towards democracy,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as
conflicts, and to more blatantly use the Arab uprising
as a pretext to prolong the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian occupied territory and other Arab occupied
territories. To Ambassador Prosor, for whom I have a
lot of respect, I say that the winds of freedom in my
country and in many other Arab countries will only
solidify our determination to achieve a comprehensive
and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict —
but a solution that should be negotiated among equals.
The slogan frequently heard from the Israeli delegation
that Israel is the only democracy in the Middle East
will not be sustained for long.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Let me start by
welcoming you, Mr. President. We are really honoured
that you are presiding over this Council meeting. Allow
me also to congratulate the new members that joined
the Council as of the beginning of this year. I also wish
to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive
briefing, as well as to stress the leading role that the
United Nations should play in the resolution of the
Middle East conflict. In that regard, we commend the
recent visit of the Secretary-General to Lebanon — the
first trip of his new term — during which he reaffirmed
his commitment to Lebanon’s sovereignty and security,
to the aspirations of the Arab peoples and to peace and
stability in the region.
Lebanon associates itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as
with the statements to be made on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab
Group.
The Quartet statement of 23 September reiterated
the obligations of both parties and called upon them to
refrain from provocations (see SG/2178). Yet, in less
than one week from that date, the Israeli authorities
approved a plan to build 1,100 housing units in the
settlement of Gilo on land originally expropriated
mainly from the Palestinian village of Beit Jala. In less
than one month, the same Israeli authorities approved a
plan for the construction of 2,610 units in the
settlement of Givat Hamatos on land illegally annexed
from Beit Safafa and Bethlehem, further encircling and

32

cutting East Jerusalem off from the rest of the West
Bank.
In the past four months, Israel has managed to
expand its settlement activities at an unprecedented
rate. In November 2011, the Israeli Government
announced plans for the construction of 2,000 housing
units in the settlements of Ma’ale Adumim and the
Gush Etzion bloc. At the time, in another unilateral
prejudgment of the outcome of any negotiation, the
Israeli Prime Minister declared that those new areas
“will, under any future agreement, remain part of
Israel”.
Recently, this past December, the Israeli
Government announced another 130 new units in the
settlement of Gilo, as well as plans to construct a
“tourist complex” in the Silwan neighbourhood of
occupied East Jerusalem. This month, the Israeli
Government issued three new tenders for the
construction of yet another 300 settlement units in
occupied East Jerusalem ─ in the settlements of Pisgat
Ze’ev and Har Homa.
According to the latest Human Rights Watch
report, published just yesterday, as of 1 November the
Israeli authorities had demolished 467 Palestinian
homes and other buildings in the West Bank, including
Jerusalem, displacing 869 people. That rate means that
Israel will have forcibly displaced more Palestinians in
2011 than during any year since the United Nations
started collecting cumulative figures. The Israelis have
also uprooted and burned hundreds of olive and
almond trees in Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron.
In East Jerusalem, Israeli bulldozers demolished a
Palestinian-owned structure in order to create a parking
lot for settlers in the Silwan neighbourhood, and razed
a playing field belonging to a Palestinian college for
the purpose of establishing a so-called Israeli national
security college in Al-Sawwanah. In addition, armed
settlers have physically assaulted and injured
Palestinian civilians, including many children, as
documented by reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
OCHA reported that, during 2011, five
Palestinians, including two children, were killed and
over 1,000 Palestinians injured by Israeli settlers or
security forces in incidents directly or indirectly related
to settlements. This January, a settler shot and killed a
15-year-old boy near the Palestinian village of Safa.
OCHA further reported that, in 2011, illegal Israeli

12-21354

S/PV.6706

settlers vandalized over 10,000 Palestinian olive trees,
while Israeli occupation forces destroyed 90 water
structures throughout the West Bank.
OCHA also notes that 90 per cent of Israeli police
investigations into incidents of settler violence during
the past six years were closed without any indictment.
In her last briefing to the Council, the United Nations
Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie
Amos, reported that settler violence in 2011 had
increased by 40 per cent since 2010 and 165 per cent
since 2009.
That is the reality of Israeli settlement activities,
which stands in complete violation of the principles
and provisions of international law — the same
principles and provisions that the Organization was
established to protect and defend, as stated in its
Charter. In resolution 446 (1979), the Security Council
reaffirmed that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies
to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
The said resolution also determined that:
“[T]he policy and practices of Israel in
establishing settlements in the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have
no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.” (resolution
446 (1979), para. 1)

settlements. However, they are the same principles and
provisions that Israel has continued to ignore and
challenge to the point where the number of settlers in
East Jerusalem and the West Bank now exceeds
517,000.
A lasting peace in our part of the world needs to
be a comprehensive and just peace based on the
principles of international law and the United Nations
resolutions. Accordingly, it will also require that Israel
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
line of 4 June 1967 and from the remaining occupied
parts of southern Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is a pleasure to see you,
Mr. President, preside over this meeting today. Let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The Council reached that conclusion decades ago,
and dozens of General Assembly resolutions have
reiterated that settlement activity in the Arab territories
occupied in 1967 are illegal and illegitimate and
constitute an obstacle to peace.

The briefing highlighted the many uncertainties
and difficulties prevailing in the Middle East. In the
midst of that scenario, the contacts entertained by
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Jordan offer a
glimpse of hope, which must be nurtured. Brazil
recognizes and praises the immense amount of political
effort on the Palestinian side to participate in those
talks and to present concrete proposals. We commend
the Palestinian Authority for its concrete and
appreciable efforts towards peace, which show vision,
political resolve and the disposition to achieve peace
through negotiations.

Furthermore, the July 2004 advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the Wall also
concluded that “the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory (including East Jerusalem) have
been established in breach of international law”
(A/ES-10/273, para. 120).

The Palestinian gesture is yet to be met with
equivalent boldness. We therefore urge Israel to engage
in a constructive way. We strongly encourage Israel to
promptly present meaningful proposals on borders and
security, in accordance with the time frame set forth by
the Quartet (see SG/2178).

Here, do we need to also recall that the road map,
put forward by the Quartet and endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003), requires
Israel to freeze “all settlement activity (including
natural growth)” (S/2003/529, annex). It also requires
that Israel “immediately dismantle settlement outposts
erected since March 2001” (ibid).

Israeli settlement activities are contrary to
international law and the single most important
obstacle to peace. The Israeli authorities themselves
are being faced with security challenges emerging from
the counterproductive environment that settlements
produce. Settler violence against Palestinian citizens
and their property is a clear expression of the silent,
but undeniable violence contained in settlement
construction itself.

Those are the principles and provisions of
international law and the United Nations resolutions on

12-21354

33

S/PV.6706

We cannot expect a culture of peace to breed
where settlements, demolitions, attacks and evictions
are the rule. The international community and the
Security Council, in
particular,
have
clear
responsibilities to uphold. A clear condemnation of
settlement activities is needed. We cannot allow the
very principles of peace negotiations to be turned
upside down and to become a logical incentive for
further expropriation and unilateral alteration of the
realities on the ground, particularly around East
Jerusalem.
We reiterate our call on Israel to stop all
settlement activities. That is not a concession to be
made in the course of negotiations, but rather an
obligation under the various resolutions of the Security
Council and international law.
We welcome the fact that the Council heard a
briefing last week by Under Secretary-General Valerie
Amos on the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Regular briefings by the
Secretariat are certainly useful to Council members and
the whole membership.
However, the Council should go beyond that and
resort to other diplomatic tools that would truly allow
it to fulfil its Charter responsibilities in what is perhaps
the single-most demanding challenge on the
international peace and security agenda. Its greater
involvement in search of a solution to the conflict is an
urgent imperative. As a first step, we propose that the
Quartet regularly and fully report to the Council on its
progress or lack thereof. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to visit Palestine in early
February. We look forward to hearing from the
Secretary-General upon his return, and to continuing to
discuss the dire situation of Palestinians living under
occupation.
On the situation in Gaza, allow me to mention
Brazil’s decision to donate $7.5 million to the activities

34

of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East related to
reconstruction. This contribution is an expression of
Brazilian solidarity with the people of Gaza. It adds to
the projects already developed in Palestine with the
support of the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
Fund. Alongside our IBSA partners, we will continue
to call for the immediate, urgent lifting of the
inhumane blockade imposed on 1.5 million human
beings in Gaza.
Brazil remains deeply concerned over the
situation in Syria. We will continue to follow closely
the implementation of the important commitments
made by the Syrian Government to the Arab League,
including allowing foreign media access to the country.
We condemn the continuation of violence. The
complete and immediate end of violence continues to
be of the utmost priority. Resort to armed struggle will
not bring Syria or the region closer to the realization of
legitimate aspirations to democracy, freedom and equal
socio-economic opportunity.
At the same time, the complete cessation of
political repression and full respect for fundamental
freedoms are necessary conditions if reforms are to be
truly credible and effective. We have been following
very closely the efforts of the Arab League to help find
a peaceful and negotiated solution to the current
situation in Syria. The role of the Organization remains
critical in ensuring that such a solution is found
through a nationally-owned political process. The
Security Council can best help if it is able to send a
clear unified message against violence and in support
of such a process.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.

12-21354
