UNITED

NATIONS

Distr.
GENERAL

SECURITY
COUNCil

s/43 23
23 May 1960
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTIm DATED 23 MAY 1960 FROM THE REPRESENTATTI7ES OF
ARGENTINA, C'EYLON, ECUADOR AND TUNISIA ADDRESSED TO
THE PRESIDELV.r OF THE SECURITY CGUNCn.

Deeply concerned with the present international situation, we hav~ the
honour to submit to the cOll$ideration of the Security Council the attached
draft resolution.
Therefore, we request the inclusion of this subject as an item in the
provisional agenda of the Council to be considered by the Council at the
conclusion of item contained in document S/4314.
Accept, etc.
(Slgned) Mario AMADEO
of Argentina

R~presentative

(Signed) Sir Claude CORE.A., K.B.E.
Representative of Ceylon
( Signed) Jose A. CORREA
Representative of Ecuador
(Signed)

Mongi SLIM

Representative of Tunisia

60-12640

/ ...

S/!~32'3

English
Page 2
Argentina, Ceylon, Ecuador, ~\misia:

draft resolution

The Security Council,
Mindful of its responsibility for the maintenance pf international peace
and security,
Noting with regret that tDe hopes of the world for a successful meeting
of the Heads of Government of France, the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and the Union C!f Soviet Socialist Repu'olics bave not been fulfiJ.led,
Considering that these developments have caused great disappointment and
concern in world public opinion,
Considering also that the resulting situation may lead to an increase of
international tensions likely to endanger peace and security,
Being convinced of the necessity to make eV€IJT effort to restore and
strengthen international good will and confidence, based on the established
principles of international law,
Being especj.ally aware of the mounting danger of the continuation of the
armaments race,
1.
Recommends to the Governments concerned to seck solutions of eXisting
international problems by negotiation or other peaceful means as provided in the
Charter of the United Nations;
2.
Appe~ls to all Member Governments to refrain from any action Hhi~h
might increase tensions;
'3. Requests the Governments concerned to continue their efforts towards
disarmament and the prohibition of nuclear weapons tests under an international
control system and their negotiations on the technical aspects of measures
against the possibility of surprise attack, as recommended by the General Assembly
in its resolutions;
4. Urges the Governments of France, the United Kingdom, the United States
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to resume discussions as
soon as possible and to avail themselves of the assistance that the Security
Council ano. other appropriate organs of the United Nations may be Able to render
to this end.
