A /71/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

91st plenary meeting

Thursday, 13 July 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolution (A/71/L.78)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.78.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): My delegation is pleased
to have collaborated with the delegation of Mexico to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.78 for consideration
and adoption by the General Assembly. We welcome
the support received from the many delegations that
participated in the consultations on the text and thank
those that joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
The crisis spawned by the introduction and spread
of cholera in Haiti, which resulted from the actions and
inaction of the United Nations, is not one to which we
can turn a blind eye. It stands starkly as a stain against
the good name of the United Nations and represents
a challenge to our shared purpose of promoting and
preserving human rights, international peace and
security, and development.
Jamaica therefore wholeheartedly welcomed the
apology offered by the former Secretary-General, which

included his acknowledgement that the United Nations
had a moral responsibility to help Haiti’s cholera
victims. We are in full support of the elaboration of the
new United Nations system approach to cholera in Haiti
and call on individual Member States, the embodiment
of our United Nations, to make every effort to repair
the harm caused by cholera and to work to prevent
further outbreaks. That will not be easy, as cholera is
now endemic in Haiti and will continue to affect people
for years to come. It is our responsibility, therefore,
to mobilize the political will and financial support
required to end the transmission of this deadly disease,
which continues to afflict our fellow Member State
some seven years after its outbreak.
Through both its tracks, the new United Nations
approach serves as a strategic plan to effectively tackle
the multiple dimensions and complexities of addressing
the cholera crisis. That includes working from a
humanitarian perspective, addressing the human rights
situation and supporting sustainable development. In
our view, our full response should always ensure a
people-centred approach so that our paramount focus is
on the rights, needs and circumstances of the victims,
their families and communities.
We note with concern the limited resources that
have been made available to fund the cholera response.
It is for that reason that Jamaica supports the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that Member States voluntarily
waive the return of the 2015-2016 unencumbered
balances and credits from miscellaneous income and
adjustments from the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and instead direct them to the United

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21303 (E)

*1721303*

A/71/PV.91

Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. We recognize that, at a minimum, the amount
that could be raised would be small relative to the
amount required. However, given the dire situation,
we believe that every feasible source of funding can
make a difference. In that vein, we also welcome the
appointment of the Secretary-General’s new Special
Envoy for Haiti and express our optimism that her work
to build partnerships with a wide range of stakeholders
to support the United Nations work in Haiti will yield
sustained results.
Jamaica looks forward to opportunities for further
dialogue among the membership on more effective
ways to provide further support for the new approach,
especially with a view to ensuring that the United
Nations lives up to its commitment to the people of
Haiti, in particular the victims of the cholera outbreak
and their families.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/71/L.78, entitled “The
new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti”.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/71/L.78: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Benin, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Cabo Verde, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain,
the Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
the United States of America and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.78?
2/6

13/07/2017

Draft resolution A/71/L.78 was adopted (resolution
71/161 B).
The President: We will now hear statements
following the adoption of the resolution.
Mrs. Nazaire (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank all the
Member States that supported resolution 71/161 B, on
the new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti,
which the Assembly just adopted by consensus. This
adoption reflects the significant international support
for the new approach, which is marked by a more open
and generous strategy with regard to the repercussions
of the cholera crisis in Haiti and, more important,
one that is more in line with the ideal of the universal
solidarity embodied by the United Nations.
My delegation therefore takes this opportunity
to express its overwhelming gratitude to Jamaica and
Mexico for their role as co-facilitators of the resolution.
Their tireless efforts led to the broad support that will
bolster the legitimacy and effectiveness of the new
plan through its increased visibility and the solemn
commitment of the international community to making
an unprecedented effort to mobilize resources and
garner moral support in the pursuit of eradicating
cholera and its adverse effects in Haiti.
For my country, this epidemic has been a calamity
that has served to highlight the significant structural
obstacles to sustainable development in Haiti. My
delegation is gratified that we now have the appropriate
tools to channel the will and efforts of our loyal partners
to this fight, for which my country lacks resources.
In that regard, we welcome the recent nomination of
Ms. Josette Sheeran as the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Haiti.
In conclusion, our hope for success is greatly
renewed with this resolution. For that, my delegation is
extremely grateful to all.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): It was a great honour for Mexico, alongside
Jamaica, to co-facilitate such an important resolution
(resolution 71/161 B), which we consider to be a
genuine watershed in the fight against cholera in Haiti,
as it enables us to redirect the balances and credits
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to such an important development
issue — health, sanitation and the long-term fight to
permanently eradicate this scourge.
17-21303

13/07/2017

Mexico intends to continue to support Haiti this
year in what we call the Yucatán Project. We have
already pledged $362,000 to a fund for rebuilding an
important national institution for Haitian midwives
as part of our health focus. We hope that we can soon
know the details of the resolutions of the closure of
MINUSTAH. At that point we will be able to consider
further contributions to our neighbouring brotherly
country of Haiti.
Mr. Ten-Pow (Guyana): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM).
I wish to first express our region’s appreciation
to the General Assembly for its support for resolution
71/161 B, on the new United Nations approach to
cholera in Haiti.
CARICOM is pleased that the United Nations
has remained consistent in its efforts to address the
situation in Haiti. We were especially encouraged when
former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced the
new approach and urged all Member States to give their
full support to the initiative aimed at controlling and
eliminating cholera in Haiti. CARICOM believes that
this initiative is one of the main platforms upon which
progress in Haiti will continue to be made, and we wish
to reiterate our commitment to the new approach. In
that connection, we welcome the recent appointment
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Haiti,
Ms. Josette Sheeran. We believe that her appointment
will give further impetus to the full implementation of
the new approach.
While considerable national, regional and
international efforts have been deployed in the fight
against cholera in Haiti since 2010, and considerable
progress has been made, Haiti continues to face
significant challenges that affect those efforts. We are
therefore heartened by the information contained in the
second report of the Secretary-General to Member States
(A/71/895) that under the new approach the number of
suspected cases of cholera has declined substantially
since 2016. That is an illustration of how a collaborative
approach can positively and significantly impact the
situation in our sister CARICOM country. We should
be under no illusion, however, about the magnitude of
the task at hand, as cholera is now endemic in Haiti.
The people of Haiti need the support of the entire
international community, not only to alleviate the
suffering caused by this deadly disease but also to

A/71/PV.91

positively and sustainably address the underlying
conditions that increase the risk of cholera, in
particular poverty — and in the case of Haiti, extreme
poverty — weak sanitation infrastructure, limited
access to clean water, poor housing conditions and a
lack of basic health services. Please note that all of
those are goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and help make the case
for special assistance for Haiti, not only as a small
island developing State but also because of the moral
responsibility that the Organization bears towards this
Member State.
We welcome the ongoing implementation of
various projects by United Nations agencies, including
UNICEF, the Pan American Health Organization and
the World Health Organization, among others. Those
efforts all contribute to the declining incidence of
cholera in Haiti. While many challenges remain to
be overcome, we believe that the United Nations is
committed to the task at hand and, in partnership with
other stakeholders in the international community, will
continue to achieve tangible progress.
In order for it to be fully implemented, the new
approach needs adequate financing. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s stated intention to
invite Member States to voluntarily direct their share
of the unencumbered balance and other income for the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund so as to support the new approach.
CARICOM encourages further voluntary financial and
other appropriate support to ensure that the momentum
that we now see is maintained.
In conclusion, the States members of the Caribbean
Community stand in solidarity with our sister nation
of Haiti. We recognize that it is crucial to maintain the
partnership among the United Nations, stakeholders
in the international community and the Government
and the people of Haiti in order to continue building
on the progress achieved to date. We therefore urge all
Member States to continue to support the new approach
as we collaborate for continued progress in Haiti.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Permanent Missions of Mexico and
Jamaica for the leadership demonstrated throughout
the consultations leading to the adoption of the very
important resolution 71/161 B, on the new United
Nations approach to cholera in Haiti, which is certainly

17-213033/6

A/71/PV.91

a new step in the right direction that allows us to
continue supporting the Government and the people of
Haiti with the help of the Group of Friends of Haiti, of
which Colombia is a member.
My delegation is convinced that the text of the
resolution establishes a new road map so as to achieve
a comprehensive approach that allows us to make better
use of resources and efforts aimed at overcoming the
serious humanitarian health crisis in our region. To that
end, we add our voice to the call on Member States, as well
as various regional and international organizations, so
that we may continue our contribution to the well-being
of a country that, despite its difficulties, has always
shown great courage and enormous determination.
As the representative of Haiti just stated, it is also
useful to point out how the political progress that the
country has made has certainly contributed to the
drawdown of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, planned for next October, and its transition
to — what is most important for us — justice support
through the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti.
That has also allowed us as a region to strengthen and
reaffirm the importance of South-South cooperation,
and as the Group of Friends of Haiti did during its most
recent visit to Haiti, two months ago, establish greater
coordination among all the stakeholders involved in
confronting the challenges related to cholera, directed
towards strengthening a system that can respond more
comprehensively and improve living conditions for
Haitians. That also has a more historical connotation for
us, because it was from Haiti in 1815 that the liberator
Simón Bolívar relaunched the liberty march that made
us a nation. Without Haiti, Colombia would not have
been able to become a republic. That is why we will
always be ready to support Haiti in building of a more
prosperous country, as it is on the path to overcoming
its difficulties.
Mr. Nayan (Philippines): The Philippines
co-sponsored resolution 71/161 B, as it was compelled
by a need to assist the people of Haiti, 800,000 of whom
have been affected by the cholera epidemic and remain
in dire need of help. In response to the call for financial
and other appropriate support in paragraph 3 of the
resolution, and in solidarity with the people of Haiti,
the Philippines is pleased to make a voluntary financial
contribution of $50,000 to the United Nations Haiti
4/6

13/07/2017

Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund in support
of the new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful to the delegations of Jamaica
and Mexico for having facilitated resolution 71/161 B,
which we also co-sponsored and on which we joined
the consensus.
Argentina reiterates its concern about the persistence
of the cholera epidemic in Haiti notwithstanding the
efforts and progress made by the Haitian Government
and the various regional and international actors to
alleviate the situation. In that regard, we support the
relevant efforts of the Secretary-General to implement
a new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti
geared towards intensifying the Organization’s support
for eliminating cholera by catalysing actions so that
all Haitians have access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, as well as providing material assistance and
support to those most directly affected.
We also welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund, as well as the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
who will be responsible for designing a broad strategy
for garnering voluntary contributions and supporting
Haitian efforts to meet its sustainable development
goals. We wish Ms. Sheeran the greatest success in her
new functions.
Since 1994, Argentina has participated in all United
Nations efforts aimed at assisting Haiti in its efforts
to achieve stability and development. In that vein,
we welcomed the successful drawdown of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the transition towards a new stage, which we hope
will ultimately lead to consolidating peace in Haiti.
After 13 years and following the departure of our
battalion and the air unit in April 2015, our level 2
military hospital will leave the country in August. That
hospital has been heavily involved in United Nations
efforts to alleviate and solve the various health issues
inherent to its mission, including in the prevention of
cholera and care of its victims, as well as the devastating
consequences of the 2010 earthquake, when initially it
was the only operating health facility left intact.
The end of the MINUSTAH mandate does
not, however, mean that we will draw away from
Haiti because, besides continuing with our bilateral
cooperation, we will continue to participate with the
17-21303

13/07/2017

current 15 Argentine civilian police officers, with the
possibility of an increase if possible and necessary within
the framework of the mandate of the new Mission — the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
so as to continue with the development of the Haitian
National Police’s capacities. We are confident that the
new Mission will also contribute to implementing the
Organization’s new approach to cholera.
In conclusion, for all those reasons, we reiterate
our country’s commitment to the new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we would
like to announce that Argentina will make a voluntary
contribution of $10,000 for 2017 to the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): Canada was proud to
co-sponsor resolution 71/161 B and to continue to
actively support the United Nations efforts in fighting
cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his most recent report (A/71/895), on
the new United Nations approach to cholera in
Haiti and for his ongoing commitment to ensure its
successful implementation.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome and
congratulate Ms. Josette Sheeran on her appointment
as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Haiti. Let
me assure Ms. Sheeran of Canada’s full support as she
carries out her important mandate.
We are encouraged to see a reduction in the number
of suspected cases of cholera in recent months in Haiti.
That shows that the intensified approach in place is
working. But those encouraging signs should not be
used as an excuse for us not to do more. Indeed, now
is the time for us all to support the new approach until
cholera is eradicated in Haiti.
(spoke in French)
Canada supports the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to reallocate the unencumbered balance of the
budget of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti to fight cholera in Haiti. We will therefore respond
positively to his request, which we hope will enable us
to respond partially to the urgent needs outlined in the
report. We also call upon other States Members of the
United Nations to respond favourably to the request.

A/71/PV.91

fight against cholera. As the United Nations and the
international community, responding adequately to this
crisis is both our moral obligation and a key to ensure
that Haiti progresses on the road to development.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegations of Jamaica
and Mexico for presenting and facilitating resolution
71/161 B, entitled “The new United Nations approach
to cholera in Haiti”. Guatemala co-sponsored the
resolution, thereby reaffirming our support for the new
United Nations approach presented by the SecretaryGeneral.
The resolution acknowledges the urgent need to
alleviate the suffering that cholera causes to the Haitian
population and, at the same time, urges that efforts
be made to prevent the prolongation of the crisis. We
commend the efforts spearheaded by the Government
of Haiti, which are supported by the United Nations
and other regional and international actors. Similarly,
we support the recommendation that the unencumbered
balance, other income credited and adjustments to the
budget of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for the period 2015-2016 be
redirected to the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
Guatemala takes this opportunity to acknowledge
the work previously conducted by the military and
police contingents who, operating under MINUSTAH’s
mandate, coordinated and established quick-impact
projects focusing, in many cases, on the need for clean
water and sanitation in the country. At the time, many of
those projects contributed to the Haitian Government’s
efforts to strengthen the country’s drinking-water supply
throughout the country. Through the implementation of
those kinds of projects, notable efforts were made to
combat waterborne diseases such as cholera. We hope
that this new approach will include lessons learned in
the past and provide the continuity required.
Finally, we wish Ms. Josette Sheeran every success
as the new Special Envoy for Haiti in her efforts to
reduce the impact of cholera in the country.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to thank the delegations of
Mexico and Jamaica for presenting resolution 71/161 B,
which Chile co-sponsored.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my country’s strong
support for Haiti’s long-term development and to the

In the current context, and with the difficulties that
Haiti has faced, the cholera epidemic continues to be

17-213035/6

A/71/PV.91

one of the main humanitarian challenges. Although
the incidence of the disease has decreased since 2011,
statistics remain alarmingly high and the response
capacity has been insufficient. The devastating passage
of Hurricane Matthew, in 2016, served only to make the
context more complex. The cholera epidemic can come
to an end only if there is a broad response from the
international community, in particular from the States
represented here in the General Assembly.
We commend the steps taken by former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon in acknowledging the role that
the United Nations played and in launching a new
approach to fight cholera in Haiti, which is supported
by Secretary-General António Guterres. Chile supports
that plan, which includes not only the issue of the
response in the short, medium and long terms, with a
view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
but also includes material steps to support the victims,
their families and communities. We believe that the
United Nations has a debt to repay in that regard, which
is why the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund requires the financing
necessary to support the programme — on both track 1
and track 2 of the new approach.
Supporting efforts to combat cholera has been
a priority for Chile. As a participant in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, we contributed
to the work the Mission conducted in its various
quick-impact projects to support Haiti’s national plan
for the elimination of cholera. In 2015, Chile made
financial contributions to the vaccination programme

6/6

13/07/2017

against cholera launched by the Pan American Health
Organization, UNICEF and local authorities, which
focused primarily on Haiti’s children. Along the
same lines, last February Chile was one of the first
countries to make a contribution to the Trust Fund,
thereby reaffirming our commitment to strengthening
institutions, development and the well-being of Haiti
and its people.
With regard to the text of the resolution, we value
the fact that it is not only a document that provides
political support; it also includes specific measures, as
indicated in paragraphs 4 and 5. We are pleased that
resolution 71/161 B was adopted by consensus. We
hope that it will provide effective support to the new
approach and thereby help to alleviate the suffering of
our brothers and sisters in Haiti.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
following the adoption of the resolution.
Before concluding, I would like to commend
delegations for a very positive and responsible debate
today. I particularly applaud the statement made on
behalf of the Caribbean Community, which was so
positive and forward-looking. It was very much on
the mark in emphasizing the role of the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular Goal 6. Now is the
time for us all to act.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 69.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

17-21303
