TU’ENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

,NEW

13 OCTOBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l593)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . , . . , . . . .. . , .. . . . . . . ... ,

. , . . <. . . . . . , . . , . . . , . . . , . , , , , . . . , . . . . . .

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey,
Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, SomaIia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee
on Namibia (S/I0330 and Corr.1) . . .

.-

S/PV.l593

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 13 October 1971, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA

SACASA (Nicaragua).

fiesent:
The reprcsentatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalis, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Grcat Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

shau, if there Y no objection, invite those delegatlons
ParticiPatingin this debate to take the placesreservedfor
them in the Council Chamber.
2. 1 invite the representativesof Sudan,EdUopia,South
Afria, Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria,MauritiusandSaudi
hbia to take the placesreservedfor them in the Council
Chamber,it being understoodthat they will be seatedat
the Counciltable when they are to speak.

Provisional agenda @/Agenda/1 593)
3. I invite the Presidentof the United NationsCouncjl for
Namibiato take a seatat the Counciltable.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representntives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad. the
Congo (Democratic Republic of). Dahomey, Egypt,
Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
lb) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/ 10330 and Corr.1).
Adoption of the agenda
?7zeagenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
Presidentof the Orited Nations Cauncilfor Flantibia, took
a place at the Couwil table; and Mr. C. F. G. V~II Hi&p
berg(South Africa) took th e placereservedfor him.
4. The PRESIDENT (inlerpretation from Spattish): ne
Council willl now continue its considerationof the item on
the agenda.
5. 1cal1on the representativeof the United Kingdom,who
hasaskedfor the floor on a point of order.
6. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): 1 should like
briefly to refer to the questionAmbassador
Farahaskedat
the very end of our latest meeting on this subject, on
Wednesday, 6 October. He asked how my delegation
interprets the principle of the right to selfdetermination,
with particular reference to the unity of the Territory
concerned.
7, 1 did in fact try to make this clear in my original
intervention when 1 said, if 1 may be allowed to quote
myself: “My Govemmentagreeson the importanceof the
unity and territorial integrity of Natibia and deploresany
measuresthat would tend to destroy them again& the
wishesof the people.” / 1589th meeting,para.62./ In other
words, like the representativeof France, we regardselfdetermination for the people of Narnibia-asfor thoseof
any other dependent Territory exercisingthe right Qf
self-determination-asapplying to a national framework.
me modalitiesof the exerciseof that right cari, asI also
mentionedin my speech,take different forms,and it is the
wishesof the people that must be paramount.But in the
caseof Namibia it follows from what I havesaidthat the
ascertainmentof the wishesof the peopleshouldbe carried
out on a Territory-wide, not a partial, basis.1 hope that
answersthe requestfor clarification that the representative
of Somaliaput to my delegation.

‘T’he situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatoriai
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritanïa, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, SomaIia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the Wnited Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(6) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
:S/I0330 and Corr.1)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
front Spanish): In
accordance with previous decisionstaken by the Council 1
1

8. Mr. KU&%GA (Poland] (interpretation from French):
Never before has the Courtcil had on its agenda so long and
SOdivcrsified a Ijst of acts of force and illegality perpetrated
by colonialism and racisql against afl of Africa. Nevex
before, either, has Africa been represented at so high a level
in the Council to place before it the indictments and the
demands of the Organization of African Unity, supported
by so many States, among them in particular Poland.
Finally, never before has the Counci! had su& an opportunity to adopt effective and determined measures to put
an end to all these acts of aggression and illegality, the sum
total of which represents a constant menace to peace and to
the independence and security of Africa.
9. Because, in each of the items on our agenda we fïnd
again the same elements of colonialism-its illegality, its
aggressiveness,its defiance of human dignity. Everywhere
we fïnd-even if under a different guise-the international
ramifications and the de facto aid which enable it to
maintain its domination, We see once again a philosophyalthough the use of that word undoubtedly is a mark of too
much honour-that is refrograde, inspired simuItaneously
by the coloniaIist precepts of the nineteenth Century and
by those which have been universally condemned, of
nazism of the twentieth Century. ‘fie cleverly orchestrated
rumeurs about a “dialogue”, SO visibly being spread
reluctantly and SOvisibly under the pressure of extremely
embarrassed allies, cannot caver up the truth, SO lucidly
revealed by Mr. Muller, that for rhe colonialists and thc
racists the real dialogue took place on thc battlefield, in
southern Africa, in Guinea-Bissau; that is spilled over into
Zambia, Casamance and Senegal, Conakry and the Republic
of Cuinea-to speak only of matters on our agenda; that the
Ianguage of the dialogue was only that of force and the
concept of superiority.
10. We have Listened with the greatest attention to the
statements made’tiy President Ould Daddah of Mauritanja
and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia, Liberia,
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalis and Chad.

tion and their struggle for a life as free men. TO add to this
description, which gives a full picture of the situation,
which is, 90 sebous, in Natibia, does not appear necessary
to us.
14. Finaily, we have noted the urgent appeal to the
Council by President Ould Daddah, who urged chat the
Council: “ , . . employ aU necessarymeans of compelling the
South African Government to bow to the unanimous Will
of the international community and immediately withdraw
its administration from Namibia.” /1583rci meeting,
para24./
15. SO far as Poland is concemed, it has alwaysadopted a
very clear position on the subject. As we see it, the
fundamental political decisions on the subject of Namibia,
in conforrnity with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, were adopted long ago by the United
Nations. They are contained in Generai Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), that is to say, the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. They were further clariiîed in General, Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI), which cancelled the Mandate of
South Africa which, because of its conduct in Namibia,
conspicuously failed to attain the objectives of its Mandate
or to comply with the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of resolution 1514 (XV), to which 1 have just
referred. Further confirmation was contained in Securily
Council resolu tiens 264 (1969),
269 (1969) and
176 (1970), ordering the South African Republic to with.
draw its administration from Namibia and declaring illegal
the prcscnceof South African authorities in Namibia.
16, Numerous stipulations of the Security Councü and of
the General Assembly subsequently developed those decisiens, requesting States Members of the United Nations to
undertake effective action against the Government of South
Africa SOas to force it to withdraw its administration from
Namibia.

:
:
;
li

11. In those statements we have noted above all the
presentation and the tigorous defence of the iegitimate
interests of the oppressed people of Namibia, whose fate,
need we recall, is the incontestable responsibility of our
Organization.

17. Poland has supported a11those decisions without any 3
reservations. This attitude is in conformity with one of the !
fundsmental principles of its fore& policy: solidarity and ’
support for the struggle for national liberation, for the
legitimate aspirations to freedom of peoples who are still
cofonized.

12. We have noted the denunciation and the condemnation of the continuing occupation and exploitation
of Namibia by South Africa, and the latter’s obstinate
refusa1 to heed the resolutions of the United Nations,
including those of the Security Council, requiring South
Africa ta withdraw from Namibia.

18. The objective and the direction of United Nations
action were always clear and unequivocal to us: the
accession of the people of Namibia to freedom and
independence.

13. We have also noted the criticism-so justified-of the
attitude of certain Western. Powers which, despite the
inhuman po!.icy practiced by the South African régime,
refuse to limit the assistance and aid they grant that régime
and which oppose the adoption by the United Nations of
measures which could practically put an end to this racist
and colonialist policy. We have also heard the statement of
Mr. Nujoma, Chairman of the South West Africa People’s
Organization, who truthfully described to us the everyday
life of the Namibian people under South Afiican domina-

19. We have gîven evidence of this attitude not only
within the United Nations; we have done SOand continue
SOto do in our policy towards the Covernment of South
Africa, in our refusa1to maintain with jt political, economic
or other relations, in our condemnation of its policy, in the
support we bave given the organizations of national
liberation of Namibia. Thus, we have applied the resolutiens of the General Assembly and of the Security Council
concerning bath the question of Namibia and the policy of
aporthejd, practised by the leaders of the South African
Repubiic.
2

20. This position of principle also determines our attitude
to the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice,l which is one of the elements of our debate today.
In this Opinion, the Court-the principal legal organ of the
United Nations-reaffirms in legal language what the Security Council and the General AssembIy had made clear in
thelr political decisions snd positions. If notes in particular
thc unequivocal obligation for South African Republic to
withdraw from the Territory of Namibia. It fürther notes,
the obligation for a11States Members of the United Nations
to put an end to the illegal situation in Namibia, that is, its
occupation by South Africa. Moreover, the States Members,
on the basis of paragraph 119 of the Advisory Opinion, are
1‘. . * under obligation to refrain from lending any support
or any forrn of assistance to South Africa with reference to
its occupation of Namibie. . . .”

21. Limiting itself, as it did, to an expression of opinion
solely on the relations of States with the South African
Governmcnt, which could imply a recognition of the illegal
presence of South Afrlca in Namibia-1 refer here to
paragraph 121--the Court notes, quite correctly, that the
definition of the nature of the choice of measures to be
adopted against South Africa, as well as their scope and the
practical methods of their implementation, is a matter
within the competence of the appropriate political organs
of the United Nations and, in pàragraph 120 that: “. . . it is
for the Security Council to determine any further measures
conscquent upon the decisions already taken by it on the
question of Namibia.”
32. T}~us, thc Court has confïrmed what my delegation
and most of the other delegations around this table have
alrcady stressed in the various debates on the Namibian
problem: the absolute necessity and unquestionable priority for specific political action against the Government of
South Africa, to ensure the withdrawal of its administration
from Namibia.
23. The consistent and totally negative attitude of the
South African Government toward the decisions of United
Nations organs, including those of the Security Council, on
tbe one hand, and the continuation by South Africa of its
policy of annexation and economic exploitation of Namibia
on the other, prove sufficiently that Security Council
action cannot be confined to exhortations, moral con.

demnations, persuasion, or proposals for a dialogue.
24. The statement made in the course of this debate by
the representative of the South African Government has
proved once again the lack of any desire on the part of
South Africa to abide by the decisions of the United
Nations or to accept the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice. Mr.Muller’s theses have been
refuted by numerous speakers and 1 shall not revert to
them. One factor in the South African legal and political
argument, SOshocking in itself because it is placed within a
context SOobsolete, SOwholly unacceptable, and rejected
as such by the international community, is the contention

dealt wiçh in paragraphs 82 and 83 of the Advisory
Opinion. I refer ta the attempt to justify the right to
annex Namibja by military conquest and by lengthy
occupation of the Territory.
25. Are the South African leaders really living in a world
apart? Have they not noticed the unanimity of the
Organization in condcmning and rejecting any attempt to
annex Territories by the use of force, which is contrary ta
the provisions of the Charter.9 Do they not reaüze that, Iike
Israel and Portugal,they stand alone to face the world?
26. TO quote Presidentl Ould Daddah of the Republic of
Mauritania: “New is the time for courageous and concrete
action” /ibid., para 261. This action, we are all aware,
cannot be limited to professing faith, to expressing regrets
at the vioIations of human rights, or utterlng platonic
condemnations of the aparfbeid system transplanted lnto
Namibia. Nor cari it be limited to theoretical support for
the dccision to deprive South Africa of its Mandate for
Namibia.
_
21. The leaders of South Africa turn a deaf ear to moral
condemnations. They place their faith in their mifitary
arsenal, which they develop ceaselessly. Nevertheless they
know that within their country their racist Eldorado is built
on a vokano. They know that, cxternally, they depend on
the economic and commercial relations, the military and
political assistance of those who remain their partners. The
decisive importance of those relations for the maintenance
and consolidation of colonial and racist domination has
been sufficiently emphasized, SO1 need not dwell upon it.
Al1 the components of the Narnibian and South African
dossier, militate in favour of breaking off those relations,
and demand that “concrefe and courageous action” supplement moral condemnations. The results of our work Will
show whether this will be the choice of those who bear SO
great a share of responsibility for the situation in Namibia
and southern Africa.
28, We do not forget that it is the duty of the Council to
ensure the withdrawal of the South African administration
from Namibia. Consequently it should adopt measures
within its field of competence which could truly influence
the Government of South Africa, which would constitute
an adequate response to the challenge thrown at us in
Narnibia, which would reflect the unanimous attitude of
international public opinion as well as a Will to act on the
part of Member States of the United Nations, with a view
to assisting fhe Namibian people to lîberate themselves
from racist and colonialist oppression.
29, T%ePolish delegation, in conformity with the position
of principle which it has defined in this statement, has
acted in thl direction in the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on
Namibia, whose report is before you. It will continue to do
SOin the process of prepadng of a draft resolution on the
agendaitem before us.

30. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
fiom Spanish): Mr. President, since this is my fïrst forma1
statement during the month of October, 1 should like to
extend to you my warm, fraternal congratulations on your
accession to the Presidency of the Security Council. The

1 Le,qal Conseauences .for Srates of the Continued Presence of
South “A Jrica in’ Nomibh fSouîh
Wmt Africa) noth withstanding
Security Council resolution276 (1970). Advisoty Opinion, 1.C.f.
Rcports1971, p. 16.

3

f

fricndship which cxists bctween Nicaragua and Argentina is
proverbial. It is born of a common origin; it is inspired by a
common dcstiny; if anything more were neccssary, WC also
have in comrnon, that extraordinary litcrary figure Rubén
Dario. Mr. President, you arc well aware of my persona1
regard and professional respect for you. Doubtless my
words arc influenced by these fcelings. Yet quite apart from
them, and taking into account only your past conduct as
Preddcnt of this Council, and your remarkable diplomatie
career, 1:am convinced that you Will excrcise your lively
sense of responsibility in guiding our debates to a successful
conclusion. We arc proud to have you in the Chair.
3 1. 1 also wish to express my appreciation and congratulations to the represcntative of Japan, Ambassador Nakagawa, for the efficiency, skill and tact with which he guided
thc debates of the Council during the month of September.
32. On 29 July 1970 the Security Council adopted its
resolution 284 (1970) in which it decided to request an
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the following question: “What are the Iegal conscquences
for States of the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia notwithsranding
Security Council resolution
276 (1970)? ” In reply, the Court issued an Advisory
Opinion on 21 June 1971 signcd by its President, Sir
Muhammad Zafrulla Khan.
33. WC have most carefully and attcntively studicd that
Opinion. The delegation of Argentina wishcs here and now
t0
express its most profound appreciation to thc learncd
judges who signcd it, for thc substantial work performcd in
producing thc irnprtant
opinion rcquestcd of them. %‘c
ah
express our apprcciatioll to thc dislinguished jurists
who
with cqu:~lly wzight!
arguments explaincd thcir
dissenting votes. W!lntcver the individual stand takcn by
counlrics herc repreucnlcd, i; is obvious that thc Advisory
Opinion is an invaluablc document to guide us in our
prcscnt and future work. Thc Council is therefore ex.
tremely grateful, and we think this should be clearly stated
when we take note of Advisory Opinion in the rcsolution
wc are about to adopt
y
34. 1 shall not enter inta a detailed or even a BeneraI
analysis of the extensive and scarching considerations of the
Court contained in this voluminous document, We think it
would be improper, even presumptuous, for the Security
Council, which has the highest political and exccutive
rcsponsibilities, to judgc the juridical value of an Opinion
rendered by the highest Court in the international system.
3.5. We realize that the interpretations of the scope of
various provisions of thc Charter-for example, Articles 24,
25, 27 (3) and 32-may logically give risc to reservations
among some Member States. We doubt, however, that this
is the appropriate forum in which to debate them. On the
other hand, and 1 need hardly add this, the opinions of the
Court on these provisions, as weII as on the problem as a
whole, are merely advisory and have no binding force,
36. T~US, it is not really in order to pursue thc legal
aspects of the matter. All these aspects have already been
duIy considered and covered in thc assenting or dissenting
opinions of the Judges; and this includes the questions put

by the Minis& for Foreign Affairs of South Africa in his
statement on G Octobcr last /158Yr/r !necfit?g/, in regardto
which we would refcr to the particularty intercsting
opinionsof two emitlentJu@s,
Mr. Luis PadillaNervo and
Mr. Fedcricode Castro.2
37. In brief, thc Court wasasked for an adtisow opinion
and complicd with that request. The spcific
repty is
containcdin paragraph133,which unequivocally states:
“(1) that, thc continucd presencc of South Africa in
Namibiabeingillegal,South Africa is undcr obligation to
withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately
andthusput anend to its occupation of the Territory;
“(2) that States Members of the United Nations are
under obligation to recognize thc illcgality of South
Africa’s presencein Narnibia and the invalidity of its acts
on behalfof or concerningNamibia, and to refrain from
any actsand in particular any dealings with the Government of South Africa implying recognition of the Icgafity
of, or lendingsupport or assistanceto, suchpresenceand
administration;
“(3) that it is incumbcnt upon States which arc not
Membersof the United Nations to give assistance,
within
thc scopeof subparagraph
(2) abovc, in the action which
has been taken by Ihc IJnited Nations with regardto
Namibia.”
38. Although it is not binding, no ont cari deny the legal
and moralweightof this Advisory Opinion. On the basisof
this antl thc othcr circutnstancessurrounding the problem,
it is JIOW for the Security Council, in the exercisc of its
puwcrs,to dccide which is thc bcst course of action to
follow.
39. The positionof Argentina regarding Namibia is clear
and definite. II is inspired by the same principles and
folIows the samedirection that we have always defended
and upheld since our entry into this Organisation as a
foundingMember,one which is in favour of the endingof
ail colonial situationswithout exception. We believe we
bave contributed in our deedsand in our advocacy to the
processof decolonizationand to promoting accessionto
independence
by the new sovcreign States which today are
amongus. .
40. Our attitude with regard to Namibia is wholly in
accord wjth this fine of conduct and with the Advisory
Opinion of the Court which I have quoted. What is more,
even before the Opinion wasgiven-as was recalleda few
days ago by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Rcpublic of Argentina in the general debate-the Covemment of Argentina advised the Government of South
Africa on 26 November1970that it did net recognizeany
authority by it in Namibia and that i.t considcred the
presenceof South Africa in Namibia illegal /,‘$/~0020/. This
act, carried out in conformity with the provisions of
Security Councilresolution283 (1970), gives proof of our
Will to implemcntany measure chat might reaffirm and
strengthenthe authority of the United Nations in this
respect.
2 I&id., pp, 89-126 ad 158-219.

4

Alo%
thc sümc
he
of idCaS WC &fJ support, and have
wJ~)rtcd CVCiShCC h inccption, the initiative t. set up a
Unitcd Na!i()ns fund for Namibia. We be]jeve that tratning
the iJlhabj!ants of the Territory, wjth a view t. crea!mg

g1 -

valificd

groups to takc over

the functjons ofgovernment

is an iJnP’tant aspect which must net be overlooked in t&
efforts w]Gch we @ht simultaneously make to ]ead
Namibia towards independence,
42. No one with the slightest sense of EaGty

cari fag t.
reake that thc stage of colonial domination bascorne to an
end. Whatcver title South Africa might c]dm to invoke, ]! ]s
net Possible that i! should obstinateiy continue !o separate
itsdf

frOtll

dity.

WflakVtX

might

bave

bMn

&

&C"m-

stances surrounding the granting of the Mandate over South
Wes! Africa by thc League of Nations, it is obvious that the
‘hrtitory was nof nor could it have been-given to South
Africa as a gift to be annexed finally and irrevocably to its
own territory.
43. Thcreforc the international communfty now cons!ituted in the United Nations claims for Namibia the same
destjny which other colonies or T~U& Territories havehad:
independencc.
44. ‘I’his desire 113s been dgmfican!]y emphasized by the
prescncc dtrring our debatcs of the hesident of Mauritania,
Mr. Ould Daddnh, Presidcnt of the Organjzation of African
Unity, BS well as of other eminent Foreign Ministers and
stntesmcn of Africa. Thc just aspirations of that continent,
which coincide with thc genera] fee]ing in the United
Nations, ntust nut bc postponed once again.
45. In order to find a solution to this disturbing problem,
the Ad Hue Sub-Committee on Namihia considered seti0\1~1y
and thoughtfully at many meetings the V~~~OUS
choices which it could submit to the Security Counci] in
thc ligflt of the Advisory Opinion of the International
Cour! of Justice. 1 think that it is appropriate to point out
thut the Snb-Committec’s deliberations took place “in the
light of’-as thc item always appeared on its agenda-and
not “on” the Advisory Opinion. Thus the Sub-Committee
corrcctly approached its task, by considering !he new
prospects opened by the Advisory Opinion, but wjthout
discussing its legal basis.
46. In an atmosphere of mutual co-operation and understanding in which WCare bound particularly to emphasize
thc fruitfu] and intense participation of the Afro-Asian
representatives as we]] as the excellent work done by the
Secretariat, a report was prepared which appeared in
document 5/10330 dated 23 September 1971,
47. Essentially this report offered three Proposa]s i*
paragraphs 18, 19 and 20. The first of these, PartA, won
dmost t.tnanjInous support in the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee.
Jt is nove] and we]]-founded and offers concrete
possibjlitjes for channeI]ing our immediate action. As we
~CC i!, because 0f the cornrnitments f! reaffirms, !Ire
direction it takes and the sohttions it pursues, ad a1s,o
because of the support jt won-and thés is no! negl]gib]@-rt
cari constitute the basis for the decision *o be adoPted bY
the Counci]. As regards part B we must reca]] thatt a’ we
read in paragraph 16 of thc report, a number of delegations,

mO% them the delegation of Argent&
felt bat fie
Proposa]s shou]d be given further study. we now wjsh to
rePea! that. We believe that many of the ideassubm&,d by
the representatives of Burundi, Sierra Leone, the Sydan
Arab Repubhc and Somalis have great ment and rcpresent
an in!eres!tng contribution in the qUMt for adquate
dutions. Nowever, it ah0 seemsto us that, becauJeof the
comP]eG!Y of some Of the mechanisms suggested,tis haï
*o be ana]Ysed carefugy and adjusted to the provtskms of
the Chadr. In *hh way we believe !hat we couhj jn due
aume ah achieve a consensusregard@ *hem whtch
would give them greater force and vaJidity+
48. ‘fhe question Of Namibia has arrivedat a stagewherejt
IqUires definite action. Since the ]ega] remedy of the
]ntemationa] COU~? of Justice hasbeen e&rus!ed and ajnce
the validity of the United Nations’ decisions bas been
mtitïed bY that high tribunal, we nowhavevery fewchoices
open !o us. One of them, which is hypothetical of course,
wou]d consist in adopting more serious resolutions which,
white they rnight provide us with some dialectic satisfaction, in pnctice would only serveto make evjdent once
again the limitations of every kind which our Organization
encounters when it cornesto implementing our decisions.It
is regrettable to have to recognizethis, but it is !he truc
situation. Until we are able to correct it, !he prestige and
authority of the United Nations Will not be consolidated
but will, on the contrary, deteriorate with the adoption of
resolutions which cannot possibly be implemented.
49. Given this situation we must weighvery carefully what
we do, because what is at stake ultimately is the fate of thc
people of Narnibia, who are still subject to foreign
domination.
SO, The Minister for Fore@ Affairs of South Africa
stated categorically here that his Government does no2
c]aim, and never has claimed, to possess!he Territory or !o
extend its sovereignty to the country. Mr. M&er said:
“our purpose is to guide each of the peoples of South
West Afrjca along the road to selfdetermination according to its wishesand, by development in ah fiel& to
bring it to full self-govemment and evemua] mdependence, if th.is is what It desires.For we know tha! omY
by do@ th]s cari we ensure’the peacefuidevelopment of
!he Territory, which is essentiel for the peace and the
s!aba!y of ah of southem Africa.” [1598rh ~e&Z
para. 79.1
51. Tha! statement contains ah the e]emen!s whJch cari
]ead us !o a final solution: respect for the free]y expressed
w~ of !he peôple, self-governmentand independence. Bu!
it must be made perfectiy Cl!?~ !hat to attain the fmal
objective,
namely, independence, it is ind]spen~b]e--*
epeat,

indiSpen&le-to

pC%XW at dl CoStS ad

at ti

tjmes the territond mtegrity of Namibia, and not !O star!
thhking of parce]hng out the land, wh.ichwodd rePresenta
new mockery of the United Nations and, wha! is even
worse, of the Namibians themselves.
52. me the bas corne for South Africa to Provc jts
goodwtB with tangible deeds and by hnP]ementing those
purposes. Such action cannot be, nor sfiou]d i* bel the

rcsult of unilateral action &y the Govcrnment of South
Africa. The United Nations, which is directly responsible
for the future of Namibia, a responsibility which flows
from the resolutions adopted in that connexion and which
has been confirmed by the Advîsory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice, must be closely associated
with that process.
53. In the statement which he made on 5 October,
/158Bth meeting] the rcpresentative of France outlined an
idea which deserves careful thought. Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet stated that once both South Africa and the
Unitcd Nations by virtue of various considerations agree
that the former Mandate no longer exists, the Government
of South Africa has the obligation to negotiate a new
international régime with the United Nations which Will
enable the people concerned freely to choose their destiny.
54. Like him, we believe that this is not only a ,possible
course, but perhaps the most appropriate one. If South
Africa really is inspired by the desire to bring the people of
Namibia to autonomy and independence, if it is true that
with respect to the Territory it harbours no annexationist
ambitions, it should take advantage of this opportunity,
which is probably the last one that wîll be offered, and
lmmediately undertake the necessary measures to reach an
agreement for a trusteeship administration for Namibia in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XI1 of the
Charter. In that agreement, as has been the case for other
Trust Territorics, a contractual basis would be laid for
bringing the people of Namibia gradually, but within a
given time, to exercise self-government and finally 10
accede to independence. It would then be for the General
Assembly, as laid down in Article 85 of the Charter, to
approve the terms of that agreement, a procedure which
would offer unimpeachable safeguards’as to thc scope and
condition of the agrcement. We could in due course inctude
the proposa1 made by South Africa to the International
Court of Justice regarding the holding of a plebiscite among
the peoples of Namibia. Naturally-and
this goes without
saying-the nature of the consultation and the details of its
organization would have dlfo be part of the trusteeship
agreement, and hence subject to United Nations supervision.

very generous words he addressed to my country and to
me. They are an honour to me and they make me very
happy because they have been expressed by a distinguished
ambassador, illustrious son of a glorious nation with which
we have ties of brotherhood, the Republic of Argentina,
golden and glowing Argentina, to whom Rubkn Dario, the
Nicaraguan poet he mentioned, was to address, hls most
beautifu1 verses,
58. Mr. ROMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): The importance
of this meeting and the potential impact of its far-reaching
results on international relations as well as on the credibility and effîciency of our Organization, and indeed on the
entire situation in southern Africa, need hardly be emphasized. That is why 1 feel it necessary at the very outset to
stress in unequivocal terms the context of our deliberations
on Namibia, SOas to relate it to the realities of the situation
under discussion, for at one time the issue seemed to be
submcrged in legal discussions revolving around the respective powers of the General AssembIy and the Security
Council, the approval or disapproval of the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and of
Articles 24 and 25 of the United Nations Charter.
59. 1 by no means wish to minimize the importance of
such legal aspects of our deliberations or their great
relcvance and usefulness to ail of us; but 1 do not want
either that they should supersede,cloud and confusethe
basicissue,which is the item on the agenda.TO usthis is
primarily the hideousracist policy of upwtheid asapplied
by brutal force, tyranny and oppressionagainsta whole
Al’rican pcople,the peopleof Namibia.
60. The note of urgency and dctermination was best
expressedby the Assembly of Headsof State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. In their
rcsolution of 23 June 1971, they explicitly and unequivocally requestedthe Security Council to uphold the principles and purposesof the Charter and to dischargethe
responsibilities
entrustedto it by the United Nations.
61, Mr. Ould Daddah,Presidentof the IslamîcRepublicof
Mauritania, eloquently conveyed to usthis sense
of urgency
whenhe stated:
“The Organization of African Unity is asking the
Security Coüncil to go beyond mere declarationsof
principle, that have Little influence on the facts of the
situation: it wantspractical action on the spot to put an
end to the occupationof this international Territory by a
foreign Power.”[1583rcl meeting,para. 18.1

55. As we see it, these suggestionsare in someways
implicit in the statementsmade in this debate by the
representativesof Italy and Saudi Arabia. They are ah0
reflected in the report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committeeon
Namibia, part A, paragraph10.

56. We believethat they have a solid foundation andthat,
with the goodwill of ail, cari be given concrete form in a 62. In the letter dated 17 September1971/S/10326],
short tirne. We appeal to South Africa to give its Co- signedby the overwhelmingmajority of the representatives
of the African States Membersof the United Nations,we
operation with a realîstic approach and a vision of the
were remindedonce more of the obligationsandthe duties
future. It is only in this manner, as was recognized by
Mr. Muller himself,that it cari contribute to ensuringpeace of the Secuiity Council vis-à-vis the hopesof the entire
continent of Africa-that is to say, the duty of the Security
and stability in southern Africa. We trust that political
common sensewill prevail in that country and that through Council to take action in its searchfor a just solutionthat
would fulffi the aspirationsof the people of Natibia in
understandingwe shall remove one of the main causesof
accordancewith relevant United Nations resolutions,in
tension in that continent.
particular GeneralAssembly resolution 1514(xv), which
57. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fiom Sponish): 1 contains the historic Declaration on the Granting of
should like to thank the representativeof Argentina for the Independenceto ColonialCountriesandPeoples.
6

63. That is why WC ShokI like to stress that the Security
C(mIcil W3S Ilot convened to hold specja] meetings in order
tu Jiscuss in the abstract the situation in Namibia but
mther t0 formulate: “, , . waYs and means of enforcing the
Past decisions of the United Nations in the ]i&t of the legaI
obligation imposed on the world community by the
decision of the International Court of Justice.“[&~./
64. The position of the Secretary-General, U Thant on
the sit UatiOrl
in Namibia coincides with that of the l-ieads of
Statc and Covernment of the 0rgani;ration of African
UnitY. In the introduction to his report on the work ofthe
Orgirnization, U Thant states:
“1 nlust report with particular regret that the question
of Namibia, a Tcrritory for which the United Nations has
a specinl rcsponsibility. is still the abject of comp]ete
dcadlock dcspite repeated resolutions of the General
Aswnbly
and the Security Council and a recent advisory
opinion delivered by the International Court of Justice at
tk request of the Security Counci]. Once more, I appeal
to tire Member States, especially to those vcsted with
special responsibilities by the Charter, to undertake the
steps well within their scope which Will put an end to this
intolcrablc situation.“3
65. The dclegation of the Syrian Arab Republic would
thcrcforc
be guided in this debate by the following
considerations.
66. First, thc indcpcndence of Namibia shall remain the
ultimatc objective of the United Nations, and hand in hand
with ~Iris goes thc right to self-determination as upheld in
Article 1 (2), of the United Nations Charter and specifïcally
stated in the International Covenant on Civil and Politica]
Iiights and in the International Covenant on Economie,
Social and Cultural Rights, part 1, Article 1, of which reads:
“Ail peoples have the right of self-determination. BY virtue
of that right they freely determine their pohtica] status and
freely pursuc their economic, social and cultura] development .” And SO unti] independence is achieved, Member
States-individually
and collectively, and in aB circumstances-are
in duty bound to preserve the unitY and
territorial intcgrity of the people of Namibia.
67. Second, that the continued occupation of Namibia
would çonstitute an act of aggression, in addition to being a
threat to peace and security.
68. Third, that Member States are under the Iegal obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s Presence in
Namibia and, therefore, to refrain from anY acts imP]Ying
recognition of Iegality or lending support and assistance to
such presence and administration.
69. Fourth, that unless the Security COUnd takes effettive rneasures against South Africa witl~n the meamng Of
the relevant provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter there
seems to be no hope that South Africa Will comply with
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by whjch, as is well known, the United Nations
3 offi&/

Records

of thc &?netal AsseIdlY,

Supplement No. IA, para.56.

i%entJ’-sUtth

Session,

deeided that the mandateof South west Africa was
teminated and assumed
direct rt?sponsibi]ity
for the Terri.
tory untü its independence,
aswell asby Secunty Counc~
resolution 264 (1969) and subsequent
oneswhich Fecognized the terminationof the Mandateand&]ed ,,, ‘ the
Gvernment of South Africa immediatelyto withdraw its
administrationfrom the Territory.
70. it wasupon thesepremises
that the delegltionof the
SYnan Amb Republicpresented,expoundedanddefended
its views duringthe meetings
of the Ad Ifoc Sub.(Jommittee
on Namibia entrustedby resolution283(1970) to study
further recommendations
on waysandmeans
to impiement
effectively the relevantresolutionsof theSecurityCounci].
71. While Part A in paragraph18 of the Ad HOC
Sub-Committee’sreport {S/I0330 und Comlj
demonstratesthat there indeedexists,a broadconsensus
on some
of these “ways and means”amongthe members
of that
Sub-Committee, Part B in paragraph
19 summarizesthe
position taken by four Afro-Asian delegations,
namely,
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalisand the Syrian Arab
RepuHic. These recommendations
were net formulated
with a desireto precipitate a situationdivorced from
reality. On the contrary, they stemfrom a realisticand
objective analysisof the situationin Namibiaand are a
responseto the challengeposedby South Africa’s continued illegal occupationof Namibiaand its refusaito
withdraw ,
72. The basic concepts behind our recommendations
revolve around the identificationof the partiesresponsiblc
for the continued illegal occupationof Namibiaand.
thereafter, the determinationof the obligationof Statesin
their collective or individualcapacityto terminaleaniilega]
situation.
73. In the light of this analysis,the four Afro-Asian
delegationsreachedthe followingconclusions.
74. Fi&, that t.he nationalliberation movementin Namibia is entitled to wageits struggleby aUav&b]e means
to att& independence
in accordance
with GeneralAssentbly resolution 1514(XV).
75. Second, that SouthAfrica’s continuedillegaloccupation of Namibia restson the mere use of force and,
therefore, al] States must SCrUpUbUSlY
aPP]YSecunty
Counci] resolution282(1970)of 23 J~IY1970on thearms
embargoand must alsorefrainfrom supplyinganyarmsor
dtary equipmentto the Governmentof SouthAfrica on
whatever pretext.
76. Thbd, that any further refusa]Onthe Partof So”th
~~~~ t. withdraw from NamibiawouldCondtute
an act
of aggresaionand a threat to internationalpeaceand
securBy within the context of ChapterVi] of the Charter.
77. The Jast point is undoubtedlythe most important
conclusionreachedby the four Afro-Asiandelegationsin
the Ad ~~~ fjub-Committeeon Namibia,despitethe fact
that we knew beforehandthat somePermanent
members
of
he Secu,+ty Council werenot at all inclinedto take any
measuresagabst
South Africa under ChapterVI] Of the

Charter; nor WOuld theY recognize that the continued
occwatioJ~ of Namibia by South Africa would constitute
an act of aggression and a thrcat to peace, aIthou& they
ECOgJlize the ~lWhY of the prcsence of South Afhca in
Namibia. I’k iJdUsiOn
of that recommendation was net by
anY means designed to embarrass any of the permanent
members, but we felt that the international orgadzation
had already exhausted, to no avail, the noncoercive
avenues open to it.
78. South Africa itself admits that its “right to admjnister
the Tertitory” is derived not from the Mandate but from
ditary
conquest. in the proceedings of the Court tbe
representative Of South Africa maintained on 15 March
1971, as reported in paragraph 82 of the Advisory Opinion:
<<. . .
if it is accepted that the Mandate has lapsed, the
SOuth African Government would havc the r@t to
administer the Territory by reason of a combination of
factors, being (a) its original conquest; (b/ its long oc.
cupation; (c) the continuation of the sacred trust basis
agreed upon in 1920; and, finally /dl because jts adminjs.
tration is to the benefit of the inhabitants of the
Territory and is desired by them. In these circumstances
the South African Governmentcannot acceptthat any
State or organization cari have a better title to the
Territory.”

Zionist *ttler State in Palestine.Nor is it an accidentaI,
passingfeatureof the IsraeU
scene.It is congenital,esscntial
and permanent;for it is inherentin the very ideojogyof
apartheidand of Zionismand in the basjcmotjvation for
ZiOniStColonkJtionof Arab territories,whjch isstingoing
on, and statehood.Zionist racial identification produccs
threc corollaries,asdoeso@hcid: racial slf-%gegation,
racial exclusiveness
and racialsupremacy.‘f%eseprinciples
constitutethe tore andheart of apartheidon t]le onehand
and of the Zionistideologyon the other. I couldgo on at
length to show the very close cooperatjon that eGsts
betweenIsraeland South Africa, one at the tip of Affica
and the other at the tip of Asia.However,thereis a very
importantreport in the form of a workingpaperon recent
developmentsconccmingrelationsof governmentsand
private interestswith South Africa, submitted to the
SpecialCommitteeonApartheid in September1971,and1
woulddrawthe attentionof members
to the part that deaIs
with Israel’srelationswith South Africa, specificallyh the
financialandmilitaryfields.

81. If we considerthat the time hascornewhenenforcementmeasures
arenecessary
to put anendto the aggression
againstthe Territory of Namibia,that is to say,againsta
Territory whichis temporarilyplacedunderthe jurisdiction
of the United Nationsand de jwc is consideredSOby
internationallegislation,this would in no way imply that
presentresolutionsof the Security Councilare Lvvoid of
Morcovcr, during the sameproceedingsthe representative any bindingforce. Wefully endorscthe conclusionof the
of South Africa said, as reported in paragraph83 of the Court, as1havealreadystatedin prcviousdiscussions,
in its
Advisory Opinion: “it is the view of the South African
Advisory Opinion to the effect that Article 25 of the
Governmenl that no legal provisionprcventsits annexing Charter doesnot only apply to enforcementmeasures
South West Africa”, thus defying in the clearestterms adoptedunderChapterVII. If MemberStatcswereto abide
Security Council resolution276(1970), whichdeclaredthe
by that conclusion,
enforcementmeasures
would not have
continued prescnceof South Africa in Namibiato be illegal to be resortedto; but, unfortunately,thosewho maintain
close relationswith South Africa have. by their pecuiiar
and calledupon Statesto act accordingly.
interpretation of Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter,
seriouslyhamperedthe ability of the MemberStates-in
79. The deliberationsof the Special Committeeon the
Question of Defining Aggressionhave revealedthat there fact, eventhe ability of the UnitedNationsitself-to resort
exists a strong body of lega! opinion that regardsthe to meansshort of askingthe SecurityCouncüto useits
occupationof a country or part thereof by anothercountry coercivepowersagainstSouthAfkca.
as an act of aggression.‘?hisopinion is sharedby Asjan,
African, Latin American and socialistjurists and alsoby a 82. However,doubtsabout the mandatorycharacterof
on Namibiawereonceandfor
number of Westernjurists. It is clear by now that South Secunty Councilresoluti111s
Africa’s physical control of Namîbiahasno legalstanding: & dispeuedhy virtue of the following conchIsionin
paragraph
11S-ofthe Adtisory Opinion:
it is but an act of usurpationbY force. In its Advkw
Opinion, the Court confirmed the illegality Of the occu“Tbe Court basthereforereachedthe conclusionthat
pation of Namibia by South Africa, and in one of jts
the
decisjons
madeby the SecurityCouncilin paragraphs
conclusionsappeatingin paragraph111, it added:“. . . the
2 and 5 of resolutions276(1970), as relatedto paraqualification of a situation asillegaldoesnet by itself put
graph3 of resolution264(1969) and paragraph5 of
an end to it. It cari onIy be the first, necessarystepin an
resolution269(1969),wereadoptedin conformity with
endeavourto bring the illegalsituationto an end.”
the purposesand principlesof the Charter ami in
accordance
with its Articles24 and25. Thedecisions
are
80. Here we corne to some aspectsof the duties of
consequently
binding
on
al.l
States
Members
of
the
Un.ited
Member States with regardto this grave situation. ManY
Nations,w]&h are thusunderobligationto aCCept
and
speakersbave referred to the military, financialand other
carry
them
out.”
relations undertaken by various States,especiaflY~JIWestem Europe, with South Africa, thus enablingit to carrYon
me conclusions
which the SecurityCouncilshoulddraw
its racist apartheid policy. However,there are two facesto
from
the
AdGsory
Opinionarethefofiowing:First, that ail
apartheid, and few-jndeed vety feW--PaYattention to this:
Secudty
Councd
resolutions
on Namibiaaremandatoryand
fie onein South Affica and the other in the Middle East,in
bin&ng
in respectof SouthAfrica aswell asin respectof
lsmel, me CO-operationbetweenthe two is carriedon at ail
those
reSohtiOnS
place
On StateS.
ne
moSt
levels and spings
from the samefalse racial PhJosophy. the obfigations
effective ob@tjon of Stateswould be chat of abstaining
Racismis net an acquiredtrait of either South Afrka or the
8

fion] lending any support or any form of assistance to
South Africa, and that implies that reIations}jp of ail
specialized agencies to South Africa or to States in similar
situations. Second, that it is for the Secufity CouncjJ t.
determine any further mcasures consequent upon the
decision already taken by it on the question of Namibia,
83. In conclusion let me remark that any meaningfu]
progress towards terminating the illegal occupation of
Namibia should take into considention that any support or
assistance to South Africa would contribute to the en.
trenchment of South Africa’s occupation of Namibia. Since
it is diffïcult to definc what kind of assistance to or support
of South Africa would or would not affect Natibia, the
economic and military prohibitions of Secutity Council
resolution 283 (1970) and previous resolutions should be
enforced vis-à-vis South Africa irrespectivc of their destination. Otherwise, how could we possibly determine their
destination?
84. 1 know of a very clear case herc in the United States in
which billions of dollars are going to the State of Israe]
under the guise of charity and thc tax-deductibility Jaw,
whcn it bas been proved in the United States Senate itse]f
that those dollars are going to colonize Arab territories and
to arm thc Statc of Isracl.
85. SO long as State capabilities arc measured in economic
and military terms it Will be an exercise in futility to try to
distinguish bctwccn those dealings that are made on behalf
of Namibia and thosc that are not made on behalf of that
Tcrritory. Any assistance to or support for South Afiica
will
release corresponding resources that wifl incvitably
cntrench South Africa’s occupation OFNamibia.
86. Moreover, those who preceded me spoke of increasing
the responsibilities of the United Nations towards Namibia.
The question now is whether the United Nations Council
for Namibia should be empowered to assume additional
responsibilities to ensure a more effective protection of the
rights of Namibians at the interna1 and international levels.
The Secretary of State of Somalia, Mr. Omar Arteh Ghalib,
rightly said:
I‘ . . . it is not sufficient for the United Nations to stand
by its resolution 2145 (XXI) without taking any step to
give that declaratjon tangible and realistic form. Jt is
certainly wrong that after five years the United Nations
cannot agree upon an appropriate organ for the administration of Namibia”. (1584th meeting, paru. 2OO./

Namibian peopie and, bcyond Namibia, to find a Face.
fui, just and lasting solution to the explosive situation
threatening not only the stability, dignity and progress of
southern Africa, but international peace and security as
well.
“We hope that this special responsibility Will remain
uppermost . . .“. [1583rd meeting, paras. 2 7 and 28.j
88. The PRESIDENT (irzterpretatiol~ fiom Spanish): 1
now call on the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia.
89. Mr. OGBU (President, United Nations Council for
Namibia): I am grateful for this opportunity to intervene
again, in exercise of the right of reply, in the course of the
debate on Namibia, still in my capacity as current President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia. J look forward
to other opportunities, when 1 shall speak on the issue in
other organs or committees of the United Nations as the
duly accredited representative of my country, when my
approach and tone of voice may be different.
90. The justification which South Africa has presented
throughout the history of the United Nations involvement
with the case of Namibia in defence of its intransigence and
defïance bas been that the Organization’s position is not
based on legal grounds.
91. The Security Counci] need not be lectured here as to
thc powers of the various United Nations organs. WC know
that the United Nations is not a world Government,
aItho@ we do bclieve it could bc were there unanimity of
Will and purpose on the part of Members. Even South
Africa knows that. Where South Africa parts company with
the rest of mankind, however, is on what the United
Nations is and what it stands for. The majority of mankind
believes that the Organization and its decisions-regardless
of whether they are termed dedsions, resolutions or
recommendations-are reflections of the desires of mankind
for self-deterrnination, freedom and the independence of
subjugated people. Therefore no arguments, or what has
correctly been termed the legal pyrotechnies employed by
South Africa, cari succeed in beclouding that reflection. ft
is understood, therefore, that South Africa Will go to any
length-and J stress the word “any”-to
argue for its own
selfish motives that its case is right and that of the rest of
mankind is wrong.

92. The position of South Africa in this international
mmmunity reminds me of the story OF the proud mother
who went to watch her only son graduate from a military
establishment , At the parade her son was completely out of
step with the rest of bis col]eagues, but the mother g]eefully
remarked ta the person next to her: Y+-% mY son, how
smzt]y he marches; he is the only one in step. AJl the
others are out of step.” By its actions and expressions
South Africa clajms it is right and the rest of the world is
wrong. TO that end, through its Foreign Minister, it has
mndemned and criticized the actions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as well as the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of .hStiCe.
The reSponsibility of the members of the Security CounCil SeWral~y
and joint]y is simple but has far-reaching consequences. ]t is

87. 1 cannot close my statement without referring once
more to the words of the leader of the Jslarnic Republic of
Mauritania, President Ould Daddah, who on 27 September
conveyed to us in the most cordial and friendly but also
most straightforward terms the message of the whole
continent of Africa to the Security Council. He said:
“It is the duty of the Security Counci] to assume its
responsibilities without the least procrastination. But it is
above au the permanent members of the Security
Councif-the United States of America, the Soviet Union,
France and the United Kingdom-on which Africa today
caus to put an immediate end to the martyrdom of the
9

fllCfCl’r~rC vcry’ ~lfilllflL*ii8ll
lllat
undcr Your I’residencY, Sir,
thC C’rNlld 1sbelfQ! C~l]Cd UpMl 10 uphdd lhc ]cga]i[y and
t}lC

I‘llfld~lfl~ClilLll

tK!SlT

]tirs1111;1]rCplltiktt~~l1
flX!llt

L3lld

recr~i;llitd
thit

IhC

~~h)cCtlWtb:

Of

IlS

Wpj

rxis[cnre.

f:rorlj

p”r

)‘(rnr record [1fdip]om;l[]c ach]evcZlfltf

itktcrrl~ticml
wili icad tht! C’nuncil
hy

y(111

[III~

impartiality

of

conmunity,

the

ttj

the

@lt

yt)\jr

çountry

1 a”~ confident
deeision.

93. h~h111 k I~I! ordcr of tire day. A decade ag0 very few
~CO$C wt1uld bave bclievcd that [he IJnlted S[a[cs of
Amcrica \kr(dd
Lake [he stand lt bas [aken [oday Or1 [he
question of C’h111ain [he United Nations. lt is important for
thiS a11g11SthtrdY t0 tic fll]]Y ccaflsciousOf what [hc w(Jr]d
CS~WCISttt’ it. ~II C%IH~~]C[If such cxpec[a[]dn is contained
in a ]~l1l~liciI[itlll er1ti[lc4l /hr fJttilc~a%r~j~~rr itr r/rc lp7t& a
stratcpy for a llfllc~l~~ crd in [he affairs of nations, bcing a
~!ptlrt tbl’ :l Il3tItlfliII
po]icy Pane] established by [hc I]nl[ed
N;ltirrtrs hsscu.kcli~tll
of’ thc [!nitcd
Stntcs
of AInerica,
under
lhc distiriguisficd Chü~rni~nstrip of Mr, Nicolas Ratrenbach,
fornicrly A[lorr1ey.(;c11eri11 and llnder-Secretary »f S[a[c of
th Ihiitcd States. Ilndcr tf1e heading “I)cc]sion-Maklng In
the Security C%uriçil”, [fie rr].~1rt states On page 21 :

Pr’-%e of thiS aUglM body. I wisb [o reiterate []~a[ what is
wired h-c and now is Positive po]i[ical action whlch will
]lelP [o re]icve [he racist régime of Pretoria of its yoke Or
burden of Preparing Namibia or Namibians for self-rule. wc
hvc haded enough and WC have legal hacking now to
dernand [bat SOuth Africa must “let my brothers and s]s[ers
Of Namibia go”. It is sad that after nearly halfa Century of
South Africa’s occupation, that régime, at best, cari OnIY
Iefer ta sub-professional cadresof nursesin genera] [ergs,
as a]feged by apparently well-hosted newspaper reporters.
The Fore@ Ministcr of South Afrjca wasunable to give the
SccuritY Council any specific numbers of Namibian medical
doctors, engineers, lawyers, architects, agricuhurlsts, OI
even PrOfCSSiOna]mine& traincd by [he régime during [bis
van of nearly half a Century. Yet a liberation movemcnt,
IabOuring under great handicaps, in a relativety short time
bas becn able to train undcr its auspicesdoctors, Iawyers,
engineers, and others, as the Council was informed by
Mr. Nujorna. This goes to prove that Namibians are definilely bcttcr teachers than thc South African Government.
96. We have al] heard the old colonial argument before,
will be prepared for independence in
due course. It is unfortunate that old colanialists never
learn; they just have to be klcked away. Experience should
have [aught South Africa that they Will stand to gain
invcstmcnt-wise should they decide now to hand over to
the international community their so-called responsibility
to preparc Namibians for indcpendence.
narnely: the Territory

“If is rsacntiol Ihat [hc Securhy Counci] p]ay ][s major
rvlc in thc United Nations efforts to maintain
intcrt1alitrnal pracc and seçurity. In our view, growlh in
tilt! rcsponsitrility efltl iiutlmity
of thc &curity
CoufKA
is
C’hartcr

IO tht

crvUr:Il

rh~~drrp~~r~t

of the strcngthencdIJrtited

Naticrns UV hclicve ncccsmry for surviva] in [hc decadcs
:I hall

.”

l‘hc rqic1rt ,olltiuues:
“‘l‘r~
II:, [hcre a]‘]n*ar tu bc scvcral nrcans of incrcasing
[ht* t1scl’ulness ut” thc ScçurilY Coui1cil. Wc arc ctrnccrncd
[bat crises and disl~utes now rccrivc Security Gounci]
at ten1ic1rr on]Y whcn [hcy approach or cross tl1e tt1r~~shold
Ul” ilrIiltid
violcncc. If‘ the Securily C’tsuncil is t0 scrvc a
mort cffcctivc rolc, it shtruld seck mrthods of assisting
[hc parlies to a dispute 10 rcach nn agrccd solution long
hcfore [hc ncar cCrtain[y of violence forces tt1e problem
[0 [hc forcfrrrnt of irifern;jltionel attention. To wait until a
crisis rcachrs such intensity beforc the Council üttcnl]~ts
to dcfusc it is tw wait until emotions hnve reachcd their
pcak and a hrgc nrrtnbcr
of Possible alternative solutions
hsvc bccn foreeloscd by the rush of cvcnts. Moreovcr,
therc has bccn a pernicious [cndoncy tu avoid difficult
solutions of disputes when [hcy are relatively quiesccnt,
and thcrl tu freczc ttte stntus quo if violence breaks out,

This

is

UII~CSU~VC~

a

ccrt&

fkrmula

for

the

pcrpetuation

of

ulld dangerdus conflicts.”

94. Wllcn I flrst addressed this Council 1 indicated inter
aha ht

:

“By acceding to thc rcquest of [he Council for Nnmibia
to bc allowed 10 participate in this dcbate, the Sccurity
Council 1~1s [akcn a stcp which further ndvances the
position of thc orgnn over which 1 have the privllege of
prcsiding at prcsent ,” [158#th nwcthtg, para. 74.1
95. The Security Council, in its infinite wisdom, subseluently granted audience to Mr. SanI Nujoma, a Namibian
3f rcpute, thus furthcr enhancing the confidence and
10

97. A cursory exarnlnation of thc South Afric- Foreign
Ministcr’s othcr futile attempts to [ry to convince [he
Counci] by bis words that South Africa is doing SOmuch
for the Namibian people, their economic deveiopment and
[l1e]r guidance towards indepcndence, shows bow farcical
c]aims are. Should we believe South Africa’s outlandish
claim that it ploughs more wealth into Namibia than it
[akes Ou[? 01~ would ask, in return for what? Is it SOuth
Africa’s love for black Namlbians, or diamonds, or gold?
l]umanltarian charity, or the joy of bearing the divine yOkc
of co]onial]sm? Thc record of the Pretoria régime and its
pollcy of q~~rtireid is clear, and 1 need say no more On thls.
98. The Foreign Minister of South Africa reveah, perhaps
madvertently but definitely in a pathetic way, bis GOVernment’s contempt for the people of Namibia. He assumes
[]]a[ [he people
of Namibia might not even want independence and freëdom. Freedom is an inalienable right of all
peop]cs.The people of Namibia have as much ri@ as the
Pop]e of any Member State, including South Africa, [O
indcpen&nce and rnembership of this GrganlDt]On in
accardance w][h [he provisions of the United Nations
Charter. Are we to believe that Chief ClemenCeRapuuo of
the Hereros, whose letter of 3 September 1 [ransmitted [o
[Ile Securlty Counci~, is a bar? Are we to assume [bat the
Rcverend Michael Scott, the man who bas piven some
2omodd ycars of bis life to fighting for the cause of the
enslaved people
of South Africa and Namlbia, is out for
persona1gain and ~IV. ? Gr Miss Barbara Rogers, a Young
]ady Of great courage and idealism, who gave UP her
position in the service of her own Government becauseshe
could nO[ reconche her principles and personal beliefs in a
just cause with her officia1 responsibilities, are we to
conslder her a Bar?- Are these people, [he churchmen as

WC]] 8s others ~110 have raised their voices agajnst South
Africa’s oppression, agents of a sinister conspiracy against
South Africa? No, we cannot belicve South Africa’s
assertions that it has no intention of exploiting Namibla,
nor cari we take at face value its claim that it is preparing
the people for self-government and eventunl independence.

Council has made a determination under Article 39 rhat a
threat to the peace, breach of the peace or sot of
aggression exists. Only in these circumstances are the.
decisions binding under Article 25. No suc11 detmnhtiOn exists in relation to South West Afrjca or Namibia,
/1589th meeting, para, SI.]

99. The facts are simply that South Africa is carrying out
a systematic policy of exploitation, suppression, apartheid
and fragmentation of a people and doing ail this as an
indication of a definite plan of annexation of the Territory
by that Government without fear, shame or conscience.

I hope that the Government of the United Kingdom was
following the debate recently ended on the complaint by
Zambia to the Security Council regarding South Africa’s
violations of Zambia’s sovereignty, airspace and territoriaI
integrity-the case in point being, of course, the events of
5 October 1971 when it was allegedthat South Afi-& was
chasing freedomQJrters from Namibia into Zambian territory.

100. I would be shirking my responsibilities to my
colleagues in the Council for Namibia if 1 as much as
address myself to the socalled proposa1 of a plebiscite.
Suffice it to say that South Africa is in no position to make
such a proposa]. If South Africa is really honestly as
innocent a victim of concerted international misunderstanding as it claims to be, let it get out of thc Territory-and
fast. Why should it continue to be there against a11odds of
fieavy investment without adequate retums as it claims?
South Africa should learn from the experience of past
colonial masters. It is better for it to withdraw gracefully
now and maintain some semblance of goodwill on both
sides for future mutual co-operation than to be chased out
in shame. It has been warned and it should. see the writing
on the wall. The United Nations is both willing and able to
rnake sure that thc Namibians decide their future in
accordancc with accepted international norms. Ah that the
Llnited Nations Council for Namibia needs is the will by the
Security Council to act in unison whiçh will leave no doubt
in the minds of South Africa that this Organization means
business.
101, 1 listened with keen attention to the members of this
Council. 1 am pleased that members of the Organization of
African Unity team, the Foreign Ministers of Africa, some
of them eminently qualified lawyers in their own right,
bave taken tare of the legal paints that have been raised
during this debate. 1 cannot help, however, getting the
impression that some legalistic arguments raised by at least
two members of the Security Council-the permanent
representatives of the United Kingdom and of France,
respectively-sound, in my opinion, like exact summaries of
the dlssentlng opinions of their respective judges at the
International Court of Justice. 1 humbly submit that the
time for legal argument ended when the International Court
of Justice rendered its opinion on 21 June 1971. This is the
time for positive political action. On behalf of the Council
for Namibia, I should Iike to express appreciation to the
Member States whose representatives either here or in the
p]enary bave indicated acceptance of the Advisory Opinion.
I’hese include the United States of America, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Italy, Japan, Poland, Argentina
and Jordan.

103. It was to precisely such a situation, as envisaged by
the United Nations Association of the United States of
America, that the quotation 1 made carlier applied. 1 am
glad, however, that the United Kingdom voted for the
resolution on Zambia’s complaint against South Africa.
104. The Unlted Nations had delegated its responsibilities
for Namibia to the United Nations Councü for Namibia.
Because, as the Foreign Minister of South Africa rightly
asserted, the establishment of that Council derives from the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XV),
South Africa will not allow members to visit the Territory
and satisfy themsclves as to the true facts of the situation.
He also enumerated a number of persans or bodies that had
been invited-some more, some less, connected with the
United Nations. This seems odd, for if, as he said, South
Africa has “nothing to hide” the logic of the situation
would be that the organ specifically charged with concern
for the Territory should be the first to enter it to see things
for itself. What really matters is whether the United Nations
representative, the Council for Namibia, or some other
organ will be able to proceed to the Territory to discuss the
modalities of the peaceful transfer of authority from those
who now exercjse it de facto to those who exercise it de
jure-the Namibian people themselves eventually. The
South African Pore@ Minister refers to the Council for
Namibia as if it were some outside body. Lest it be
forgotten, the United Nations Council for Namibia comprises eleven Member States, namely, Chile, Colombia,
Guyana, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia. These countries remain committed
to the ideals of the United Nations and are prepared to
serve the cause of the United Nations in ensuring that the
Territory of Namibla gains its independence through the
democratic process. They have no other particular axe’to
grind. Will the Security Council disappoint the worfd and
fall short of its expectations? Mr.President, under your
distinguished and memorable Presidency, 1 hope not.

102. I was particularly struck by the statement of the
representative of the United Kingdom who, among other
things, said:

105. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation wishes to
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for bis
statement at the beginning of this meeting Clarifying bis
Covernment’s interpretation of the right to self-determination withm the context of the situation prevailing in thc
Unjted Nations-protected Territory of Namibia.

“And, as a matter of law, my Covernment considers
that the Security Council cari take decisions generally
bin&ng on Member States only when the Security

106. At our 1588th meeting the representative of France
gave us the interpretation of his Covernment, which was
that France interprets the principle of the ri@ to
11

sclf~ctcrminatitrn within thc framcwork in which
it hs
alrcady granted independcnce to France? former colonial
tcrritorics. Ile went on to elaborate that this is self-determination within thc framcwork of a given territory, no1
fragmcntary seIf.determination at for instance the communal Icvcl or thc 1cvcl of small cntities. 1 am glad to note
that thc vicw exprcsscd by thc reprcsentativc of the Unitcd
Kingdom is in accord with that vicw, and f am sure that this
coincidcs with the vicw of each dclcgation at this table.

“South Africa docs net claim, and ncver has claimed, to
thc Tcrritory. Our purposc in the Tcrritory is not
our own aggrandizemcnt or cnrichment-territorial
or
01herwise. . . . Our purpose is IO guide each of the pcoples
of’ South West Africa along the road to self.dctermination
according to its wishes and, by dcvelopment in a11fields,
to bring il to full self-government and cventual independence, if this is wflat it desires.” /1589th meeting,
~OSSCSS

para. 79.j

107. 1 wishcd to cal1 attention to this aspect because when
I first raiscd this question 1 cxpresscd thc hopc that perhaps
when Mr. Mullcr ncxt took the floor hc would cxpand upon
bis Govcrnmcnt’s concept of thc principlc of thc right to
~lf.tlctern~ill;Iljtrn.
Ilnfortunatcly,
WC havc net had an
opportunity of henring his vicwpoint. It would thercfore
rtot bc out of context 10 cal1 attention to the vicws held by
the pcople of Si>uth Wcst Africa on sclf.determination. II
Will bc recnllcd that af a prcvious meeting 1 drew thc
attention of this Council to a statcment which had bcen
issued by a distinguished pancl of African churchmcn in
Windhoek on 30 June compiaining about thc ha& and
unjust conditions to which the people of Namibie werc
bCing SuhjCCtCd.
Foflowing that statemcnt, Prime Minister
Vorstcr went tci Windhoek and hcld discussions with this
pancI of churchmcn and alter that meeting l3ishop Auala
foulld it ncçcssary 01 issue aitother slatcment, in which he
slid:

f08. 1 have said in gencral how the people of South Wcst
Africa conccive of their vital self-detcrmination, and 1 am
glad that this agreeslargely with the viewsexpresscdby the
rcprcsentativcs of France, the Unitcd Kingdom and a11of us
hcrc. But how cari such self-determination take place’! This
was made clcar by thc South Wcst Africa Pcople’s Organizatiori in a communication of 29 January 1971 addressed to
thc Secretary-General. 1 wish to read out thc relevant parts:

“WC h:~vc rcad thp ncwspapers, and wc havc sccn thnt
thc whifcs arc VC~Srli!;*,.ltisfied with IJS.‘I‘h~y do net :~grcc
with
WC’
our noa-&~tIiiC ccjnprcgal ions
lmdcrst:m.l us ~~11, bcçausc we bave referTed tu thc truc
I;icts. ‘I’he ncwspapcrs ar~d other whites ~ay th:lI thc
churchcs müy not talk this w;ty. Our uwn people who
cxperirncc thc iJCtU~il condit itms evcry day arc grateful
tllat thc church courEils bave intervcnctl orI thcir bChalf.
WC car], thcreforc, only stand by thc words which WC
havc rclcmd.”

“3. Thc unconditional release of a11Namibian political
prisoncrs currently imprisoned in South Africa as well as
thvsr now bcing held in Namibia.

US.

But

I‘ld

tlilt

The stotcment went on fi say:

“1. A generat climate of pcecc, harmony and free
political activities must prevail throughout the COUII~~~ to
ensure the participation of all Namibians irrespective of
race, creed or colour in a plebiscite.
“2. Noting that Namibia is presently under South
Africnn rnilitary occupation, a genuine plebiscite cari only
be carried out if all the South African troops and police
arc withdrawn fron Namibian territory.

“4. Thc rcturn fo thcir own country of a11%unibians
çurrcntly in e: ilc wjthout risk of arrest, detention,
inlimirlalicm or imprisonment I
“5. The dismantling of all Bantustans which aim at
dividing the people on an cthnic basis and that such a
plcbiscitc be conductcd on the principle of ‘one man one
VOk’.

“In our lettcr WC said that South West Africa should
rcmain a unit and that it must bccomc independent. Thc
Government also wishcs this indcpcndcnce. But it wishes
this for 811 indcpcndcnt Ovamboland, and indepcndent
K~WJI~O,
IIereraland, Damaraland, Nilmaland, etc. ‘rhe
pupuIation of south wcst Africa is small in numbcr and
Will thus be dividcd, evcn though it wishes to StSY
togcther. We ca11 do no more than to sce South West
Africa with a11ils cthnic groups as a unit. Thcrefore, we
have said that thc South African GOVernmCnt, in COoperation with the ?Jnited Nations, should make the
whole country with a11its pcoples independent. WC must
a11of LIS togcthcr be independent in me country. This is
what WCnsked of thc Govcrnmcnt.
“Our main points arc the inferior position to which our
people are aubjcctcd through the policy lnws ~~CI through
the treatmcnt which they experience. WC are fully adult
peuple . . . and WCwjsh to bc recognizcd as such. This is
what WCplcad for.”
Contrast that with thc statcmcnt made by Mr. Mullcr when
he addresscd this Cou&l:
12

“6, That SUC~a plebiscite be conducted under the joint
supervision of thc United Nations committee on decolonization,” the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
Organizafion of African Unity.”
109. Of course WC at the United Nations, whether
mcmbers of this Council or of other bodies, have already
affirmed thc Princip)e of the rigbt of peoples to self.
determination; this was elaborated upon and adopted
..”
unanimously at the twentyafifth session of the General
Assembly in rcsolution 2625 (XXV), wkich ww 8 “bel++ .’ ;-’
ration on Principles of International Liw COnCeJTM& ,,
Frjendly Relations and Co-operation among States in ..;“.‘ ;:’
accordance with the Charter of the United Nationa”. Th& :,,!i’.~,-i~
was an unanimously adopted declaration to which even tif ,,.:~;:3,:~~,
South African delegation did not make reservationdl. @#: ‘i,$&
bave two other, eq&y hpXtant
resolutions, f 514 o$i$9ii
.,::bJ;
,j, f!;T,“;;#
,;.,fIj
and 1541 (XV).
.:‘,:: _’
4”

110. I havc brought these pertinent facts to the Council’s
attention in the hope that if members wish to pursue this
question of sclfdetermination further, they Will take them
into account .

course, independence. If there were any doubt on this
point, we could refcr to the right to self-determination,
including independence, in the text of the resolution itself.
115. We believe that the legal basis for such negotiation
would be the provisions of the Covenant of the League of
Nations, the United Nations Charter and the 1946 resolutions. T~US, we would have a wholly adequate legaI basis,
without referring to rcsoiutions which have been challenged
far more.

111. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(Fnncc) (interpretution
fiom Frenchj: I havc asked to speak bccause at the 1588th
meeting the representative of SomaIia asked a question
after 1 had made my statement. 1 had replied in part when
he put a more specific question both to the representative
of the United Kingdom and to me. But in fact the
representative of Somalia asked me, after my statemcnt,
what we had meant and what solution we basically
envisaged for thc problem.

116. Final&, we cannot hide from ouwelves the fact that
it would be extremely difficult to persuade South Africa,
but it would be more difficult to use force. We couid see
this moming how resolutions tended to pile up and how
many resolutions, evcn the harshest are becoming increasingly unenforccable.

112. I believe it would be useful, at a timc whcn we are
discussing among ourselves possible solutions and future
resolutions, to give some clarification to my colleaguc of
our ideas on the subject.

117. We believe, then, that if some hope remains to end
the present deadlock it resides in collective pressure
brought by the United Nations and, in particular, by the
Powers that are most iikely to be heard. Such pressure
would perhaps influence South Africa to accept a solution
which, beyond any legal pplemics, would go straight to
what we consider to be essential on the moral as ~41 3s the
political level, namely, an opportunity for the people
concerned to determine its own destiny.

113. 1 must say that the objective is the same for a11of us:
to give the people of Namibia an opportunity to express
themselves freely on their destiny. W’here we differ,
obviously, is in regard to the means of achieving that
objective, and our assessment of the difficulties. But since
the idea which we submitted has been taken up and
mentioned by several colleagues and has even been taken
over in various forms by some of them--1 listened with very
great interest this morning to the extremely interesting
suggestions made by the Ambassador of Argentinashould like to statc here specifïcally what we have in mind
SOthat all mcmbcrs may think it over.

118. That is the clarification 1 wished to give in reply to
the question put to me by the Ambassador of Somalis.
119. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has listened
with interest to the views put forward by the representative
of France. 1 am sure that they Will be given the consideration they deserve by ail members of the African Croup.

114. We have in mind a resolution whercby the Security
Council would invite in the most pressing terms the
Government of South Africa to contact the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations SO as to negotiate an
agreement for a provisional international régime which
would enable the population concerned-within
3 reasonable time, of course-t0 exercise its right to selfdetermination. As we see it, that right to selfdetermination-and I shall not go back to the clarification that 1
gave the last time-means the chance for a people freely to
choose whatever solution it deems best, including, of

120. l’he PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next meeting of the Security Council will be held tomorrow
at 3.30 p.m., when WC shall continue our debate on the
question of Namibia. It is possibIe that a draft resolution on
the item may be presented at that meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m,

3
