S/PRST/2006/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 June 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5474th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 June 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Strengthening
international law: rule of law and maintenance of international peace and security”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, which are indispensable foundations of a
more peaceful, prosperous and just world. The Council underscores its
conviction that international law plays a critical role in fostering stability and
order in international relations and in providing a framework for cooperation
among States in addressing common challenges, thus contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
“The Security Council is committed to and actively supports the peaceful
settlement of disputes and reiterates its call upon the Member States to settle
their disputes by peaceful means as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, including by use of regional preventive mechanisms and
the International Court of Justice. The Council emphasizes the important role
of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States.
“The Security Council attaches vital importance to promoting justice and
the rule of law, including respect for human rights, as an indispensable element
for lasting peace. The Council considers enhancement of the rule of law
activities as crucial in the peacebuilding strategies in post-conflict societies
and emphasizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard. The
Council supports the idea of establishing a rule of law assistance unit within
the Secretariat and looks forward to receiving the Secretariat’s proposals for
implementation of the recommendations set out in paragraph 65 of the
Secretary-General’s report on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616). The Council urges Member States
which are interested in doing so to contribute national expertise and materials
to these developments within their means, and to improve their capacities in
these areas.
“The Security Council emphasizes the responsibility of States to comply
with their obligations to end impunity and to prosecute those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity and serious violations of international
06-40159 (E) 220606

*0640159*

S/PRST/2006/28

humanitarian law. The Council reaffirms that ending impunity is essential if a
society in conflict or recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past
abuses committed against civilians and to prevent future such abuses. The
Council intends to continue forcefully to fight impunity with appropriate
means and draws attention to the full range of justice and reconciliation
mechanisms to be considered, including national, international and ‘mixed’
criminal courts and tribunals and truth and reconciliation commissions.
“The Security Council considers sanctions an important tool in the
maintenance and restoration of international peace and security. The Council
resolves to ensure that sanctions are carefully targeted in support of clear
objectives and are implemented in ways that balance effectiveness against
possible adverse consequences. The Council is committed to ensuring that fair
and clear procedures exist for placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists
and for removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions. The
Council reiterates its request to the 1267 Committee to continue its work on
the Committee’s guidelines, including on listing and delisting procedures, and
on the implementation of its exemption procedures contained in resolution
1452 (2002) of 20 December 2002.”

2

06-40159
