UNITEDNATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING: 12 APRIL 1973
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 70.5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the i)ermanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)........................,....................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
15

S/PV. 1705

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a,symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the OfJcial Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 1.2 April 1973, at 5 p.m.
&&dent:

Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 705)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
LRtter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)
The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the PermanentRepresentative of Lebanonto the United Nationsaddressed
to the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/10913)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I wish
to inform the membersof the Council that 1have receiveda
letter, dated 12 April 1973, from the representativeof
Lebanonin which he asks to be allowed to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’sconsiderationof
theitem on its agenda.
2. In accordance with the practice of the Council, and
with its consent, I proposenow to invite the representative
of Lebanonto take a place at the Counciltable in order to
participatein the considerationof the item on our agenda
without the right to vote.
At the invitation. of the President, Mr, E Ghorra
(Lebanon)took a placeat the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I have
also received a letter, dated 12 April 1973, from the
representative of Israel, in which he asks to be
allowed to participate, without the right to vote, in the
council’sconsiderationof the item on its agenda.

4. Again in accordancewith the practice of the Council,
and with its consent, I proposeto invite the representative
of Israel to take a place at the Council table in order to
participate in the considerationof the item on our agenda
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the aesident Mr. Y. Tekoah [Israel)
took a place at the Counciltable,
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fiorn Spanish]: The
representativeof Egypt hasalsosent a letter, dated 12 April
1973, to the Presidentof the Security Council in which he
asksto be allowed to participate, without the right to vote,
in the Council’sconsiderationof the item on its agenda.
6. If I hear no objection, and with the consent of the
Council, I shallinvite the representativeof Egypt to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the PraideN, Mr. A. I? Abdel
Meguid (Egypt) took a place at the Council table.
7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spdnisk): This
meeting of the Security Council hasbeen convenedon the
request made by the representativeof Lebanonin a letter
dated I2 April 1973 addressedto the President of the
Security Council [S/10913/. I should alsolike to draw the
attention of membersof the Council to the following
documentsdealingwith the item on the agendafor today’s
meeting: letter dated 11 April 1973 from the representative
of Lebanon, document S/10911; and letter dated 11 April
1973 from the representativeof Israel,‘documentS/10912.
8. The first name on the list of speakersis that of the
representativeof Lebanon,on whom I now call.
9. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, although we
are not membersof the Council, it seemsthat we are
permanent clients and I shouldlike to addressto you my
congratulations on your assumptionof the presidency of
the Council for the month of April. Weseein you a noble
figure representingPeru, a progressiveand forward-looking
nation, and at the sametime the people and the continent
of Latin America, with which Lebanon has strong ties of
friendshipand humanrelationship.
10. First of all, on behalf of my delegation 1 wish 10
expressto you, Mr. President,and to the membersof the
Council, our gratitude for having convened this urgent
meeting &+-the Council at such short notice. Yesterday
afternoon I had the privilege of visiting you in your office
and handing you a letter, contained in document S/l091 1,
in which I described the perfidious act of aggression

mounted by Israel against Lebanon in the early hours of
10 April 1973 and set forth the position of the Lebanese
Government regarding this attack. The’document is before
the Council and, although it includes all the facts, I wish to
recapitulate some of them at this stage. Tho’se facts have
been corroborated by none other than the culprit, Israel, in
the public statements made by Israeli leaders, as well as by
the letter contained in document S/10912, addressed to
you, Mr. President, by the representative of Israel.

El-Najjar and Kamal Nasser were killed. In the area of
El-Ouzai the attackers blew up a building where two
Lebanese civilians and three Syrian labourers were killed.
Another Israeli murder-squad landed near Sidon, soutll of
Beirut, and attacked a garage which, the Israelis later
claimed, belonged to the Palestinian organization of El
Fatah.
16. AS a result of all those criminal operations, 12 people
were killed: two Lebanese policemen, two Lebanese &vilians, three Syrian labourers, four Palestinians, and an
Italian woman; 29 persons, all Lebanese, were wounded.
The invaders also attacked a refugee camp in the vicinity of
the Beirut Airport; many people were killed there, I do not
have, at this stage, the exact figures; I will communicate
them to the Council at a later stage.

11. At 1 a.m., 10 April 1973-that is, at an hour when
practically everybody is asleep-Israeli naval units landed on
the shores of El-Ouzai, the the southern outskirts of Beirut,
capital of Lebanon, a squad of Israeli terrorists numbering
about 35 persons. For the information of the Council,
El-Ouzai is an area of beaches where people go to swim and
for leisure. At night the area is naturally deserted. These
beaches are defenceless. They are open to those who come
in peace to Lebanon to enjoy our sunshine and the beauty
of those beaches.

17. In my letter of 11 April I stressed,and wishto stress
againtoday, that Lebanon, in the face of repeatedIsraeli
aggression,has always depended,and depends,on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the Security Council
for its protection. The Council assumes,
under the Charter,
prime responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in the world, and definitely in one of the nlost
unsettled areasof the world. It hasan obligation not only
to find solutions to problems and conflicts, but also to
offer protection for the States which are victims of
aggression.

12. The raiders were disguised in civilian clothing. Civilian
Lebanese cars with Lebanese registration plates were
waiting for them in the vicinity of the landing area. They
had been put there by Israeli agents who had infiltrated
into the country with false passports. The Lebanese
Government has proof that elements did come from outside
with falsified foreign passports in or’der to prepare the
ground for that Israeli criminal act.

18. With the attack by Israeli commandoson the International Airport of Beirut on 28 December1968, Israel set
in motion a cycle of violence which has persistently
intensified since then. Its armed forces have mounted
severalassaultsagainstour peacefultowns and villages in
southern Lebanon;hundredsof innocent people, including
women and children, have been murdered or wounded;
severalhundred homesand buildingshave been destroyed;
the peaceof the country hasbeendisturbed.

13. The Israeli marauders drove away in those cars
towards predetermined objectives. One group went to Rue
Verdun, a peaceful residential area in Beirut. They burst
into one apartment building with their guns blazing and
murdered, in gangster styIe, Mr. Yussef El-Najjar, known as
Abou Yussef, and his wife, who attempted to shield him
from the attackers. Mr. El-Najjar was a member of the
executive committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). In .thc same building, they attacked the
apartment of Mr. Kamal Nasser, a poet and intellectual who
acted as the spokesman for the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and assassinated him, also in cold-blooded
fashion.

19. Last February, Israeli armedforces raided two refugee
campsin northern Lebanon in a surprise attack at night.
Thosecamps were situated at Badawi and Nahr El-Bared.
Scoresof Palestinianswere murderedin cold blood in their
beds.

14. It may interest the Council to hear about one aspect
of the barbaric way in which Mr. Kamal Nasser was
murdered. Since he had been the spokesman for the PLO,
his mouth was riddled with bullets, which demonstrates not
only a spirit ‘of hatred but a symbolic intent to silence the
voice speaking on behalf of the Palestinian people. The
murderers wanted to silence a mouth that had spoken in
defence of the rights of the Palestinian people in a country
which cherishes and respects freedom, and which is
considered to be one of the countries most attached to
fundamental freedoms.

20. The Council has on severaloccasions strongly condemnedIsrael for its actionsin Lebanonand warned it not
to repeat them. In resolution 280 (1970) the Council went
sofar asto declarethat Israeliarmedattacks “can no longer
be tolerated” andin that resolutionthe Council repeated its
solemnwarning to Israelthat “if they were to be repeated
the Security Council would, in accordancewith resolution
262 (1968) and the present resolution, consider taking
adequateand effective stepsor measures
in accordance with
the relevant Articles of the Charter to implement its
resolutions”.

15. Another group of Israelis attacked and blew up a
building in the street of El-Fikany, while another attacked
and blew up a garage belonging to a Palestinian, situated in
the northern district of Beirut, called Al-Dawrah. In the
vicinity of the residence of Yussef El-Najjar lived Mr. Kamal
Adwan, another leader of the Palestinian liberation movement. He too was killed, in the same way as Ymsef

21. The variousresolutionsof the Council regarding Israeli
aggressionagainst Lebanon, as well as other resolutions
about Israeli aggressionagainstArab States which were
passedby the Security Council or the General Assembly,
weremet persistentlywith contempt and defianceby Israeli
officials and representatives.Israel,which owesits existence
to the United Nations, hasbecomethe spoiled child of this
2

Organization and the Member most rebellious against the
Charter, the resolutions of the Organization, international
security and international law and morality.

and executed by the State, as was the act of terrorism
perpetrated the day before yesterday in the early hours of
the morning in Beirut and in Sidon. Mrs. Meir referred to
those gangster-like operations in Lebanon as “very marvellous” operations about which “shining pages will be
written”. The Prime Minister of Israel forgets the historical
fact that terrorism was introduced in the Middle East by
Zionist gangs. She forgets the dark pages that those gangs
have written in the history of that area, If the operation
undertaken in Beirut the day before yesterday was
“brilliant and daring”, as it was described by a newspaper,
it shows the long experience that the Israelis have had in
terrorism-in
the training, planning and execution of
terrorist acts.

22. It is a recognized fact that Lebanon is a peaceful
country, constantly pursuing a peaceful course in life and
helping to promote peaceful conditions in the area and
elsewhere in the world. We do not pursue a militaristic
course and we do not rely on military power for our
existence and protection, for a country that has existed for
over 6,000 years and has seen empires fall and invasions
repelled can afford today to rely mainly on the new
international order and legality for its protection. The
Council cannot shirk its responsibility towards small,
peaceful and defenceless States which are Members of the
United Nations. If, indeed, there is a raison d’dtre for the
Security Council, for the United Nations and for the
Charter, it is precisely to protect the security of those
countries and the peaceful existence of their inhabitants. It
is certain that the major political Powers do not need the
protective shield of the Security Council, The Charter
devised that shield for the smaller nations like ours.

27. If I were to remind the Council of the entire history of
Israeli terrorism in the Middle East, I could easily recite
hundreds of examples, but I am not going to abuse the time
and the patience of members of the Council. I only want to
refresh their memories by citing the King David and
Dir Yassein massacres, where hundreds of men, women and
children were killed and butchered in 1946 and 1948.
28. Nobody, perhaps, has described the nature of Israeli
terrorism more aptly than Mr. Herbert Morrison, Lord
President of the Council and Leader of the House of
Commons of the British Government, when he said, on
31 July 1946, after the King David massacre:

23. Here at the United Nations we often speak of
strengthening international peace and security, of enhancing the role of the Security Council and of making the
United Nations a more effective instrument for the preservation of peace in the world. To that effect we have
adopted numerous and lengthy resolutions, most of which,
unfortunately, remain unimplemented. We have maintained
before, and we continue to maintain, that the United
Nations faces a crisis of confidence, for the people of the
world, and especially those victims of acts of aggression, are
despairing at the failure of the United Nations to protect
them. This situation has come about because the United
Nations has neglected to take the appropriate measures in
due course of time to enforce its resolutions and to
command respect for them.

“The curse of Hitler is not yet fully removed. Some of
his victims fleeing from the ravaged ghettos of Europe
have carried with them the germsof those very plagues
from which they sought escape-intolerance,racial pride,
intimidation, terrorism and the worship of force.“r
29. It is a mere coincidencethat I am drawing on some
British statements, for I could cite hundreds of French,
American, Russianor other statements about lsraeli terrorism. But I should like also to state that the evils of
Zionist-inspired policy applied by Israel are so reminiscent
of Nazi practicesas to have made the well known-British
historian, Arnold Toynbee, remark “. . . it was their [the
Zionists’] supremetragedy that the lessonlearnt by them
from their encounter with the Nazi GermanGentilesshould
have been not to eschewbut to imitate some of the evil
deedsthat the Nazishad committed againstthe Jews.“*

24. Indeed, the United Nations faces that crisis vis-$-vis
the public opinion of the world-it
is a crisis of the
implementation of United Nations resolutions. Israel has set
an example of how a militaristic State, contemptuous of
the United Nations and contemptuous of international law
and order, can destroy the trust of the world in this
Organization and can scuttle all the efforts deployed by it
to achieve peace in the world.

30. Lord Russelldedicated his entire life to the searchfor
truth and the promotion of peace in the world. He
culminated that life with a message
dated 3 1 January 1970
to the Conference of Parliamentarians-it was like his last
will and testament-in which he said:

25. The’ letter of yesterday from the representative of
Israel was, like many of his previous letters, based on three
fallacious arguments. The first is that Israel is conducting
warfare against terrorism and terrorist organizations. The
second is that Israel is undertaking actions to prevent future
terrorist acts. The third is that these terrorist organizations
are harboured in Lebanon and that the Lebanese Government is conniving with them to launch their acts of
terrorism abroad.

‘&Weare frequently told that we must sympathizewith
Israel becauseof the suffering of the Jews in Europe at
the handsof the Nazis. I seein this suggestionno reason
to perpetuate any suffering, What Israel is doing today
cannot be condoned, and to invoke the horrors of the
past to justify thoseof the presentis grosshypocrisy.”

26. First of all, Israel is the least qualified country in the
world to invoke arguments regarding terrorism. It is a State
born out of terrorism, by which it has preserved its
existence for the last 25 years. It has maintained itself and
continues to maintain itself on what has become known as
a State-organized terrorism-a terrorism planned, organized

1 See F’ar:i~irnentarj~
Official
Reporf
Fifth

Dehates

(Ifansard),

Serb,

vol. 426 (London,

House

oj’

C’rnmon%

Her Majesty’s

StationeryOflice),COI.960.
2. Arnold Toynbce, A Study
of History,
Oxford University Press, 1954), p. 290.

3

vol.

VIII,

(London,

that should be borne by the international community-that
is, finding a solution to that problem.

31. The problem of the Palestinian refugees fills a large
section of the United Nations archives. Is it necessary for
me to remind everyone here around this table of an
established historical fact: that Zionist terrorism. drove
1.5 million Palestinians out of their homeland, usurped
their homes and properties? Is it necessary to remind
Members of the United Nations that most of those
Palestinians live in the squalor of refugee camps as a result
of a continuing process of terror, intimidation, spoliation
and, most important of all, injustice? Is it, further,
necessary to remind the Council that such a life, filled with
frustration and despair, can hardly be nourished by the
meagre rations provided by the United Nations itself,
rations which are far below the level needed for subsistence?

35. Israel, which bears the guilt for having caused the
problem, cannot shift responsibility for its solution to
Lebanon. Its campaign of slander and calumny cannot
absolve it of that guilt nor of the responsibility for finding a
solution. Israel can very easily solve the problem of the
Palestinian people. If it has any grievances concerning the
existence of the Palestinian refugees, the Palestinian people
of Lebanon, all it has to do is reopen the door for them to
be reinstated in their homeland and in their homes, and
administer and help in the administration of justice to
them.
36. The repeated acts of aggression against Lebanon by
Israel cannot go unpunished. We do not have the force to
administer punishment to Israel. But you, as a Council
entrustedwith a certain responsibility by the Charter, have
that force. You have the moral force; you have the political
force; you have the legal force; you have the hstrumentality of the Charter to enforce the decisionsof the
Council. Condemnation alone of Israel is not sufficient.
Condemnationof its acts in the pasthasnot helped to stop
its aggression.At this stagewhat we ask of the Council is
more meaningfulaction in order to put an end to the Israeli
aggression
againstLebanon.

32. The end to the agony of the Palestinian people does
not appear to be in sight, for what has the United Nations
done except provide the Palestinians with those meagre
rations and adopt resolution after resolution reiterating
their right to repatriation, compensation or self-determination-resolutions
they fail to implement? What has the
United Nations done recently in the face of the new policy
being pursued by Israel to strike at the Palestinians
wherever they may be, at any time and by whatever
measures it thinks fit? That newly declared policy of Israel
is an evil tactic designed either to exterminate the Palestinian people or to reduce them to incapacity, thereby
nullifying their legitimate claim to their homes and homeland. What hope does the United Nations and the international community offer the Palestinian people to end
their exile and their agony and to channel their lives toward
the building of peace in the Middle East and their
participation in the economic, social and cultural development of the area? What options do we present to the
Palestinians to end their bitterness and their misery?
Forgetting those Palestinians, neglecting them and denying
their very existence-as Mrs. Meir once did, as reported in
ne Times of London of 15 June 1969-will not lead to the
solution of their problem.

37. I shall conclude at this point. I reserve my right to
speakagainat a later stage.
38. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I have taken
the unusualaction of askingto be allowed to speakat this
time becauseof a development of grave concern to my
Governmentand to all thosewho seekto calm tempers and
restore conditions in which the search for peace in the
Middle Eastcan go forward.
39. The tragic events in Lebanon have been followed by
an attempt to spreada big lie around the world-namely, a
charge that my Government connived, colluded and in
some way participated in the Lebanon events, and the
allegation that the American Embassy at Beirut is harbouring personswho were involved.

33. The United Nations must come to grips with this
problem in a boId, imaginative and decisive manner, with a
view to finding a just and permanent solution to it. Of the
1.5 million Palestinian refugees, 300,000 live on our land,
in Lebanon. Is Lebanon responsible for their plight? Is it
responsible for their continued existence in misery, despair
and frustration?
Is it responsible for their yearning to
return to their homelands and for the spirit of resistance
with which they are imbued against the aggressor who has
deprived them of their homes, their land and their beautiful
ancestral cities-Nazareth,
Jerusalem, Jaffa, Haifa and the
rest? Is Lebanon responsible for so many thousands of
Palestinians being refugees twice or three times in their
lifetimes-expelled
even from their refugee camps on the
West Bank, after the aggression of 1967, and thrown into the
East Bank, or into Syria?

40. This qualifies, by any definition conceivable, as a
massiveuntruth-a big lie. The big lie became a standard
weapon of psychological warfare before and during the
Second World War. It is an art form of the totalitarian
mentality. It seeks to deceive the unwary public by
resorting to a falsehood of gigantic dimensions. By its
enormity, it succeedsin deluding the innocent because no
one would believe that such a massiveuntruth could be
invented. The monstrousaccusationthat the United States
somehowhelped carry out the events in Lebanon atld is
acting as a shield for those involved originated with those
who oppose, at all costs and by any means, a peaceful
settlement, who preach and practise wanton terrorism and
who, for their own purposes,seek to place the blame on
others-the blame for their failures and crimes. Not only is
it being spread by clandestine means and by rumour
mongering,it is alsobeingrepeatedin recognized information
media in several countries, which, in many cases, have

34. Lebanon cannot solve the problem of the Palestinian
people; it can only contribute to its solution. The Lebanese
Government has, during the last few years, deployed every
effort to promote peaceful conditions not only in Lebanon
but also in the overall area. It cannot bear the responsjbility
4

inexplicably failed to make known
denials,

our firm categorical

41. This charge is totally without foundation. It is a
complete fabrication from beginning to end. I would hope
that reasonable people everywhere would recognize how
defamatory and irresponsible on its very face such a charge
is. Even worse, it can encourage new violence, more
destruction and more deaths of innocent people. And if this
big lie succeeds in inflaming new violence, the responsibility
will rest on the shoulders of those who listened impassively
to the big lie and did nothing to speak the truth.

SO. While the world has been reacting with shock and
indignation to the atrocities of Arab terror groups, while
responsible Governments have begun to take steps against
them, Arab States continue to lend their support to the
campaign of killing and maiming innocent civilians and still
harbour within their borders terrorist bases, headquarters
and hideouts.
51. We come to charge that Lebanon has convened the
Security Council to ask licence for the continuation of
terrorism. The Government of Israel is duty-bound atid has
pledged to protect the lives of its citizens and to do al! in its
power to put an end to the sanguinary assaults deliberately
directed against guiltless men, women and children.

42. Yet another tragic aspect is that many, when emotions
ride over reason, become the victims of such a bold and
monstrous lie-just as many became victims of the false
charge of American participation in the 1967 Arab-Israeli
War, a charge they later came to recognize and acknowledge
as false but which at the time led to consequences that are
still with us today.

52. This was the objective of Israel’s action on the night of
9-10 April against terrorist bases, headquarters and hideouts
in the Beirut area, and in particular the El Fatah headquarters in the southern part of Beirut, responsible for
terror operations in the Gaza region, the central headquarters of the terrorist Democratic Popular Front, also
situated in the southern part of Beirut-this murder group
had assumed responsibility for planting and detonating
explosives in Jerusalem and l-ladera on 30 March 1973-two
workshops in Beirut in which explosives and weapons used
in attacks by El Fat&Black September are prepared, and a
repair garage north of Sidon (Saida) servicing vehicles of
terrorists who operate in southern Lebanon. Casualties were
inflicted on the terrorists. The Israeli losses were two
soldiers killed and two wounded. Official statements issued
in Beirut, communiqu& by terror organizations and international news agencies’ reports from Lebanon have confirmed that the targets struck were terrorist centres and
that the casualties were members of the murder groups.
Among them was Mohammed Yussef El Najjar (Abou
Yussef’), the El Fatah-Black September commander in
Lebanon since 1970; Kamal Nasser, spokesman of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the umbrella organization of the terrorist groups; and Kamal Adwan (Abu
Wael) one of El Fatah’s founders who was in charge of the
El F&ah-Black September activities in Israel-controlled
areas.

43. The views of my Government on the broad principles
are well known. They have been stated an many occasions
by my predecessors-most
recently in the Council on
10 September 1972 [I 661st meeting]. We deplore violence
wherever it occurs and from whatever source it comes. We
deeply regret the mounting toll in innocent lives. I shall
reserve further comment on these aspects of the matter for
later in the debate.
44. Today, however, I want to make it categorically clear
that neither the United States Government nor any
representative thereof had any part whatsoever in or
knowledge of the Israeli raid on Lebanon on 10 April. All
Governments concerned have a responsibility to disassociate themselves from this outrageous lie and to take steps
to prevent the spread of such slander whose consequences,
if it is not checked, can do grave harm to the cause of peace
and incite new destruction and more deaths of innocent
people.
45. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.

53. Under the leadership of such men, the terrorist Black
September carried out 105 murder attacks in the last two
years. Of these, 68 were directed against Israel, 6 against
individual Jews in various parts of the world, 17 against
Western air companies and 14 against Jordan. Until the
attacks at Nicosia last Monday, the Black September
operations had resulted in 228 casualties, including 116
deaths.

46. Mr. TEKOAI-I (Israel): Mr. President, I should like to
express my delegation’s deep respect for you and for your
country and our very best wishes for your success in your
high office.
47. We do not come before the Security Council to
explain the facts, They need no explanation. The scourge of
Arab terrorism, wanton slaughter and barbaric atrocities is a
menaceto all mankind and all are aware of it,

54. Muhamad Dawud Awdeh, known as Abu Dawud, an
El Fatah leader arrested several weeks ago in Amman for
plotting against the Jordanian r&me,
declared in his
testimony:

48, We do not come to the Council to justify our actions.
They need no justification. All are conscious of the
necessity to stamp out outrages such as the Lad massacre
and the Munich murders, the assassination of diplomats at
Khartoum or the attacks of 9 April 1973 on the residence
of Israel’s Ambassador and on an El Al plane in Nicosia.

“Operations
by Abou Yussef: the killing of Wasfi
at-Tall-he personally assignedthe men through Yahya
Ashur, he transported them to Cairo, and subsequentlyhe
himself transported the weaponsto Cairo (he carried an
Algerian diplomatic passport);

“The Sabenaplane operation at Lod airport-the Lod
operation wasa failure;

49. We come to accuse.
5

“The Bangkok operation, which was a failure also.
Another operation, which was supposed to take place
together with the Bangkok operation, was an attack on
the Israeli Embassy in Romania; that, too, failed.”

rorists followed instructions which were being transmitted
to them by wirelessfrom the El Fatah-Black September
headquartersat Beirut, under the personalsupervisionof
YassirArafat, head of El Fatah and the so-calledPalestine
Liberation Organization, defendedsoemotionally today by
Mr. Ghorra.

55. Abou Yussef is the man who, according to reports
from Beirut, was a close personal friend of Lebanon’s Prime
Minister. The world still remembers how the murderers,
dispatched by this same Abou Yussef to Cairo to kill
Jordan’s Prime Minister, bent over Wasfi at-Tall’s corpse,
dipped their hands in his blood and drank it in front of
onlookers. The world still remembers how the defenceless
American and Belgian diplomats in Khartoum were first
brutally assaulted and then shot dead in cold blood, after
being held hostage for long hours by Arab terrorists. These
are the men that the Lebanese representative portrays as
leaders and men of letters. These are the barbarians that he
eulogizes. It is these international criminals that his
Government harbours and protects.

59. In preceding months almost all Arab terror squads
involved in murder attacks, including the Lod airport
massacreand the killing of Israeli athletes at the Munich
Olympic Games,had come from Beirut. Representativesof
the terror organizationsat Beirut collected $US 5 million
from Lufthansa for the releaseof its plane hijacked by
membersof the terrorist “Popular Front,” and forced to
land in Aden in February 1972. ‘The hijacking of the
Sabenaplanein May 1972 wascarried out by four terrorists
who had arrived in Europe from Beirut. The communiquB
assumingresponsibility for that act wasissuedby terrorist
organizationsin Beirut.

56. It is common knowledge that Lebanon is a centre for
the planning and execution of terrorist attacks against
civilians in Israel and elsewhere and provides refuge to the
perpetrators of these dastardly crimes. The terrorist groups
maintain their headquarters, workshops
for the manufacture of weapons, recruitment and information offices
and other installations in Lebanon’s capital. With the
consent of the Lebanese authorities they use refugee camps
and individual houses to train and prepare murder squads.

‘.

60. It was in Lebanon that the massmurderer Kozo
Okamoto and his two accomplicesweretrained and it was
from Beirut that they set out in May 1972on their barbaric
assignment
at Lad. In August 1972, two terrorists, who had
come from Lebanon, were detained at Rome after an
explosion aboard an El Al aircraft in flight, caused by
dynamite chargesconcealedin a record player, which they
had persuadedtwo British girls to take with them on tllc
plane. In September 1972 it was established that the
terroristswho had carried out the slaughterat Munich had
come from Lebanon. In October 1972 an emissaryof El
Fatah, travelling on an Algerian diplomatic passport, was
detainedat Amsterdam airport on his way from Beirut to
South America, carrying with him arms,sabotagematerials
and letter bombs, which were to have been mailed from
Latin America.

57. Most of the attacks carried out by El Fatah-Black
September and other terrorist organizations have originated
at Beirut. It is from that city that terrorists are dispatched
on their missions of death to different parts of the world.
In the last few weeks alone, the following operations were
launched from Beirut: On 1 March three diplomats were
savagely murdered at Khartoum. On 3 March the Cyprus
passenger steamer Sania, on its way to Haifa with 250
Christian pilgrimsefrom the United States, was blown up in
the Beirut harbour. On G March attempts were made to
bomb an El Al office and two Israeli banks in New York.
Three automobiles with explosives and timing devices were
discovered next to these offices. Had the charges exploded,
Fifth Avenue would have been strewn with hundreds of
dead and injured. On 12 March an Israeli merchant was
assassinated in Cyprus. On 15 March an attempt was made
against the Israeli Embassy in Paris but was foiled when an
automobile loaded with high explosives was discovered by
the French authorities. On 20 March four suitcases filled
with arms and explosives intended for terrorist attacks were
discovered at the Rome airport. On 21 March a letter bomb
was intercepted in Singapore. On 4 april three Arab
terrorists carrying pistols and hand grenades were arrested
at Rome airport. On 9 April an attempt was made tg blow
up the residence of the Israeli Ambassador in Cyprus. At
the same time a terrorist squad attacked an El AJ airliner at
Nicosia airport. The terrorists killed a Cypriot policeman.
TWO of the attackers were slain and others arrested. All of
these assaults originated in Lebanon’s capitaI.

61. In December 1972, a terror squad of the “Popular
Front” left Beirut with instructions to reach Haifa by ship
with a view to perpetratingterrorist attacks or, if unsuccessful, to commit suicide.The squadwasdiscoveredin Greece
and its memberswere returned to Lebanon. In December
1972 an Arab terrorist wasapprehendedat London airport
on his arrival from Beirut. Arms and explosiveswere found
in his possession
destinedfor an attack against an Israeli
Embassyin Scandinavia.Also in December 1972 an attack
was carried out againstthe Israeli Embassyat Bangkok by
terrorists who had come from Beirut. 111January 1973 an
assassination
squad planning to carry out an attack in the
port of Haifa was discoveredin Cyprus. The terrorists flew
back from there to Beirut. In January 1973, three terrorists
were apprehendedat Vienna. Three others were detained at
the Austrian-Italian border. The intention of the six was to
execute a murderousattack on Jewishemigrants from the
Soviet Union in a transit camp in Vienna. All six terrorists
had set out on their bloodthirsty missionfrom Lebanon.
62. The international community is weary of the sanctimonious protestations of innocence and of the sterile
falsehoodswith which the LebaneseGovernment and its
representativestry to cover up Lebanon’s grave responsibility for turning Beirut into the capital of internationai
terrorism, Lebanonis like one who consortswith murderers

5X. Beirut’s sinister role was particularly evident in the
seizure and murder of the diplomats at Khartoum.
Throughout the entire course of the operation, the ter6

and, having turned his house into a centre of crime and
violence and bloodshed, pleads helplessness and innocence.

makes free”. The Arab nation has attained freedom and
sovereignty in 18 independent States, including the Palestinian State of Jordan. The real objective of the Arab
terrorism is to wrest from the Jewishpeopleits liberty, the
liberty it has regained in its only national homeland after
centuriesof captivity and dispersion.

63. Jt is of interest to note how inconsistent and fickle
Lebanon’s argumentation has been over the past five years.
At first it denied altogether the very presence of terrorist
organizations within its borders. When that became too
obvious a lie the Lebanese Government began to allege that
it waspowerlessto prevent the existenceand activities of
the terrorist groups.Now the maskhas dropped. Lebanon
tries to justify the terrorist operationsin and from its soil
and even hasthe audacity to claim immunity for itself and
impunity for the terrorists.

68. Israel’saction againstthe terrorist centresin Beirut has
saved the lives of many, in the Middle East and in other
regions, who would have fallen victim to futuie attacks
planned and organized in those centres under the direction
of murderers such as the three men hunted down by the
Israel Defence Forces. If there is room for criticism, it is
that such action had not been taken earlier. It might have
spared many innocent lives. Jewsand non-Jewsalike, and
especially Europeans,must askthemselveswhat would have
been preferable historically: the elimination of Nazi leaders
in the early years of their rule of terror and barbarism,or
their trials after the World War and after the holocaust?
The heinous nature of the Arab terror operations, the
menace they constitute to humanity, is obvious. This
menacemustbe endedbefore it spreadsany further.

64. Nothing can justify Lebanon’s agreement to the
maintenanceof terror centresand baseson its territory and
in particular in its capital. Nothing can justify attemptsto
whitewashorganizersand perpetrators of savageatrocities
againstdefencelesscivilians all over the world. As long as
the LebaneseGovernment and its representativeschooseto
do so, as long as they find it possibleto refer to murder
squadssimply as Palestinianorganizations,and the bases
whereweaponsand explosivesare preparedand assassins
of
men, women and children trained as innocent locations,
Lebanonmust be consideredan accomplicein Ihe campaign
of bloodshedwagedby the Arab terrorist groups.

69. By permitting the exploitation and abuse of its
territory by murder organizations, the LebaneseGovernment abandons in fact its responsibilities towards its
citizens and exposesthem to constant danger. Whoever
permits his house to be used by criminals must surely
understand that he createsinsecurity for himself. Yet Israel
has directed its action solely againstthe terrorists. Previous
Israeli actions against terrorist basesin Lebanon, and in
particular in the southern part of the country, have had a
salutary effect on the situation along the Israel-Lebanese
frontier in recent months. However, with the full connivance of its Government, Lebanon remainsthe principal
base for terror operations abroad and a haven for all
terrorists.

65. International public opinion is weary also of the
ridiculousclaim that the presenceof Palestinianrefugees,
resultingfrom the Arab aggressionagainstIsrael in 1948,
justifies Lebanon’srole as a basefor international murder
operationsor makessuch operations on and from within
Lebanoninevitable. There are areasin the Middle Eastwith
largerconcentrationsof PalestinianArabsand refugeesthan
in Lebanon,and yet terrorist organizationsdo not find in
them refuge, freedom of action and protection. Moreover,
for years and years there had been no terrorist operations
out of hbanon despite the existence of its refugee
population.

70. Those who arc defending themselves against these
criminals and are determined to end their loathsome
activities cannot acquiescein the continuation of this
situation, which constitutesa gravethreat not only to Israel
but to other countries as well. The only way for Lebanon
to extricate itself from this situation is by fully observing
its international obligationsand eliminating completely the
presenceof the terrorist groups and their activities on and
from Lebanesesoil.

66. In any event, the terrorist organizationsare wellsfed
and well-paid establishment.If Arab Governmentswhich
financethem were to devote l per cent of’their oil income
to the settlement of the refugeesinsteadof to violenceand
bloodshed,there would be no refugeestoday in Lebanonor
elsewhere.
67. It. is also a matter of general knowledgethat Arab
terrorismis not a developmentof the post-1967 period.
Israel has confronted it throughout the years of its
independence,
and the beginningsof this bestialmethodof
bloodshedreach asfar back as the 192Os,when the Jewish
community of Hebron was massacredand Jews were
slaughteredin Jerusalem, Motza and Safad by Arab
terroristsorganizedby the infamous Haj Amin El-Husseini,
who in later years servedasHitler’s and Eichmann’sadviser
in the annihilation of 6 million Jews. The Abou Yussefs,
the Kamal Nassers,the Adwans are following in his
footsteps.Their aim aswell is to murderJews,td destroy a
People, to deprive it of its right to live and to be
independent.The use by them of the term “liberation”
bringsto mind the cynidal Nazi sloganat the entrance co
the death campsin which millionswereslaughtered:“Work

7

71. Today the LebaneseGovernment has called on the
Security Council to act against steps combatting international terrorism. It has asked the Council to take a
position in support of Lebanon’s remaining a base for
murderous outrages in the Middle East and outside the
region, in flagrant violation of international law and
morality and of the Charter of the United Nations. The
interests of international peace and security require that
responsibleGovernmentsand the Security Council refuseto
do so.
72. The PRESIDENT (interpretution from Spunish): I
should like to inform the membersof the Council that I
have received a letter, dated 12 April 1973, from the
representative of Saudi Arabia in which he asks to be

allowed to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s consideration of the item on its agenda. In
accordance with the practice of the Council, and with its
consent, I propose to invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take a place at the Council table in order to
participate, without the right to vote, in the consideration
of the item on our agenda.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J, Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took a place at the Council table.
73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Spanish): I call
on the representative of Saudi Arabia.
74. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I feel
privileged indeed to address the Council while you are
presiding. Indeed I really feel at home when I see you in the
Chair because of the fact that I have had the privilege of
knowing you for so many years. Furthermore, I must thank
the members of the Council-Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse of
Guinea and all my other colleagues-for not having objected
to my request to speak.
75. I do not want it to appear as if every time the
representative of Israel takes the floor I must forthwith
rebut certain of his statements. I have grown accustomed to
so many of the remarks made by none other than the
representative of Israel, Mr. Tekoah, but many of you here
are new and I have been addressing myself to this question
for the past 25 years or, I should say, since the partition of
Palestine at Lake Success in 1947.

Palestinians.But she forgets that when shewas young she
cameto the land of Palestine.And, incidentally, the word
“Palestinian” is not an Arabic word; it is derived from the
Philistines,who were from Crete and who settled where
Gazais now. And the land was calledPalestinebecauseof
the Philistines, who, for your information, Mr. Tekoah,
were not Semitic. I know you do not come from the area;
you invaded the area. You come from Russia-from the
Ukraine-by way of Shanghai.
79. But by force you have establisheda State there, and
that is nothing unusual.You are not the only peoplewho
have establisheda State by force. Throughout history it’s
have seenpeoplesestablishStates by force. It is nothing
unusual. I want to be very objective and not engagein
recriminations and accusations,having listened to the
catalogueof allegationsof what the so-calledArab-I shall
call them Palestinian-terroristshave done in Palestine. No
doubt there were Palestiniansin Palestinewho, during ttle
British Mandate, reactedto the invasion-or shall I say the
inflow, becauseit was not an invasion-of Jews who were
indoctrinated in political zionism. And we do not have to
go back to the Balfour Declaration, to see why Balfour,
who neededthe United Statesto join in the war of 1917.
gave away somethingthat did not belong to the BritishPalestine.But in that Declaration he gave it away equivocally.
80. Anyway it was then called a national home. And I
have to repeat this, time and again. Some of the Zionists
wanted the word “State’‘-they wanted to estabrish a
JewishState in Palestine.None other than the Rothschilds
were afraid of the word “State”: they opted for the words
“national home”, becausethey were afraid that should, one
day, Jewsfrom all over the world comethere and establish
a State for themselves,the Rothschildswould be tnld b!;
the British: “Now you get out of there.” They wanted to
protect their interests.I did researchon that in England in
the late twenties and thirties; I am not talking off the top
of my head,and historianshave borneme out.

76. What I have said is on the record. “Why repeat it? “,
somebody might ask. For no reason other than that certain
accusations are repeated by the representative of Israel,
none other than Mr. Tekoah, without being scrutinized by
anyone. They are taken at their face value sometimes by
the international press, which to a large extent in the
Western world-l
do not know about the socialist world
because I do not read Russian, or Bulgarian, or Romanianthey control by acquisition, or by propaganda or by many
other means. I am not going into the freedom of the press
and its distortion.

81. But what did the Balfour Declaration say? It said:
provided the establishmentof a national home for the Jc\vs
was not prejudicial, or did not jeopardize-I am paraphrasing-the civil, political and religious rights of Ihe
indigenouspeopleof Palestine.And the tragedy is that tile
indigenouspeople of Palestine-many of them-had been
the original Jews. The Canaanites,the Amorites and ttle
Moabites-all one family. The Hebrewsof yore were OUT
brothers, not our cousins.But they were tribal, and mally
of those people who lived in tribes warred against cacll
other, astribes havewarredin variousperiods of history.

77. Needless to say, Lebanon has never been an aggressor
in its six millenia of history. It has never encroached on its
neighbours. I challenge anyone to cite a period in history
when Lebanon was the aggressor. On the other hand,
terrorism is not the monopoly of any one people, regardless
of race, religion or political persuasion. In fact, terrorists
are considered heroes by those who support them. Why go
back into ancient history? I shall go back to the days of
Jeanne d’Arc. She was considered a critninal by the British,
but she was a heroine to the French. The maquiswere 82. And then, when Jesusemergedin that area, many of
considered terrorists by the Nazis, but they were heroes those Jews embracedChristianity. Later, many embraced
becausethey were fighting for their homeland. And this Islam. But, originally, ethnologically, many of those people
applies to the Palestinians,regardlessof whether they are who were chasedout of Palestinein the forties, fifties alld
Arabs. Mr. Tekoah doesnot call them by their namein his sixties had been Jews.And then who came? The Khazars,
letter dated 11 April. He refers to “Arab terrorist organi- who had been converted to Judaismin the eighth century
in what today is southern Russia.And what did they do’!
zations”.
They organized themselvesinto a sort of political orgaxli78. As my colleaguefrom Lebanon said, Mrs. Meir, the
zation and played the big Powersone against the other.
Prime Minister of Israel,hasrepeatedly said that there isno
They were the friends of the Germans-of the Kaiser. Wllcn
such thing as a Palestinian people, that there are no
the Kaiser could not help them with Sultan Abdul Hamid
8

of Turkey, they turned their backs on the Germans, and
after the Entente Cordiale in 1903 what did they do? They
began to connive with the United Kingdom. And when
Great Britain was losing the war against Germany, what
happened? They wanted to railroad the United States into
the war, which in fact they did.

87. Well, why do I bring up the genesis all the time? So
that people may know that the European Zionists had no
business in Palestine. They used Judaism-a noble religion, I
repeat, because it is one of the three main monotheistic
religions-as a motivation for a political and economic end.
And do you know what economic end? The rich amongst
the Jews in Europe-and they are clever businessmen; they
are bankers-felt the pressure of the European people on
their Governments and were worried by rising taxes, That
was even before the First and Second World Wars. And they
said: “Well, there is Palestine; we will go and establish
ourselves there, and it will be a headquarters for becoming
the clearinghouse of Europe, Asia and Africa”. Not all Jews
are sentimentally religious; many are secular, like the
adherents of other religions. How many a time do we find
throughout history that a religion was used as a motivation
for a political and economic end? We find it in every age.
And we find it today, as we shall find it tomorrow and as
we find it in the past.

83. I have mentioned time and time again how propaganda
was rife in the United States against the Germans. I am no
German; I can be more objective than anyone here who
hails from Europe.
84. And what happened? The British promisedsecretly-Palestine, a territory that did not belong to them,
to a people that was alien to the area. And here Mr. Tekoah
refers to the land as being “their” land. It is the land of the
people who have lived on it for centuries.
85. Mr. Tekoah, you should know about the two
diasporas: the diaspora in the time of Nebuchadnezzar.
Who left Palestine in the time of Nebuchadnezzar? If you
have not taken the time to do research yourself, ask your
scholars. And I have a great deal of respect for your
scholars, because they are scholars; they forget that they
are Jews when they are scholars-or
Gentiles for that
matter. Scholars are scholars; otherwise they are publicists
and polemicists and politicians. Those who left at the time
of the first diaspora, during the days of Nebuchadnezzar,
were the influential people and the wealthy people. Their
king did not heed Jeremiah, one of the prophets of
Judaism. And that is why we have the Lamentations of
3eremiah in the Bible. He told them: “Go and make peace
with Nebuchadnezzar.” And who was Nebuchadnezzar? He
was a Semite; he was not an antiSemite-because the
Assyrians, the Chaldeans, the Hebrews, the Samaritans, who
were a small group, the Moabites and the Aramcans-all
those tribes constituted the Semitic family. Incidentally,
the Jews spoke Aramaic 2000 years ago; they did not speak
Hebrew. You know that, do you not?

88. You bad no business to come, except in peace. If you
had come in peace and had been driven by religious
sentiments, I bet you anything you would have been
received with open arms by the indigenous people of
Palestine. I am not going to call them Arabs, because they
are the indigenous people of Palestine. They are Palestinians, just as you call those from Lebanon Lebanese and
those from Syria Syrians. They happened to have acquired
Arab culture, but they are the indigenous people of
Palestine, whether you like it or not. And, as I said, the
irony of it was that many of them had been the original
Jews of the country-not
the very, very original ones,
because the original indigenous people of Palestine were the
Canaanites who lived in Jericho and Jerusalem and who
were invaded by the Hebrew tribes that came from the
north, from Ur of the Chaldees which is west of Iraq, and
moved in search of pasturage, like many tribes do. But YOU
were our brothers, our cousins-not youI of course, but the
Hebrews of those days-and we fought one another. It does
not matter that we fought one another. Everybody fought
everybody else in those days. But you came from eastern
Europe and central Europe where your movement was
initiated by non-Sephardic and non-oriental Jews, and YOU
used that religion as a motivation for your political and
economic ends. All right, if you want to do that do it-but
not at the expense of the indigenous people of Palestinc.
That is what i want to tell you.

86. And then came big political Zionism-although, 1must
say, Zion is a mountain, as you know. There is a spiritual
Zionism mentioned in the Psalms of David: “I will lift Up
mine eyes to the hills”. You know that psalm,
do YOU
not? -and Mount Zion. But you took Mount Zion as the
core of a political movement that was bred and nurtured in
eastern Europe, because you thought, and perhaps rightly
at that time, that the Jews had no life, no future, in
Europe. But after the French Revolution and after the
enfranchisement of the Jews by Germany in the first
quarter of the nineteenth century, you became prosperous
in Europe, little by little. Of course there have been
persecutions, and we deplore persecutions in any age.
Anyway, when the Christians were not of many sects-you
remember, before Protestantism there was the Inquisition;
sometimes Catholic burnt Catholic on account of dogma.
So why should they not sometimes persecute the Jews, if
the Christians persecuted Christians? The Moslems persecuted one another; we have people who persecute others
witltin the same sect. Do not forget, Mr. Tekoah, the
historical facts which should be the genesis of any
discussion of this question.

89. Now it is a hrit accompli. What can we do? We are
told “You Arabs are weak, you cannot fight”. Of course we
are weak. But if we are weak does that give you an escuse
to treat the indigenous people of Palestine and their
neighbours with injustice ? Terrorism should not be condoned--Should never be condoned. But I shall not cite
examples from the 192Os, although I am a contemporary of
that era and I have been seized of the Palestine question
since 1922, when I was 17 years old. Again I am not talking
from books, and I want to come here to some remarks
which you, Mr. Tekoab, repeated umpteen times about Haj
Amin el-Husseini. I knew him in 1925 in Jerusalem. The
first time I was in Jerusalem was in 1925 when I was 20
years old, and he took me to the Mosque of the Rock. He
had known of my family and 1 had an introduction. He was
9

at the gate and he showed me around. In that period, three
or four years after the commotion and the disturbances had
happened, what do you think Haj Amin el-Husseini told
me personally? He said “I am not afraid’of the Jews. I am
afraid that they will be used as an instrument of colonialism
in our area and that they want to expropriate the land.”

94. I now come to Lebanon. As I said, Lebanon is a
peaceful country. In 1948 it did r& send one single soldier
across the border to Palestine to participate in the war, It
has an army of only 12,000 men, more like a gendarmerie,
If it had had any aggressive intentions, it would have built
up its army. It is one of the freest countries in the world;
otherwise, how would it have been possible for those
spies-allegedly Belgians, British, Germans and so on-to
prepare for that terrorist act recently in Lebanon by going
to the corniche of Beirut and making it appear as if they
were just fishing. Of course, you say, “Well, that is
justifiable; look at what other intelligence agencies do”. I
am not going to mention those agencies that spend billions.
I am not even going to mention.the currency. They know
who they are. They are of various political persuasions, and
they spend billions. So you want now to ape those who arc
big? Because you have strength you are showing that
strength in the way you want it to be shown.

90. Well, you may say that I may be making this up, but
people know me. I do not make things up. I have seen Haj
Amin el-Husseini, and I once asked him why he went to
Germany and hc replied, “I went to Germany because I
would have been killed had I gone to London, Paris or to
the United States where the Zionists were on the rampage.”
They would have killed him. He went to Germany because
he had no other place to go. You say that he was the
adviser of Eichmann and Hitler. Of course he was received
by Hitler. I knew several people who were received by
Hitler. That does not mean that they were with Hitler.
Mr, Chamberlain was received by Hitler. Mr. Daladier was
received by Hitler, And they were conniving how to beat
Hitler. Mr. Molotov went to see Hitler, and there are
pictures of them together. Does that make the Russians pro
Hitler? Does that make the French pro Hitler? Of course
he was photographed with Hitler. You do not have to show
me that. But who, Mr. Tekoah, wrote the racist book of
Hitler? Rosenberg-who
turned Christian. Actually, I do
not know whether he turned Christian or dissimulated, but
why do you not mention Mr. Rosenberg, the racist author,
who said that the blond people-you are blond-are the
superior race? Thank God I am not blond. What are you
talking about, bringing pictures like that to show to the
Council. Haj Amin el-Husseini had no choice but to go to
the people who were fighting his enemies.

95. What do you want the Lebanese Government to do?
Do you want the Lebanese Government to go into the
camps and find out who is conniving? There are 300,000
Palestinian refugees there. Do you want them to play the
intelligence game that you are playing? Suppose they find
out and there are people in Lebanon with the Palestinians,
there are people who want to be neutral and there are
people who favour fighting Israel. Do you want Lebanon to
get into an internal struggle and to have anarchy prevail?
96. Lebanon is predicated on a balance of sects-a very
delicate balance. The President of the Republic of Lebanon
is a Christian Maronite; the Premier is a Moslem; the
Foreign Minister is a Melchite. We have Druses. We happen
to have many sects of every religion, and they are all living
together in peace. And you want to disrupt that peace by
telling Lebanon “Go and find out who is conniving to
perpetrate any action against Israel and chastise them”?
There will be civil war. Is that what you want? Lebanon
will not engage in any action that will divide it in two. Well,
who will do that, then? Who is going to be responsible?

91, I knew Rashid Al Kilani of Iraq. IHe had to flee
because be thought that the British had deceived him, and
he was working with the Germans. That does not mean that
he was pro German. He took refuge in Saudi Arabia, and
the late Mr. Churchill asked King Ibn Saud, the founder of
the kingdom, to surrender him, but he would not, He said
“I would surrender my own children, but not Rasllid Al
Kilani, because we have traditions”. All those things do not
make a case.

97. The United Nations is responsible. Who created
Israel? I was sitting at Lake Success when the major POWerS
unanimously voted for the creation of Israel. They did that
for their ulterior motives. And when the British were
bankrupt after the Second World War, who took over,
Mr. Scali, my dear Sir? You have known that for many
years, You know the answer; you are a journalistambassador-it was the late Mr. Truman.

92. The core of the case is that you came to Palestine in
order to expropriate it for political and economic reasons,
and you played on the religious sentiments of Jews, I
respect their sentiments. And you rallied them all over the
world so that they would support your movement.
93. And then what about the memoirs---[*do not have the
names here-that were written by the leaders of the Irgun
Leumi and the Stern Gang, and so many other terrorist
movements? I do not say that the Arabs did nothave their
terrorists. You started terrorism there. You killed Count
Bernadotte. You killed Lord Moyne. I do not want to
remind you of that+ is very sad. And you do not have to
remind us of those who killed some Jews. It is very sad, by
the same token. I do not want to raise now the question of
who blew up the King David Hotel, who hanged British
tommies from the branches of trees, who killed Arabs, and
which Arabs killed Jews? It was all deplorable. You are
trying to disinter bones of tragedy, which will not help
your case.

98. What have we done to the British or to the United
States, which took over later, that they should create that
problem for us?
99. We are not against the Jews, my dear Sir, You
mentioned the lie and so forth. I knew Senator Austin; I
was sitting at Lake Success and we discussed with him the
suggestion-made not by us but by the State Departmentthat Palestine be placed under the Trusteeship Council
pending the finding of a solution satisfactory
to all
concerned. And do not think that at that time, at Lake
Success, Mr. Gromyko was very happy about it. He asked
for partition, allegedly because the Soviet Union then
thought the best solution would be to partition the land.
10

foe. And anyone who is a friend today may tomorrow
become a foe. There will be terrorism all over, But we are
not going into the question of terrorism; that is the
prerogative of the committee to be appointed, Mr, Bennett
and I spoke about terrorism at length in the Sixth
Committee; 1 am not going to enter into the causes of
terrorism. But what 1 want to say is that you, the major
Powers, ‘and more specifically the United States and the
Soviet Union, must put an end to it. I would not say that
the People’s Republic of China should not he consulted,
because, after all, it is a permanent member of the Security
Council, and there should be consultations with our friends
from the United Kingdom and from France, because they
have experience, long experience, in the area, I am not
discarding those two members, which fortunately or unfortunately do not wield world power as they did in the
nineteenth century. Perhaps it is a good thing not to wield
world power. You have to put an end to it. Or let us close
up this shop. What is it for? You-l am addressing you, my
good friend Mr. Scali-have a President who, hopefully, has
brought to an end the war in the Far East. He has shown
courage; he has shown stamina. Do you mean to say that
he cannot assert himself, especially when your country
contributed to the creation of Israel? When it suits you,
you big Powers say “We do not interfere in the affairs of
other States, including Israel.” But when it suits you, you
also rationalize a policy whereby you could interfere in the
affairs of the denizens of the moon-if
there is any
population on the moon. 1 am not saying this merely about
you; it applies to all the great Powers. They all rationalize
their policy.

100. All the trouble started from that. All the major
Powers were responsible. And pressure was brought to bear
on the small nations. None other than the present Foreign
Minister of the Philippines, my good friend General
Romulo, spoke for an hour against partition. Them
Mr. Truman brought pressure to bear on the President of
the Philippines. And Romulo, who is an honourable man, a
man respected not only in his own country but by the
international community, told me and others, “I cannot
vate under pressure”, so the Philippines Embassy was
instructed by Manila to send someone to vote for partition.
101. Mr. dear Mr. Scali, this is, I think, your first time in
the Security Council in New York, though you appeared in
Panama. I must tell you-but you know this, because you
are not only a mere journalist; you have been engaged in
surveys of the diplomatic field since, no doubt, your early
days, and you should perhaps know this better than I-in
1919, 94 per cent of the population was indigenous and
6 per cent Jewish. Until 1939, the Jewish population-most
of it had come from Europe on account of Hitleramounted to less than one third. And who was the one who
brandished the 14 points’? None other than one of your
illustrious Presidents, President Wilson. And who spoke
about the four freedoms but Mr. Roosevelt? And by what
yardstick do you call yourself a democracy and a free
nation? Could you pass by the wayside the principle of
self-determination, which has been ennobled in many
pronouncements since you fought your war of independence in 1776? By what yardstick? Tell me, my dear
Ambassador and colleague. “Well,” you might say, “we
made mistakes. All nations make mistakes. What should we
do? This is now a fait accompli.” And many of the Zionists
say the Arabs want to drive the Jews into the sea. The
Arabs cannot push one of themselves into the sea. How can
they push that strong State into the sea? And today, in
your statement, you rightly said-1 paid attention-that no
one had the right to attribute to the United States any
mischief in the recent sad happenings in Lebanon. Wrsonally, I do not believe’the United States had any part in
them. I may be wrong, but I do not think it had.

105. Let us be frank, for heaven’s sake. I have been here
27 years, It is up to you-you and the Soviet Union-not to
tiny Lebanon. Why the Soviet Union? After all, the Middle
East is not very far from its borders. It seems to consider
that it is an interested party-and why not? And YOU have
economic interests in that area too. Look how your
newspapers dramatize the oil situation, saying that the
Arabs are going to throttle the United States in the 1980s.
Seers, prophets. All these made-up stories about the Arabs
and the monetary crisis. The monetary crisis you have is the
result of the fact that you Western Powers, after two world
wars, spent your patrimony almost to the point of
bankruptcy. 1 saw how the mark dwindled in the l92Os in
Europe-and the franc and the pound sterling, We are tied
to you here. We sell you oil and we trade with you.

102. Why should you do that? You do better things. You
give them Phantoms; you give them all kinds of sophisticated weapons; you give them money. And now my good
friend Mr. MaIik, my friend since 1948, when we first met,
what do you do? You send immigrants. Their number is
legion. 1 do not know which is more dangerous, the
Phantoms or the immigrants, to tell you the truth.

106. The dollar today is worth 20 cents compared to the
dollar of 1947 at Lake Success. If you do not beware, five
years from now it will be worth 10 cents. You will have to
reissue the money, as our French friends did. This is not a
laughing matter. We, in the middle class, are being
impoverished everywhere-because
money seems to be
everything these days.

103. I am talking objectively. We are the victims, and OUI
area is a checkerboard on which power politics is being
played not with wooden pieces but with the destiny of
nations, with the destiny of the Arabs-not the Arabs as
such, but the Palestinians. And the Palestinians are the core
of the problem.

107. You representatives of the big Powers, tell those who
are behind you, who issue instructions to you, that it is IIO
longer moral to keep on picking on a small State like
Lebanon that has never encroached on anyone. 1 am not
going into the catalogue of the terrorist acts, whether
perpetrated at one time by the Zionists in Palestine, or
subsequently-or
concurrently at that time, to be fair-by
the indigenous people of Palestine; or, for that matter, into

104. Here I come to some final remarks, hoping that
Mr. Tekoah will take them into consideration. This is nat
the first time I have made such remarks. As long as there
are Palestinian refugees dispersed all over the Arab land and
the wortd at large, there will be no peace-not only in the
Middle East but in many parts of the world. For there are
activists and activists are sometimes financed by friend and
11

the cause and effect of the terrorism
nowadays.

we are witnessing

of major Powersin the Council created.We had to accept
certain things in life. But if they generate tension od
infinitum, there will be no peacein the world.

108. You have to come into the picture or the United
Nations, and more specifically the Security Council will
become the laughing-stock of the whole world. Ask why
the number of people taking the United Nations guided
tours is dwindling, Nobody wants us any niore. You are a
new Ambassador, Mr. Scali. You should infuse new hope in
the United Nations-and I am sure you will. Look at me, 1
am much older than you and I am still active. And our
friend hlr. Malik knows the United Nations from A to Z
and from Z to A, having served here for many years. Why
do you not prevail on those behind you to put an end to all
this? Why do you not ask for an international plebiscite to
find out how many of the Palestinian refugees, whether
they are in Lebanon or in neighbouring countries or
elsewhere, dispersed as they are, want to go back to
Paiestine? Why do you not-1 shall not say pressure--but
persuade those whom you supply with arms to take them in
and live in peace with them?

114. And you know how powerful the Jews and the
Zionistsare. I feel sorry for many of the Jewsbecauseone
day, I am afraid, knowing what humanbeingsare, that if
things go wrong, they will make a scapegoatof them and
the innocent will suffer; the mighty and the wealthy will
take to their heelsasthey have done-not only amongst(he
Jews, but amongst other people too. Jews are human
beings.Why concentrate on religion, for heaven’s sake?
There are 16, 17, 18million Jews;they are creating a world
problem.
115. I feel sorry for thosewho aregetting indoctrinated. I
am sayingthis honestly, on my word of honour. I sayit
with compassionto human beings regardless of their
religion-or political persuasion,for that matter, if they
have no religion, After all, we are all human beings; guesls
in this world. Each one of us is like a grain of sandon the
shoreof eternity. And before long, where will you all be?
In the ditch. Nobody is going to survive, Why make life SO
miserableon the basisof religion-Jew and Gentile. It is not
worth it, believeme. There is too much contention in the
world.

109. “Oh,” the Zionists say, “Palestine was given to us by
God.” The first time I heard that was from Mr. Eban. And I
believe it was at that time that I made the remark, “Since
when has God been in the real estate business?” And if
God gave Palestine to the Jews, or the Gentiles for that
matter, we want to see the title deed and the seal.

116. And what about this idea of spending1 per cent of
the oil revenueto resettle peoplein other lands, especially
Arab lands? Supposethe Palestiniansdo not want to be
resettled, Supposethey insist that they want to go back
home. How can we coerce them? You cannot buy
everything with money. Money is the curseof humanity iIf
our days.Nothing but money-consumerism-money.

110. And by the same token, if you are a student of the
Bible, and if you take something from the Bible out of
context and use it as the basisfor your statement that
“God gave us Palestine”,why do you not take what King
David said in the Psalms:“The earth is the Lord’s and the
fullness thereof,” He did not say the earth belongsto the
Jews or to the Gentiles. He did not sy, for that matter,
that China should belong to the Indians becauseBuddha
was, after all, born in what was then part of India, near
Nepal. Nor have I heard the Indians laid a claim on China
becauseBuddha was born in their country. There aremore
Buddhists now in China, 1 think--unless they are now
atheists. But China does not lay a claim on India because
Buddha wasborn in India. This is a fallaciousargument.
111. And becausesome of the prophets of Judaism
happened to emerge from Palestine-and they are our
prophets too, they are Semitic prophets, not Ukrainian or
Polish prophets, with all due respect to the Ukraine and to
Poland--it doesnot meanthat those political Zionists who
came from abroad could claim Palestineon the groundsof
religion.
112. With all due regardto the fundamentalistsin religion,
WC should not be carried away by such things when we
know that you cannot make a people out of a religion. A
people is determined by culture, by language,by way of
life, by common interests.The Jewsare many peoples,like
the Christians are many peoples, like the Buddhists are
many peoples.This is alsotrue, for that matter, of political
ideologies.Many peoplesbelong to one or more ideologies,

117. You cannot buy some people with money. They
want to go back to their homes and orchards. Live with
them in peace.Havea bi-national State or something else- 1
do not know what you should have; you should ask them.
YOU camefrom outside. All right, you will one day become
people of the land-1 mean that in the sensethat after a
long time haspassedyou will be able to live together.
118. But what is the alternative? Every time something
happens6,000 miles away from Palestine,or from dat
you now call Israel,you saythat Lebanonis responsiblefor
it or Egypt is responsiblefor it-just asat one time YOU said
that Jordan was responsiblefor it. Thesefrustrated Palestinians are not accountableto Lebanonor to Egypt or to
Jordan. They are frustrated and they have developed a
psychosislike your psychosis.Whenyou put two psychoses
one againstthe other you seefireworks. Every one of IISis
in dangernowadaysbecauseof violence.

119. It is a long time sinceI have adressedmyself to this
question. I am sorry that I have had to make a rather
protracted statement,but I had to go into the background
of the situation so that someof my colleagueswho arc 110t
familiar with it should know its genesis.I shall finish nl)
statementby expressingthe hope that what I have saidwill
not be taken lightly by Mr. Tekoah. He usesrhetoric and
113. 1 could go on and on. But I had to make this position rubrics. Many of us do that-1 am not singling him out-to
clear becauseit is not fair that Lebanon shouldbecomethe
cover up the truth. There is no absolutetruth, but there is
whipping boy of a State that the erstwhile representatives truth basedon history, basedon equity, basedon justice. If
12

not, we become political animals. I wish we were political
in the sense of politics harmonizing the interests of States.
We become rationalizing animals finding excuses for OUT
misdeeds. Cast away, if you can, by persuading those
behind you, the tight jackets of instructions which you
have to wear here in the Council when you, in your
innermost heart or by the light of your conscience, know
that those instructions should emanate from justice and not
from expediency, not from self-interest but rather from
enlightened interest based on harmony among all States.

2949 (XXVII)]
Premier Golda Meir said: “The United
Nations can decidewhatever it likes;we haveno choice but
to do what is necessaryfor the Jewish State.” That is an
expressionof the arroganceof power. Here we are dealing
with a State that relies solely on its military power to
abolish terrorism, to establishpeacein the area. Here we are
dealingreally with a very seriousmatter.
125. Mr. Tekoah said in his statement that Lebanon
cannot claim impunity. in his letter to the Council
Mr. Tekoah said: “Lebanon forfeits the right to claim
respect for its territory” [seeS/109.22]. Here we have a
State which is claimingfor itself the right to interfere in our
internal affairs, to breach our territorial integrity and
sovereignty and to foment trouble in our midst. How? As a
self-appointedgendarmeof the United Nations. The Israeli
representativeclaims:“1 am comingto you to askyou for a
licence to legalizeactsof terrorism againstLebanon.” What
in fact he is askingthe Council to do is to appoint Israel,
that spoilt child of the United Nations, as the United
Nations gendarme in the world to establish peacesomethingthe Security Council cannot do by establishinga
peace-keepingforce, although Israel is claiming that right
for itself. All the Council has to do is passa resolution
appointing Israel the grand marshalof the United Nations
for the preservation of peace in the world. That is the
sanction that Mr. Tekoah hascomehereto askfor. Why do
they want this licence’?They want it to kill more people.
Statements by the Chief of the Israeli Armed Forces,
General Eleazar, are reported daily in the press. He is
reported to have saidthat what happenedin Lebanon the
day before yesterday is not the end and that there are other
actions which may be taken in Lebanon and Lebanon
cannot claim for itself any shieldof protection.

120. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Lebanon,
121. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I listened with great
interest to the statement made earlier in this meeting by
Mr. Scali. One point impressed me very much: it had to do
with what he described as “massive lies”. This evening we
have been treated in the Council to a repetition of the
Israeli massive lies against Lebanon, It was done with intent
to denigrate, to defame, to calumniate Lebanon and its
reputation in the world,
122. What we heard tonight was not new; we have heard it
many times before, Even Mr. Tekoah’s Foreign Minister,
Mr. Abba Eban, made the world laugh recently when in a
statement in Vienna he said that Lebanon was the least
civilized country in the world, It is really a matter for
laughter to hear such a statement, such a description of
Lebanon from Mr. Abba Eban, who is supposed to be an
articulate, scholarly, learned and cultural man. Mr. Tekoah
read out a long catalogue of all the conceivable acts of
terrorism that had taken place in the world during the last
few years, and said that all those acts had originated in
Lebanon. Really, after that description, I wonder whether 1
do not constitute a danger to my colleagues here, as a
terrorist coming from Beirut, Lebanon.

126. They want to kill more people. They have killed a
few Palestinians,They think that by eliminating hbou
Yussef and Kamal Nasserthey are putting an end to the
claims of the Palestinianpeople. We have an Arab saying:
“Every time a leader diesthere is a new leaderborn to take
his place.” Are they going to kill everyone who assumes
leadershipamongthe Palestinianpeople’! Are they goingto
exterminate all the Palestinianpeople? Do they want usto
be their accomplicesin the extermination of the Palestinian
people?

123. Mr. Tekoah referred to some of the matters he
brought out in his letter of 11 April. He referred, for
instance, to an incident on 3 March affecting the passenger
steamer Sania. He said that that steamer “on its way to
Haifa with 2.50 Christian pilgrims from the United States
was blown up in the Beirut harbour”. I am not singlingout
thisparticular incident for any other purposethan to point
out that Mr. Tekoah is attempting to usethe platform of
the Security Council to spreadhere in the United Statesthe
falsehood,the big lie, that 250 Christianpilgrimswho were
on the steamerSaniain Beirut were the subjectsof an act
of terrorism. There is not the slightest proof that the
explosionwhich really did take placeon the steamerwasan
actof terrorism or sabotage.

127. When they say that a certain person went from
Beirut, it does not meanthat he really did go from Beirut.
Most of the claims that Mr. Tekoah has made are not
substantiated,They arehearsay,they arerumours-that this
group went from Beirut or that that group took an aircraft
from Beirut. We had to face the Security Council in 1968,
when a group of Israeli commandoslanded and destroyed
13 of our aircraft, on the pretext that two Palestinianshad
left Beirut for Athens, and there had attempted an attack
on an Israeli El Al aircraft, That wasenough justification
for Israelto bomb the airport of Beirut and destroy most of
our civilian air fleet.

124. We seeMr. Tekoah or other representativesof Israel
here in the Security Council when there is a complaint
about acts of aggressionand acts of organizedterrorism
Perpetratedby the State of Israel.They comehereandthey
usethe platform of the United Nations for propaganda.We
know that Mr. Tekoah and his colleagueshave saidabout
the United Nations Security Council: that it is bankrupt
morally, politically and legally. We know the attitude of
Israeltowards the United Nationsand towardsthe Security
Council. After the adoption of the resolution by the
General Assembly last
December [resolution

128. Not only could I cite the whole record of Israel’sacts
of terrorism in the Middle East and elsewherein the past,
but I could ask the following: Who killed Mr. WahelZuaiter
at Rome on 16 October 1977? Who killed Mahmoud
El-Ilamsheri in Parisin October 1972? Who killed BCchir
13

Abou Kheir in Cyprus in January 1973? Who likked Basile
Kobeyssi in Paris on 6 April 1973? Who killed C&man
Kanafani in Beirut on 8 July 1972’! Who made an attempt
on the life of Anis Sayegh on 19 July 1972 and on the life
of the Bassam Abou-Cherif on 24 July 1972’! I have many
other names and facts I could cite about Israeli terrorism.

133. We have to remember that there are underly$
causes, and one of the underlying causes for the acts of
violence committed by individual Palestinians is the condi.
tions of misery in which they have been kept for 25 years
because of Israel. When we deal with the causes of the
misery of the Palestinian people, when we eliminate those
causes, there will not be acts of violence committed by ah)
Palestinian against anybody. These people are crying for
justice; they are asking you, the Members of the United
Nations, to administer justice to them.

129. When we speak about terrorism we must remember
one thing-that
Israel is the head and soul of Stateorganized terrorism. This is the only State in the world
which has and pursues a declared policy of organized State
terrorism. As a matter of fact, Israel is the only country,
Member or non-Member of the United Nations, condemned
by this Security Council for one of the greatest acts of
terrorism-the
destruction of the Lebanese civilian air fleet,
to which I have referred. Israel is the only country in the
world which has been condemned by this Council for
kidnapping Lebanese and Syr@ officers and soldiers on
Lebanese territory in June 1972.

134. The PRESIDENT (ilzterpretation from Spunish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the rept,.
sentative of Egypt.
13.5. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation fro,,,
French): 1 should like to inform the members of tile
Council that the statement Egypt intends to make on the
item which is on the Council’s agenda today will be
delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt,
Mr. El-Zayyat, who is on his way to New York.

130. Mr. Tekoah has cited the Lod, the Khartoum and the
Munich massacres. We dealt here in the Security Council in
June 1972 with the massive Israeli attack, a reprisal for the
Lod incident, The Israelis pretended that they were
following Palestinian guerrillas into Lebanon-Palestinian
terrorists, as they call them. But the guerrillas they killed at
that time were peaceful civilians, the people of the towns of
Deir al-Ashayer and Hasbya. Later on they mounted
another attack against Lebanon. The terrorists they killed
were terrorists such as a family which was crushed to death
in its own car by an Israeli tank.

136. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jbr~ SpanishJ: Th,
next and last name on the list of speakers is that of the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
137. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The hour is late, and I shall
limit myself to three brief observations, First of ali, I
should like to draw the attention of the Council to
Lebanon’s incorrigible attitude and to the fact that the
Lebanese representative continued in his second statement
this evening to defend the Abou Yussefs and the Anis Saighs
and the Hamsharis and the Abu-Khairs, whom terrorist
organizations based in Beirut have acknowledged as their
agents on missions of murder directed against innocent
civilians, especially in capitals of Europe. The world w~H
follow our deliberations with interest and will want to
know how the Security Council reacts to this proclamation
of defiance of the elementary laws of civilized mankind and
to the announcement that Lebanon does not intend to
change its attitudes towards terrorist activities on and from
its soil.

131. We have deplored here in the Council the massacre of
Lod and that of Munich. We are not insensitive to human
tragedies. We feel with people; we feel with our friends in
the world, with our American friends, our Puerto Rican
friends, our Belgian friends. Are we happy about what
happened in Khartoum? Definitely not. But those were
acts undertaken by individuals, and here WC are dealing
with an official complaint by Lebanon against an admitted
act of aggression perpetrated by a State called Israel against
a State Member of the United Nations called Lebanon. And
to achieve that attack Israel has resorted, against all norms
of international law and morality, to the most perfidious
method of warfare. The Israeli attackers werq dressed in
civilian clothes; they were disguised. They came as thieves,
as marauders, to commit their abominable crime.

138. Secondly, the use of Lebanese territory for acts of
murder is not an internal Lebanese matter: it is of concern
to the entire world-to all those, whether in the Middle East
or outside the region, who are exposed to the danger of
atrocities of the kind witnessed by mankind in recent
months and perpetrated by terrorists who set out froln
Beirut. Lebanon can in no way deprive Israel of its right to
defend itself and to protect its citizens from this kind Of
outrage.

132. We could go on speaking about terrorism indefinitely, but we must remember that this item was
inscribed on the agenda of the twenty-seventh session of the
General Assembly. And let me read out again the title of
that item in order to remind people of one basic fact which
is usually forgotten when we speak of terrorism. The title is
as follows-it is an official title of the United Nations:

139. Finally, I shall let the head of the Lebanese Church
respond to the fundamental argument in the statement of
the representative of Lebanon. His Beatitude Cardinal
Maushi, the Patriarch of Antioch and the Entire I!@#
declared in an interview granted to the Lebanese newspsPe’
El Bairuk and reprinted by another Beirut paper, E~:‘IJ~&~’
on 28 September 1972:

“Measures to prevent international terrorism which
endangers or takes innocent human Iives or jeopardizes
fundamentat freedoms, and study of the underlying
causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence
which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and despair and
which cause some people to sacrifice human lives,
including their own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes”.

“The Israelis do not want to destroy Lebanon. I kfi”:’
them well. No one knows them better than I do. 1 was:;
contact with them over a tong period when I was head
14

,

the Patriarchate of Tyr and the South. I have in my
possession information which proves that through international institutions Israel has frequently tried to explain
to those responsible in Lebanon that Israel wishes
Lebanon no harm, provided that the fedayeen withdraw
from the country. But how does the proverb go? ‘To
whom can one read your psalms, 0 David? ’ ”

meeting, I should like now briefly to perfornl a duty that is
more than a ritual-that
is, to pay a tribute to my
distingliished predecessor, F4r. Aquilino Bayd of Panama,
who was President of the Council last month. I pay a
tribute to the every effective and able way in which he
presided over our work, both in New York and in Panama,
142. Although I know full well that 1 should not mix my
own personal feelings of admiration and affection for the
noble and brave Panamanian nation with the high functions
that I am called upon to exercise at this moment, I still
think that 1 can declare what I might term an informal but
very sincere consensus of warmth on the part of all
members of the Council and express today our deep
appreciation for the generous hospitality of the Government and people of Panama during our meetings held in
Panama City from I5 to 21 March.

140. Members of the Security Council could help by
reading to Lebanon the psalm of peace-of ending violence,
OF terminating terrorist activities and restoring the tranquillity which the peoples of Lebanon and Israel alike need
so much.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from &wish):
There being no other names on the list of speakers for this

The meeting rose ut 7.55 p.m.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

IJnited
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
IJnies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde rntier.
Informer-vous
aupres de volre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
IJnidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S

2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

7%82001-June

1978-2,260
