A/RES/77/121

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 December 2022

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 45
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 12 December 2022
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/77/398, para. 12)]

77/121.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010, 65/271
of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012, 68/50 of
5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013, 69/85 of 5 December 2014,
70/1 of 25 September 2015, 70/82 of 9 December 2015, 70/230 of 23 December 2015,
71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/77 and 72/78 of 7 December 2017, 73/6 of 26 October
2018, 73/91 of 7 December 2018, 74/82 of 13 December 2019, 75/92 of 10 December
2020 and 76/76 of 9 December 2021,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made in space exploration efforts, including
deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the Sun and the Earth itself,
in the use of space science and technology for the benefit of all humankind and in the
development of the international legal regime governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for
international cooperation in space activities represented by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical Subcommitt ee and
Legal Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all Member States the

22-28485 (E)

201222

*2228485*

A/RES/77/121

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in
this field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of international law, including the relevant norms of international space law and their
important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties
that promote the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new
challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all Member States, in particular those with major space
capabilities, should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer
space with a view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris, which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and the
importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, including
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote the
development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that regard the
need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of spacebased services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacity building and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as telehealth, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the
United Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural
development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and Ebola virus disease, to the
detriment of human life, society and development, and urging the international

__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
3
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
1
2

2/8

22-28485

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

community to enhance the role of space-based solutions, in
tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,

A/RES/77/121

particular

Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the
important role that space science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its sixty-fifth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
on the work of its sixty-fifth session;
2.
Agrees that the Committee, at its sixty-sixth session, should consider the
substantive items recommended at its sixty-fifth session, 6 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its sixty-first session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 7 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 76/76;
4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its sixty-second session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee, 8 including holding intersessional consultations as necessary, taking
into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
5.
Urges Member States that have not yet become parties to the international
treaties governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or
acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as
incorporating them into their national legislation;
6.
Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the
Office and published in all official languages of the United Nations could encourage
further studies within Member States in cooperation with relevant entities in support
of capacity-building efforts in space law and policy;
7.
Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the Review of
International Mechanisms for Cooperation in the Peaceful Exploration and Use of
Outer Space on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan, 10 as finalized at
the fifty-sixth session of the Legal Subcommittee, and notes that the report provides
an important source of information and useful guidance for further joint undertakings
by spacefaring nations and emerging space nations, as appropriate;
__________________

Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20).
6
Ibid., para. 428.
7
Ibid., chap. II, sect. C; see also A/AC.105/1260.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), paras. 279–280.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610,
No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574);
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of Objects Launche d into Outer
Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
A/AC.105/C.2/112.
4
5

22-28485

3/8

A/RES/77/121

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

8.
Notes with satisfaction the establishment, under a five-year workplan, of
the Working Group on Legal Aspects of Space Resource Activities of the Legal
Subcommittee;
9.
Notes that, at its fifty-ninth session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee continued its work, 11 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 76/76;
10. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its sixtieth
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 12 including holding intersessional consultations as
necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of
developing countries;
11. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on Space and Global Health
on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan, 13 as finalized at the fifty-ninth
session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and notes that the report
provides an important source of information and useful guidance for advancing the
use of space science and technology for global health for spacefaring nations and
emerging space nations, as appropriate;
12. Notes with satisfaction the establishment of the Space and Global Health
Platform, based in Geneva, to promote effective collaboration on space and global
health issues among Member States and United Nations system entities, in particular
the World Health Organization and the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat, as well as international organizations and relevant actors, and welcomes
the establishment of the Space and Global Health Network, whose work should be
facilitated by the Office for Outer Space Affairs within existing resources; 14
13. Recalls with appreciation that 10 October 2022 marked 55 years since the
entry into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
as the cornerstone of international space law;
14. Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering,
monitoring and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to
ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity for
predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and
disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with
satisfaction the work carried out by the International Asteroid Warning Network and
the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to strengthen international cooperation
to mitigate the potential threat posed by near-Earth objects, with the support of the
Office, serving as the permanent secretariat of the Advisory Group; 15
15. Notes with satisfaction the adoption by the Committee of the preamble and
21 Guidelines for the Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities, as
contained in annex II to the report of the Committee on its sixty-second session, 16 and
the establishment, under a five-year workplan, of the Working Group on the
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), chap. II, sect. B; see also A/AC.105/1258.
12
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), paras. 189–190.
13
A/AC.105/C.1/121.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), para. 167.
15
See A/AC.105/1138, paras. 205–210; see also A/AC.105/C.1/121.
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20).
11

4/8

22-28485

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/77/121

Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of the Committee, notes that the Committee encouraged States and
international intergovernmental organizations to voluntarily take measures to ensure
that the Guidelines were implemented to the greatest extent feasible and practicable,
and emphasizes that the Committee serves as the principal forum for continued
institutionalized dialogue on issues related to the implementation and review of the
Guidelines;
16. Notes with appreciation that some Member States are already
implementing space debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national
mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris
Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 17
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States
to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
17. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to the
problem of the gradually increasing probability of collisions of space objects,
especially those with nuclear power sources, with space debris, and o ther aspects of
space debris, calls for the continuation of national research on this question, for the
development of improved technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the
compilation and dissemination of data on space debris, considers that, to the extent
possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on futu re
space missions;
18. Urges all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
to contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
19. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, and agrees that the
Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security and
associated matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible
conduct of space activities, including ways to promote international, regional and
interregional cooperation to that end;
20. Emphasizes the central role of the Office in promoting international
cooperation in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space for economic, social
and scientific development, in particular for the benefit of developing countries;
21. Notes with satisfaction the programme of work undertaken by the Office
in 2022 to strengthen international cooperation in the conduct of space activities for
peaceful purposes and the use of space science and technology and their applications
towards the achievement of the internationally agreed Sustainable Development
Goals, including the workshops and symposiums conducted to build capacity, the
assistance provided to developing countries, at their request, in the development of
national space policy and legislation in conformity with international space law, and
actions implemented to strengthen institutional capacity in space activities;
22. Welcomes, in that regard, the activities being carried out by the Office to
promote gender equality and the increased role of women in space activities,
__________________
17

22-28485

Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), paras. 117–118, and annex.
5/8

A/RES/77/121

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

including through targeted capacity-building and technical advisory activities, and
efforts to encourage enhanced involvement of women and girls in sc ience,
technology, engineering and mathematics education, and invites Member States to
make voluntary contributions to those activities;
23. Requests the Office to continue to apprise the Committee and its Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in
2023, of the status of its capacity-building activities;
24. Recognizes the capacity-building activities under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications, which provide unique benefits for Member State s,
in particular developing countries, participating in those activities; 18
25. Notes with satisfaction the activities carried out under the United Nations
Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), and recognizes the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to Member States within the framework of UN -SPIDER
since its establishment in 2006 19 with the valuable contributions of its network of
regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary basis, to
provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address the
increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
26. Reiterates the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 20 in which the value of space-based technology and Earth
observation for disaster management and emergency response is recognized, and
notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office and its UN -SPIDER programme
towards promoting international cooperation as a way to enhance the use of spacebased technologies and related services at the national and local levels in contributing
to the implementation of the Sendai Framework and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
27. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International
Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office, in
its capacity as executive secretariat of the International Committee, towards achieving
compatibility and interoperability among global and regional space-based
positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global
navigation satellite systems and their integration into national infrastructure,
particularly in developing countries, and notes with appreciation that the International
Committee held its sixteenth meeting in the United Arab Emirates from 9 to
14 October 2022;
28. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Nations, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China,
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific,
located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico,
and the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Western
Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes in 2022,
encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participat ion of women

__________________

See A/AC.105/1240, sect. II.
See resolution 61/110.
20
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
18
19

6/8

22-28485

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/77/121

in their education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue
to report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
29. Notes the continued work of the Russian Federation in the establishmen t
of a centre for space science and technology education in the Eurasian region on the
basis of Roscosmos Corporate Academy;
30. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peacefu l uses of outer space, assist
Member States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to that end requests
relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the assistance
necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
31. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by such organizations
as the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the European Space Agency
and by conferences and other mechanisms, such as the African Leadership Conference
on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific
Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the Americas, in
strengthening regional and international cooperation among States;
32. Recalls the adoption of the African Space Policy and Strategy by the
Assembly of the African Union at its twenty-sixth ordinary session, held in Addis
Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2016, notes that this achievement marks the first step
towards the realization of an African outer space programme within the framework of
the African Union Agenda 2063, and notes with satisfaction in that regard the
establishment of the African Space Agency, hosted by Egypt;
33. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly gro wth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national levels
and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in
developing countries;
34. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic,
social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the
fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for
global, regional, national and local sustainable development processes should be
promoted in the formulation of policies and programmes of action and their
implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those
conferences and summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
35. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and technology
applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data, and in general, space-based
data and infrastructures, with the involvement of the Office;
36. Encourages the Office to take active part in those conferences, summits
and processes and other activities in support of their objectives, as appropriate, and
to conduct capacity-building activities, hold lectures and participate in academic and
research activities to foster international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space;

22-28485

7/8

A/RES/77/121

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

37. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office, to continue to examine how space science and
technology and their applications could contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate, as
appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
38. Encourages the Office to continue to conduct capacity-building and
outreach activities associated with space security and transparency and confidence building measures in outer space activities, as appropriate, and within the context of
the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
39. Also encourages the Office to continue to explore existing avenues and
new opportunities to increase its capability to meet the growing demand for support
to strengthen the capacity of countries, in particular developing countries, in using
space science and technology and their applications and to inform the Committee of
those efforts;
40. Agrees that the Office should pursue greater engagement with industry and
private sector entities to further their support for and contributions to the overall work
of the Office; 21
41. Appeals to Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, institutions, industry
and private sector entities and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund in support of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in order to support the efforts of the Office to secure additional resources to facilitate
the full implementation of its programme of work, including, where appropriate, the
financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the Office in carrying out
technical cooperation and assistance activities, in particular for developing countries;
42. Urges the African States, the Asia-Pacific States, the Eastern European
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and the Western European and other
States to nominate their candidates for the offices of Chair of the Committee, Second
Vice-Chair/Rapporteur of the Committee, Chair of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, First Vice-Chair of the Committee and Chair of the Legal
Subcommittee, respectively, for the period 2024–2025, before the next session of the
Committee, to be held in 2023; 22
43. Decides that Guatemala and Uzbekistan shall become members of the
Committee; 23
44. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant the status of observer to
the Association for the Development of the Atlantic International Research Centre,
the Access Space Alliance, the Hague Institute for Global Justice and the International
Peace Alliance (Space), in accordance with the procedures of the Committee; 24
45. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
52nd plenary meeting
12 December 2022
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/72/20),
para. 326.
22
Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/77/20), para. 409.
23
Ibid., paras. 410–411.
24
Ibid., paras. 413–420.
21

8/8

22-28485
