A/64/PV.67

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

67

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 22 December 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 71 (continued)
Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence
Draft resolution (A/64/L.40)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the Assembly held a joint debate on agenda
item 71 together with agenda item 70 and its sub-items
(a) and (b) at its 59th and 60th plenary meetings, on
7 December 2009.
I give the floor to the representative of Benin to
introduce draft resolution A/64/L.40.
Mr. Babadoudou (Benin): On behalf of the
Group of African States and the other sponsors, I have
the honour to present draft resolution A/64/L.40,
entitled “Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide
in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence”. In addition to the sponsors listed
in the document, Australia, Denmark, France, Israel,
Japan, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden and the
United States of America have joined the list of
sponsors.
The
draft
resolution
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s report on assistance to survivors of
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans,
widows and victims of sexual violence, contained in
document A/64/313. It further commends the efforts of
the Government and people of Rwanda and civil

society organizations, as well as the international
community, to provide support for restoring the dignity
of the survivors.
The draft resolution calls on Member States and
the United Nations system to urgently implement the
conclusions and recommendations in the report of the
Secretary-General.
It
further
requests
the
Secretary-General to take all necessary and practicable
measures for the implementation of the draft resolution
and to report thereon to the General Assembly, at its
sixty-sixth session, with concrete recommendations for
the support of survivors of the Rwandan genocide of
1994.
The African Group and the other sponsors believe
that it is imperative that, six years after a resolution of
this kind was first adopted, the survivors of the 1994
Rwandan genocide be given the support they deserve.
We hope that this draft resolution will be adopted, as
usual, by consensus.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to take action on draft resolution A/64/L.40. I
wish to inform members that since the submission of
the draft resolution Albania has become a sponsor. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/64/L.40
(resolution 64/226).

was

The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 71?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-66218 (E)

*0966218*

adopted

A/64/PV.67

It was so decided.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Consultative
Committee of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women
The President (spoke in Arabic): The term of
office of five members of the Consultative Committee,
appointed under General Assembly decision 61/414 of
15 December 2006, expires on 31 December 2009.
Members will recall General Assembly decision 62/521
of 6 December 2007, by which the Assembly took note
of the appointment of two new members of the
Consultative Committee to replace the members who
had resigned from the Committee.
Taking into account the remaining three
vacancies and the recommendations made by the
Group of African States, the Group of Eastern
European States and the Group of Western European
and other States, I have appointed the Czech Republic,
Egypt and Sweden as members of the Consultative
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2010.
May I consider that the Assembly takes note of
those appointments?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of subitem (h) of agenda item 112.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now consider the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 129, 132, 133, 135, 137,
139, 140, 142 and 154. If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee that are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the

2

recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 129
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/547)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/227).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 129.
Agenda item 132
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/548)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the

09-66218

A/64/PV.67

Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Capital master plan”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/228).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 132.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/549)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/229).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 133.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/580)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/230).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 135.

09-66218

Agenda item 139
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/581)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“United Nations common system: report of the
International Civil Service Commission for 2009”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/231).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 137
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/550)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision entitled “Provisional
Staff Rules”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 137.
Agenda item 140
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/551)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
its activities”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

3

A/64/PV.67

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/232).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 140.
Agenda item 142 (continued)
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/582)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/233).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 142.
Agenda item 154
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/552)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, which was
adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/234).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 154.

Agenda item 111 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(g) Election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e)
of General Assembly resolution 60/180, of
20 December 2005, the Organization Committee shall
comprise the following: seven members of the Security
Council, including five permanent members; seven
members of the Economic and Social Council, elected
from regional groups; five top providers of assessed
contributions to United Nations budgets and of
voluntary contributions to United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies, including a standing
peacebuilding fund; five top providers of military
personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by the
General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
At its 73rd plenary meeting of the sixty-third
session, on 22 December 2008, the General Assembly
elected Benin, Chile, South Africa, Thailand and
Uruguay as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2009.
Members will also recall that by resolution
63/145, of 18 December 2008, the General Assembly
decided that the term of office of the two members of
the General Assembly on the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission due to
expire on 22 June 2009, namely Georgia and Jamaica,
shall be extended to 31 December 2009.
The Assembly also decided that, beginning with
the election to be held during the sixty-third session,
the term of office for the members of the General
Assembly on the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission shall begin on 1 January
instead of on 23 June.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission. By
resolution 60/261, the Assembly decided that the
members of the Organizational Committee shall serve
for renewable terms of two years, as applicable.

4

09-66218

A/64/PV.67

Accordingly, Georgia and Jamaica are eligible for
immediate re-election.

representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.

Regarding candidatures for the two seats, I
should like to inform members that for the Eastern
European States, the Group has endorsed the Czech
Republic; for the Latin American and Caribbean States,
the Group has two candidates, Jamaica and Peru.

We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected. Ballot papers will now be distributed. I
request representatives to use only those ballot papers
that have been distributed.

Members will recall that in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the
election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee. For
this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election will be held by secret ballot
and there will be no nominations.

May I ask representatives to write clearly on the
ballot paper the name of the one State for which they
wish to vote. A ballot will be declared invalid if it
contains more than one name or if the name of the
Member State on that ballot does not belong to the
Latin American and Caribbean States region.

However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election. In the
absence of such a request, may I take it that the
Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Since the
number of candidates endorsed by the Group of
Eastern European States corresponds to the number of
seats to be filled, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides to elect by acclamation the Czech
Republic as a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a
two-year term of office, beginning 1 January 2010?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate
the Czech Republic on its election as a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Since there are two candidates from among the
Latin American and Caribbean States for one vacancy,
we shall proceed now to an election by secret ballot, in
accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, no

09-66218

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Toba
(Brazil), Mr. Plunkett (Canada), Mr. Gheghechkori
(Georgia), Mr. Ogweno (Kenya), Mr. Ayub
(Pakistan) and Mrs. Bademli Angel (Turkey)
acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 3.45 p.m. and
resumed at 4.05 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majority of members:
Number of votes obtained:
Peru
Jamaica

175
0
175
4
171
86
97
74

Having obtained the required majority, Peru was
elected a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for
a two-year term beginning on 1 January 2010.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate
the Czech Republic and Peru on their election as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and I thank the tellers for
their assistance in the election.
This concludes our consideration of sub-item (g)
of agenda item 11.

5

A/64/PV.67

Programme of work
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
consult Members regarding an extension of the work of
the Fifth Committee for one day. Members will recall
that at its 66th plenary meeting, on 21 December 2009,
the General Assembly approved the recommendation
that the Fifth Committee would complete its work by
Tuesday, 22 December 2009. However, I have been

informed by the Chairman of the Fifth Committee that
the Committee was not able to finish its work by today,
Tuesday, 22 December.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
tomorrow, Wednesday, 23 December 2009?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

6

09-66218
