S/PV.8449

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8449th meeting

Tuesday, 22 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger/Mr. Trullols. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mrs. Marsudi
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01678 (E)
*1901678*

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with and
condemnation of the attack on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like
to condemn in the strongest terms the outrageous,
deadly and totally unacceptable attack perpetrated on
20 January 2019 against the camp of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in Aguelhok, Mali, which resulted
in 10 peacekeepers from Chad being killed and several
others injured. The members of the Security Council
convey their deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people and the Government of Chad,
as well as to MINUSMA. Those brave peacekeepers
were operating under a mandate given by the Security
Council in order to provide a more secure future for
the people of the Mali. We commemorate their ultimate
sacrifice in the cause of peace.
I ask those present to now rise and observe a minute
of silence for those killed.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Malaysia,
Morocco, Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab
Emirates, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
2/66

22/01/2019

with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Martín Prada, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Mrs. Anayansi Rodríguez Camejo, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I give the floor
to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I thank Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for joining us today.
As 2019 begins, we should have no illusions about
the dangerous dynamics in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which continues to unfold before our eyes.
In the past few months, understandably, our focus has
been on the tragic situation in Gaza. Today I would
like to return to the broader questions of peace and a
sustainable resolution to the Palestinian question.
Over time, the possibility of establishing a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State has been systematically
eroded by facts on the ground. During the reporting
period, Israeli authorities advanced, approved or
tendered over 3,100 housing units planned in Area
C settlements, including plans for approximately
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2,500 units that were advanced and tenders for about
650 others. Nearly half of them are to be built deep
in the West Bank, many in isolated settlements in
the Nablus area and near Hebron. One of the plans
effectively legalizes the outpost of Ibei Hanahal as a
neighbourhood of the Ma’ale Amos settlement in the
Hebron governorate.
Meanwhile, we have seen additional attempts to
pass legislation that would directly apply Israeli law to
the territory of the occupied West Bank, raising fears
of future annexation. In December, the Government
endorsed a bill to advance the legalization of 66 illegal
outposts throughout the West Bank within two years.
In the interim period, authorities must provide the
outposts with funding, electricity and other services
and freeze the implementation demolition orders.
While in early January Israeli security forces
evacuated dozens of settlers from mobile homes
illegally installed at the site of the former Amona
outpost, at the same time a Government team has
been tasked with legalizing outposts and housing
units built illegally in settlements, including under
Israeli law. Demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures also continued across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Twenty-five structures were
seized or demolished, citing the absence of Israeliissued building permits, which are nearly impossible
for Palestinians to obtain. As a result, 32 people were
displaced. With only 13 per cent of East Jerusalem
designated for Palestinian construction and an
estimated 13,000 outstanding demolition orders issued
in Area C communities, demolition and displacement
is a constant threat. I reiterate the United Nations longstanding position that settlements are illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace.
On the Palestinian side, there are growing pressures
on the foundations of the future Palestinian State, many
of them imposed by decades of occupation and internal
divisions. Despite the tireless efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations, hopes for a genuine intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are fading by the day as the sides blame
each other for the lack of progress.
As ever, ordinary Palestinians bear the brunt of the
suffering. The gap between Gaza and the West Bank is
widening again. The early January arrests by Hamas
of dozens of Fatah members in Gaza were particularly
alarming and led to the Palestinian Authority’s
withdrawal of its personnel from the Rafah crossing

S/PV. 8449

on 7 January. Those developments are a very serious
blow to the reconciliation process. I call on Palestinian
leaders to engage constructively with Egypt and act
decisively to resolve the political impasse by ensuring
the full implementation of the 2017 Cairo agreement.
One thing is certain: Palestinian sovereignty and
statehood will remain an impossibility without genuine
unity. There can be no State in Gaza, and there can be
no State without Gaza.
Meanwhile, economic growth in the West Bank
is insufficient to keep the Palestinian economy afloat
in the face of Gaza’s dramatic economic contraction,
the occupation and diminishing external support. The
numbers speak for themselves — the West Bank gross
domestic product (GDP) grew by 1.2 per cent in the
third quarter of last year, while it contracted by 6.5 per
cent in Gaza. As a result, the total GDP of Palestine
contracted by 0.5 per cent in this period.
In other developments affecting Palestinian
democratic foundations, on 12 December 2018,
the Palestinian Constitutional Court declared the
Palestinian Legislative Council dissolved and requested
President Abbas to call for legislative elections within
six months. I am concerned by the continuing vacuum
of a functioning elected Palestinian legislative body
until credible elections can take place.
There has also been a dangerous security dynamic
unfolding in the West Bank over recent months, as a
series of deadly terrorist attacks have taken place and
the risk of destabilization has increased. The period
witnessed an increasing number of Israeli military
operations in Areas A and B of the West Bank. In
Ramallah, for example, and elsewhere, the almost daily
confrontations with Israeli security forces fuel anger
and have raised questions among Palestinians as to
the viability and relevance of the structures created
under the Oslo Accords. Such operations disrupt the
lives of civilians, increase tensions and undermine the
Palestinian public’s trust in their own security forces,
as well as the morale of their personnel.
It has been over 25 years since Oslo opened a
pathway to peace. The core of those agreements was
long ago enshrined in a number of United Nations
resolutions and bilateral agreements that remain valid
to this day. They also define the final-status issues that
can only be resolved through negotiations between
the parties with the goal of a two-State outcome. Over
time, however, those agreements have eroded as the

19-016783/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

prospect for credible negotiations has dimmed, only to
be replaced by the lack of hope and the growing risk of a
one-State reality of perpetual occupation, as outlined in
the Quartet report of 2016 (S/2016/595, annex). If both
sides were able to re-commit, with the support of the
international community, to the basic tenets enshrined
in bilateral agreements and to the principle that core
issues can be agreed only through negotiations between
the parties, that should provide hope for the future and
impetus for peace and stability. A quarter of a century
of investment in peace and State-building must not
be allowed to wither under the pressure of violence,
radicalization and suffering.
The agreements and the principles that have been
established over the past 25 years must be respected by
both sides if peace is to have a chance. The Palestinian
economy must be allowed to grow through expanding
opportunities for free trade; fiscal leakages must be
fixed by modernizing existing arrangements; and the
Palestinian Government must be able to expand the
services it provides to its people. Security coordination
should also continue. Those are just some examples
of small steps that can be taken to strengthen the
Palestinian institution-building effort and that must be
supported by the international community, including
through the mechanisms of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC). Those steps are not an alternative
to final-status negotiations, which can be based only
on international law. They are not, and cannot be, an
alternative to statehood. Engaging in them, however,
should provide some of the much-needed political and
economic space that people need in order to regain their
faith in a peaceful and just resolution of the conflict.
For the international community, it is also important
to know that both sides remain committed to existing
bilateral agreements and arrangements.
The challenging dynamics I mentioned are
unfolding as violent incidents have continued in
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Eight Palestinians were killed during the reporting
period by the Israel security forces, including during
demonstrations, clashes, military operations and other
incidents. No Israelis were killed by Palestinians during
this period.
Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence continued
during the past month, with seven Palestinians killed
by live Israeli fire. The launching of incendiary devices
into Israel also resumed after a lull of several weeks, and
two rockets were launched by militants towards Israel. I
4/66

22/01/2019

reiterate my call on Israel to use lethal force only as a last
resort and in response to an imminent threat of death or
serious injury. At the same time, Hamas in Gaza must
also stop the indiscriminate launching of rockets and
mortars and ensure that protests remain peaceful.
Meanwhile, the upsurge in settler violence over
the past year continues to be a serious concern. On
Christmas Eve, the convoy of Palestinian Prime
Minister Hamdallah was attacked with stones in the
same location that a Palestinian woman, Aisha Rabi,
was killed by Israeli stone-throwers in October. I urge
the authorities to uphold their obligation to protect
Palestinian civilians in the West Bank and to hold
accountable those responsible for such attacks.
I would like to turn briefly to the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. While the current
temporary boost in the electricity supply has led to a
general improvement in living conditions, including a
40 per cent reduction in the need for United Nationsprovided emergency fuel, the situation remains
desperate. Recent funding cuts by donors have forced
the World Food Programme to suspend food assistance
to approximately 27,000 people and reduce rations to
another 166,000 beneficiaries.
At the September AHLC meeting, member States
emphasized the need for increased efforts to revitalize
Gaza’s economy, including through cash-for-work
programmes. The implementation of the package of
urgent interventions continues. Donors have committed
approximately $90 million of the $210 million needed
for six months. Electricity supply to households has
increased from three to 10 hours. About 4,200 jobs
have been created and essential medicines have been
delivered by the United Nations. I encourage donors
to continue supporting our work, which is critical to
avoiding another escalation.
Notwithstanding the enormity of the political
challenges, the United Nations is working with the
Palestinian Authority and all the relevant stakeholders to
address some of Gaza’s most pressing needs. The United
Nations has also significantly enhanced its capacity to
support project implementation on the ground. It is
currently working with all key stakeholders to advance
the package of socioeconomic and humanitarian
interventions and to monitor ongoing projects. I urge
donors to support all of our efforts. I would also like
to take a moment to reaffirm our support for the
critical work being done by the United Nations Relief
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in Gaza, the West Bank, including east Jerusalem,
and across the region. I also urge donors to continue
their support for the essential services provided by
the Agency.
Turning to Lebanon, the country has been without
a Government for over eight months. The formation
of a cabinet seemed to be within reach but failed to
materialize over political disagreements in December.
I reiterate our call for all stakeholders to resolve
their differences so that Lebanon can address the
many pressing challenges it faces, including that of a
struggling economy.
In the meantime, the situation in southern Lebanon
and along the Blue Line remained calm but tense. The
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
was able to confirm that at least two of the tunnels
discovered by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) crossed
the Blue Line, and thereby constituted violations of
resolution 1701 (2006). To date, UNIFIL has not been
granted access to the confirmed entry points of a tunnel
near Kfar Kila, on the Lebanese side. On 13 January,
the IDF also announced that it had discovered a sixth
tunnel near Zarit, south of the Blue Line, in the vicinity
of Ramyah, in Sector West. On 9 January, the IDF
initiated T-wall construction south of the Blue Line
close to the Lebanese reservation area near Misgav Am.
The construction featured prominently in the tripartite
meetings on 10 January and 17 January.
On the occupied Golan, the ceasefire between Israel
and Syria has been maintained, with relative calm and
low levels of military activity in the areas of separation
and limitation on the Bravo side. The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) attributes
that activity to controlled detonations of explosive
ordnance as part of clearance conducted by Syrian
security forces. The relative calm in the UNDOF area
of operation was interrupted by events that occurred on
25 December and, most recently, on 20 and 21 January.
On 25 December, UNDOF observed a helicopter
on the Alpha side fire four rockets that impacted on
the Bravo side. On that day, UNDOF also heard and
observed surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft defence
guns, rockets and heavy machine guns fired on the
Bravo side, but could not observe the points of origin
or impact.
On 20 and 21 January, UNDOF observed and
heard an increase in air activity over, and the firing

S/PV. 8449

of missiles into, the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side. UNDOF liaised with both sides to
de-escalate the situation. The observations of military
activity coincided with open-source reports of Israel’s
confirming that it had conducted a series of air strikes
on targets in Syria in response to a missile fired from
Syria and intercepted by Israel.
Such events demonstrate the volatility of the area
and risk jeopardizing the long-standing ceasefire
between the two countries. It is critical that both parties
to the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement respect
it at all times to prevent escalation across the ceasefire
line and actions that undermine progress towards
stability in the area.
Returning to the Palestinian question, I have said
this many times, but let me repeat it once again — those
who believe that the conflict can be managed in
perpetuity are wrong. There is no status quo; there is
only a deterioration that, if left unchecked, without a
vision and the political will for peace, can lead only
to endless conflict and the steady rise of radicalization
on all sides. I am concerned that, within the current
political landscape, those on both sides who seek to
bridge the gap between Israelis and Palestinians are
being undermined. Despite that, civil society continues
to carry out critical work to find common ground and
work towards resolving the conflict. Their efforts are
inspiring and should be applauded and supported by all.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in English): I
extend our warmest congratulations to the Dominican
Republic on its able presidency of the Security Council
from the very outset of its tenure. I also thank United
Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing on the current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.
Today, we extend sincere congratulations to the
other Security Council members that also began their
terms on 1 January — Belgium, Germany, Indonesia
and South Africa. We wish them all success, along with
the rest of Council members, in upholding their lofty
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

19-016785/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that connection, I would like to convey to
my friend, Ambassador Matjila, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, and through him to
the people and the Government of South Africa, my
deepest condolences for the death of a dear friend,
the late Permanent Representative of South Africa,
Ambassador Kumalo. May his soul rest in peace.
We also welcome among us today Mrs. Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and thank
her for her presence and for Indonesia’s strong support
for and solidarity with Palestine.
Of course, we must also renew our deep appreciation
to the countries and delegations of Bolivia, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden upon
completion of their terms, during which they served
with consummate commitment, skill and wisdom.
While there are many serious challenges before us,
as humans tend to have, we begin the year with high
hopes — hopeful that the better sides of humankind
will prevail, that our common values will be upheld,
that our obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law will be respected and
that our commitments will be fulfilled so as to ensure a
more just, peaceful and secure world for all, including
the people of Palestine.
Although the past year tragically witnessed deep
human suffering and loss as Israel’s illegal occupation
became more entrenched, brutal and extreme, and as
the political process remained deadlocked — not only
without prospects on the horizon, but with marked
setbacks — there were some glimmers of hope.
Alongside inspiring stories of Palestinian resilience
and achievement, the following international events
and trends have been critical to preserving our faith
in international law and the international system, and
even in the inevitability of justice.
Despite the unprecedented funding crisis faced
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the
international community rallied, with generosity and
compassion, to close an immense shortfall. Led by the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner General, and
supported by many traditional and new donor countries,
those efforts helped ensure the continuity of operations
for the provision of crucial humanitarian, development
and emergency assistance to 5.4 million Palestinian
refugees across the region, pursuant to UNRWA’s
General Assembly mandate pending a just solution.
6/66

22/01/2019

The meaning of that collective mobilization cannot
be underestimated. It has helped alleviate the refugees’
plight amid widespread worries, fears and rising needs.
It has ensured relative stability in their communities
and host countries against a backdrop of volatility and
conflict in the region. And it has served as a model
of multilateralism at work and of tangible respect
for humanitarian principles and political and legal
responsibilities — all decisive factors in our collective
ability to address the crises we face at a time when
multilateralism is under such intense pressure.
The year 2018 also served to highlight a shared
determination by the Palestinian people and their
leadership, as well as by the international community,
to preserve the foundations of a just and peaceful
solution and protect Palestinian rights. That has
included a near-consensus rejection of actions aimed at
legitimizing illegal Israeli measures in occupied East
Jerusalem, deeming such actions null and void and
flagrant violations of resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016).
At repeated junctures — whether in this Chamber
by nearly every Security Council member month after
month or by other Member States at every debate or
in the 18 December joint statement by present and
outgoing European Union Council members and/or
in the vast support for General Assembly resolutions
on the Palestine question, including the 6 December
resolution 73/89, entitled “Comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East” — important efforts
have been made to reinforce the long-standing terms
of parameters for a just solution, based on two-States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security along the pre-1967 borders, and for all final
status issues, including Jerusalem, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
The international community must continue to
reject attempts to erode this consensus and must match
words and commitments with practical measures to
ensure accountability for all violations. Only that can
make impunity costly, bring it to a halt and truly make
a difference in our collective search for peace. That
must include serious efforts to implement the relevant
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016) and the
clear obligations therein, including of non-recognition
and distinction. As often stressed by the SecretaryGeneral, there is no viable plan B to the two-State
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution. I repeat, there is no plan B to the two-State
solution, as he often tells us. Immediate action to
advance its realization is required before it is too late.
A final recent, positive event was the endorsement
of the State of Palestine as Chair of the Group of 77
for the year 2019, tasking us with leading the Group’s
efforts to address issues of universal concern towards
ensuring development, stability and prosperity for all
humankind. We are humbled at being conferred that
responsibility and pledge to uphold our collective
principles and goals, in the true spirit of multilateralism,
on behalf of the Group’s 134 member States and with the
rest of our partners and the international community.
Those have been the more hopeful developments.
Unfortunately, as Special Coordinator Mladenov
pointed out, the situation on the ground has been far
less positive. The reality remains one of recurrent
crises, cycles of violence and imminent dangers, as
Israel, the occupying Power, exploiting the international
paralysis, persists with its illegal policies and practices,
inflicting more suffering on our people and relentlessly
colonizing our land, pushing peace prospects further
and further away.
Day by day, the occupation is destroying the
two-State solution and sowing deep despair among
our people. That despair is especially acute among
our youth, who have known only the oppression and
dehumanization of foreign occupation and blockade all
their lives and who are losing hope for a better future
and losing trust in the promises of peace and justice
made to them by their leadership and the international
community. That reality has been confirmed in briefing
after briefing, including in the context of the SecretaryGeneral’s quarterly reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), which should be presented
in written format, as we and the majority of Council
members have repeatedly called for.
Israel, the occupying Power, is flagrantly carrying
on with its illegal settlement campaign, making a
mockery of international law and of the Security
Council’s credibility. In blatant contempt of the
Council’s authority and global demands, Israel has
persisted in confiscating and colonizing our land
with settlements, the wall, checkpoints, Israeli-only
roads and other occupation infrastructure, as well as
demolishing Palestinian homes and forcibly transferring
Palestinians, including vulnerable Bedouins, with

S/PV. 8449

nearly 500 people, among them 216 children and 127
women, displaced and made homeless in 2018.
Israel has deliberately advanced the illegal
construction of more than 5,600 settlement units in
the past year, thereby facilitating the illegal transfer
of thousands more Israeli settlers to our land. The
majority of those settlement activities are taking place
in areas deep inside the West Bank, and in particular in
and around East Jerusalem. The obvious aim is to alter
the demography, character and status of the occupied
territory and de facto annex it, in grave breach of
international law, and to obstruct the contiguity of our
State and thereby the viability of the two-State solution.
Israeli Government officials and extremist settlers
have also persisted with provocations and incitement
against Palestinian Muslim and Christian communities
and against our holy sites, particularly Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, undermining the historic status quo, Jordan’s
custodianship and inflaming religious tensions. Most
recently, that has involved dangerous rhetoric by
an Israeli politician who called for the demolition of
parts of the historic wall of the Old City of Jerusalem.
Such provocations must be explicitly condemned, and
Israel must be demanded to comply with all relevant
resolutions, including for the protection and preservation
of the city’s historic, cultural and religious heritage.
The human toll also continues to mount as
Palestinian civilians continue to be denied their
fundamental human rights and the international
protection that the Security Council and General
Assembly have periodically called for across the five
decades of this illegal occupation. Acts of violence and
hatred against Palestinian children, women and men
continue unabated, including by extremist settlers.
Incited by a barrage of inflammatory rhetoric, even
from the highest levels of the Israeli Government and
military, violent raids and lethal attacks by occupying
forces, including against unarmed civilian protesters in
the Great March of Return in Gaza, continue to cause
harm to civilians, take innocent lives and devastate
Palestinian families, and Palestinian civilians continue
to be arrested, detained and imprisoned by the occupying
Power, which is fiercely targeting our male youth.
We will not forget the 295 Palestinians killed by the
occupying forces in 2018, among them many children,
or the 29,000 injured — the highest casualty toll since
Israel’s war on Gaza in 2014 — among them hundreds
left disabled, including many amputees. We will not

19-016787/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

relent in our calls for the perpetrators of those crimes
against our people to be held accountable and for justice
for the victims.
Human misery is also intensifying, with the
poverty and dependence on aid borne of that injustice
mounting daily. The situation is especially grave in
the Israeli-blockaded Gaza Strip, where the depth of
the humanitarian crisis defies description. Hearing the
shocking figures reported monthly by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNRWA, the
Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and others may seem to have become the
norm after all this time, but there is nothing normal about
the calculated infliction of such human deprivation
and indignity. The longer the international community
tolerates this deplorable man-made crisis — whereby
2 million people are being forced to live in an open-air
prison, in total isolation and desperation — the closer it
will come to losing its sense of humanity.
We urge the Security Council to heed the cautions
and appeals presented to it over and over and to give
that matter urgent attention. We call for serious action,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the Council’s own resolutions, to bring to a halt
Israel’s impunity, with a view to not only saving the
possibility of a just peace, but actually promoting its
achievement. Each State also has a responsibility to
respect and ensure respect for the law by not rendering
aid or assistance to illegal Israeli actions, including in
Jerusalem, and by advancing accountability and peace.
On our part, we will remain resolute in calling for
the application of international law and calling on the
international community to uphold its political, legal
and moral responsibilities to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation and achieve a just solution to the Palestine
question in all its aspects, including the fulfilment
of our people’s inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination and to return.
We reiterate our appeal to countries that have not
yet done so to recognize the State of Palestine and,
moreover, call for support for Palestine’s request for
admission to United Nations membership, which has
been pending since 2011, to allow us our rightful place
among the community of nations. Such steps would
be in full conformity with the relevant resolutions,
the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination
and independence and the two-State solution, which
the international community has insisted upon, yet
8/66

22/01/2019

neglected, for decades. It would also be significant in
restoring hope and rebuilding trust, which is so vital
in creating peace. We will also remain insistent in our
pursuit of Palestinian reconciliation and unity, and once
more, we especially recognize Egypt’s valuable efforts
in that regard and pledge our cooperation.
Moreover, despite the dismal situation on the
ground and severe political deadlock, we remain
committed to non-violence, dialogue and the objective
of peace, including through negotiations based on the
terms of reference enshrined in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. It is on
that basis that all final-status issues must be resolved
and that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace can
be guaranteed.
We call for the mobilization of regional and
international efforts to help overcome the impasse
and contribute to the realization of a just solution as a
matter of urgency, in line with the Security Council’s
calls in resolution 2334 (2016). We urge all States to
step up their efforts to uphold their commitments and
obligations to bring a peaceful end to the PalestinianIsraeli tragedy. Peace cannot be achieved by dismissing
international law and human rights; rather, upholding
the law is the only path to peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): On behalf of Israel, I
congratulate the incoming members of the Security
Council. I hope that this year the Council will engage
in factual and constructive dialogue regarding the
situation in the Middle East. I also congratulate the
delegation of the Dominican Republic on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Two days ago, the Iranian regime committed a
grave act of aggression against Israel. The Iranian
Quds Force fired a medium-range surface-to-surface
missile into northern Israel from a position that was
in close proximity to the Israeli border. Israel’s Iron
Dome air defence system intercepted that missile
successfully. Israel responded by targeting Iranian
military infrastructure in Syria, including intelligence
command and control centres, weapon warehouses
and training facilities. Israel holds the Syrian regime
responsible for the missile that was launched against
Israel from Syrian territory.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community and the Security
Council must condemn Iran for that act of aggression.
The firing of that missile proves, once again, Iran’s deepentrenchment in Syria. Let me be clear: Iran must fully
withdraw its military presence and militia forces from
Syria without conditions. It must do so immediately.
Israel does not wish for any escalation, but Israel is
ready and able to protect its citizens and its sovereignty
from the Iranian threat. Anyone that threatens to wipe
Israel off the map will be held fully accountable.
When it comes to countering terrorism, you must
follow the money. When the world united against the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, we asked two fundamental questions. Where
do they get their money, and how do we cut off their
supply? By asking the right questions and following the
money trail, the world was able to diminish the threat
of terror.
When it comes to countering terrorism in the
Middle East today, the international community must
apply the same strategy. It must follow the money. In
our region, the money trail of terror leads back to one
common supplier. The world must acknowledge that
supplier — the source that is the epicentre of modern
terrorism. It must face the harsh reality that that source
is a United Nations Member State. That Member State
is proliferating a plague of terror from which no one is
immune. Fortunately, in recent months, we have seen
nations and unions of States from the Middle East to
Europe and beyond beginning to take steps towards
finding a remedy, but a remedy is not enough. We
need to take preventive action. It is high time that the
world stop the source, the main supplier and sponsor of
terrorism — Iran.
After the signing of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the international community was
optimistic. It thought that Iran would use the billions
of dollars it received to invest in its people, and maybe
its infrastructure, reform its economy and rejoin the
community of nations. That was wishful thinking. Iran
has used the money to finance terrorism throughout
the region and around the globe. The Iranian payroll
emboldens the worst of terrorists. The money trail
starts in Tehran. It reaches the border with Iraq. It
stretches across the Arab Gulf to Yemen. It extends to
the tyrants in Damascus. It lands in the bank accounts
of its proxy Hizbullah. Iran is bankrolling a coalition of
terrorists around the world. Its ultimate goal is to preach
and export Ayatollah Khomeini’s radical doctrine and

S/PV. 8449

further the Iranian policy of expansionism. With the
Iranian regime’s complete backing, Hizbullah — the
Iranian proxy — is turning Lebanon into a launching pad
for terror. If those here do not believe me, they should
believe Nasrallah — the head of Hizbullah — who stated
proudly that all of Hizbullah’s funding for weaponry,
and even food supply, come from Iran.
On 19 December 2018 (see S/PV.8432), I presented
right here undeniable evidence of Hizbullah’s use of
private property throughout southern Lebanon to build
terror-attack tunnels underneath the Blue Line into
Israel, in clear violation of Israel’s sovereignty. As the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and several Member States have stated, those tunnels
violate resolution 1701 (2006). The Lebanese army
has taken no action in response, allowing Hizbullah
to continue building those tunnels undisturbed. I also
revealed the existence of four terror-attack tunnels
beginning in Lebanon and ending in Israel. I outlined
Hizbullah’s grand plan to take over the Israeli Galilee.
Every year, Iran provides $1 billion to its Lebanese
proxy — Hizbullah. The Iranian regime has invested
millions of dollars into each Hizbullah terror-attack
tunnel. This is a result of the Iranian money trail
when the world is silent. This is what happens when
the world relies on wishful thinking. On 20 December
2018, Israel began a new phase of Operation Northern
Shield. Operation Northern Shield was a defensive
measure on our side of the Blue Line to destroy the
terror-attack attack tunnels. Israel neutralized one
tunnel by sealing it off with cement. When the cement
overflowed from the other side, the evidence was
crystal clear. Hizbullah’s terror tunnel had begun inside
private property in Lebanon, stretched underneath the
Blue Line and infiltrated Israel’s sovereign territory.
Even then, with striking evidence, UNIFIL is still
not fulfilling its mandate. On 26 December 2018, the
Israeli Defense Forces discovered a fifth terror tunnel
beginning in Kfar Ayta ash Shab, Lebanon, and ending
in Shtula, Israel. Just last week, on 13 January, Israel
discovered a sixth terror tunnel — the largest and
most elaborate so far — spanning from Kfar Ramyah,
Lebanon, into sovereign Israel. Operation Northern
Shield has concluded, but Israel will continue to take
any and all necessary defensive measures on its side
of the border, including to neutralize all terror-attack
tunnels violating its sovereignty. Israel will defend its
people by any means, on the ground and underground.
There is no price tag for the safety of our people.

19-016789/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

If one follows the bloody trail of money starting in
Tehran, one will arrive at the terror tunnels in Lebanon
and Gaza and their weapons warehouses in Syria. It
is now trying to infiltrate Judea and Samaria as well.
The Iranian regime’s obsession with Israel is not just
well known, it is expensive. Seven billion dollars are
directed annually to the never-ending attempts to
destroy Israel — $7 billion. In Syria alone, it invests
$4 billion dollars every year to help the Al-Assad
regime. Iran gives $1 billion in aid annually to its
Shiite proxy. Iran also gives hundreds of millions of
dollars to its proxies in Iraq, and tens of millions of
dollars to rebels in Yemen. On Israel’s border, Iran
supports Hamas and Islamic Jihad in Gaza with well
over $100 million every year.
The Palestinian observer did not mention anything
about the connection between Palestinian terrorist
organizations and Iran. Allow me therefore to do so.
Iranian money has ended directly in the pockets of
Hamas and Islamic Jihad in the Gaza Strip and Judea
and Samaria. Iran, in partnership with Hamas and with
the help of Hizbullah, is pushing to build a military
front in Judea and Samaria from which to attack Israel.
The Iranian trail of terror unifies the efforts of Saleh
Al-Arouri, who is the Deputy Political Chief of Hamas.
He works very closely with Saeed Izadi, the Head of
the Palestinian branch of the Iranian Quds Force, on
behalf of Qasem Soleimani, Commander of the Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard. The end goal
of that gang is to establish terror networks throughout
the Middle East. With the help of Al-Arouri and Izadi,
Iran is trying to turn Judea and Samaria into the fourth
military front against Israel. With Iran’s blessing,
Hamas is also growing closer to Hizbullah and sharing
its preferred terror tactics, including the tunnels,
which we now see in southern Lebanon. Hamas is also
building a major military front in Lebanon, using it as
another base from which to terrorize Israel.
All of a sudden, Iran is now speaking publicly about
training Palestinian terrorists. High-profile Hamas and
Islamic Jihad terrorists are meeting with high-ranking
officials in Tehran. On 22 December 2018 — a few
weeks ago — Hamas co-founder Mahmoud al-Zahar led
a Hamas delegation to Tehran. As Saleh Al-Arouri said,
“The aid Iran provides to the resistance is not
merely symbolic. Nobody but Iran gives us any
military support”.
10/66

22/01/2019

On 31 December, Ayatollah Khamenei rang in the new
year by meeting with the head of Islamic Jihad, Ziad
Al-Nakhalah, in Tehran. For his new year’s resolution,
Khamenei promised Al-Nakhalah that the Palestinian
State would be established in Tel Aviv. I have news
for Mr. Khamenei. He will not meet his new year’s
resolution — not this year, not ever.
In the light of those meetings, it is odd that in that
same week the Iranian Foreign Minister, Mohammad
Javad Zarif, claimed with the utmost confidence,
“When did we say we want to annihilate Israel? Find
one person that has said so. Nobody has said that”.
In fact, the entire Iranian regime has said that for 40
years, since 1979. For 40 years, Iranian missiles have
borne the inscription, “Death to Israel”, and it is written
in Hebrew. The so-called moderate Iranian President
calls Israel “a cancerous tumour”. The Iranian Supreme
Leader threatens to annihilate Israel himself and place
the Palestinian State in Tel Aviv.
The Iranian machine of terror does not stop even
for a moment. It is attempting to close in on us on four
fronts, but it stands no chance against Israel. We will
never let Iran win — not in Syria, not in Lebanon, not
in Judea and Samaria, not in Gaza, not anywhere. The
world cannot keep living in a rose-coloured reality. Iran
is attacking Europe. It is entrenched in States on the
other side of the planet. I am sure the Ambassadors of
France, Belgium and Denmark know that, if Iran strikes
their countries once, as it did in recent years, it will
strike again. The European Union has taken a crucial
step forward by imposing new sanctions on Iran. It is
now the Council’s turn to take that leap.
Israel means business. We know what Iran seeks
to accomplish and we share it with our allies. We know
the international community can rise to the occasion
and join us in the fight against Iranian terrorism. We
know that the world can answer the call of the Iranian
people, who deserve a brighter future. We are waiting
for the Security Council to designate Hamas, Hizbullah
and Islamic Jihad as terrorist organizations, because
weakening them is the first step to dismantling the
epicentre of terrorism that sits in Tehran. We know
the world is capable of responding. But, if we must,
we will respond alone. We will defend our democracy,
safeguard our sovereignty and protect our people.
As former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
once warned,
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“If an enemy of our people says it seeks to destroy
us, believe him. Don’t doubt him for a moment.
Don’t make light of it. Do all in your power to deny
him the means of carrying out his satanic intent”.
If Israel must act, Israel will not hold back.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.
Ms. Marsudi (Indonesia): First of all,
congratulations, Sir, on your able presidency of the
Security Council. I wish to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing. I also wish to warmly congratulate
Palestine for assuming the chairmanship of the Group
of 77. It shows the international community’s vote of
confidence in Palestine.
My presence here today is intentional. It is to show
Indonesia’s consistent support for the Palestinian cause.
It is a natural and legal right of Palestine to be a full
Member of the United Nations. The road to Palestine’s
membership has been, and will remain, bumpy.
Everybody knows that. But I am sure that bumpy road
will not stop Palestine and the international community
from fulfilling that right. Palestine deserves the
Council’s full attention. The Palestinian question
defines the credibility of the Council. In that context, I
wish to underline three main points.
First, all sides must comply with international law
and the relevant resolutions, in particular 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016), as a matter of urgency. Continued
violence and the violation of international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions reduce the Council’s
credibility. That must be stopped and credibility must
be restored. Compliance with international law also
includes refraining from provocative actions or rhetoric.
Two days ago, the Israeli media circulated news of the
planned closure of schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) in East Jerusalem next year.
I truly hope that such news is a hoax. If not, it amounts
to provocative action as well as a violation of Israel’s
responsibilities under various international agreements.
Furthermore, we reject the continued expansion of
illegal settlements. It is provocative, not to mention
morally and legally wrong. Palestinian families are
driven unjustly from their homes. It has to end.

S/PV. 8449

Secondly, the peace process requires legitimacy,
and legitimacy comes when the process is under
the guidance of a multilateral mechanism based on
internationally agreed parameters. Any peace plans
that fail to accommodate such parameters will not
succeed. What we are witnessing now is disturbing, as
agreed parameters have been undermined, including
the attempts to move away from the two-State solution.
Let me reiterate loud and clear: the two-State solution is
the only option for solving the Palestinian issue. Unity
and reconciliation are also of paramount importance.
Therefore, I commend Ambassador Riyadh Mansour
for his statement on Palestine’s determination to pursue
unity and reconciliation. Moreover, we commend
countries that have upheld principled positions in line
with many United Nations resolutions, including on the
status of Jerusalem.
Thirdly, humanitarian collapse, especially in Gaza,
must be stopped. The 11-year blockade is unjust. It
does not contribute to solving the problem and must
be lifted. We appreciate those who have provided
generous contributions to fill the UNRWA budget
deficit and improve conditions in Gaza. Indonesia, too,
has significantly increased its contribution to UNRWA,
and we will step up our humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people. Let me emphasize that UNRWA has
a humanitarian mandate and is not a political agency.
The plight of 5.4 million Palestinian refugees is at stake.
With regard to Syria and Yemen, continued efforts
towards peaceful and inclusive political solutions
must be further encouraged. Syria has seen more than
a decade of suffering. We condemn the recent series
of bombings that led to a number of casualties. We
therefore welcome the latest efforts towards advancing
a credible political process. We call on all parties to
ensure the success of that Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
United Nations-facilitated process, which would lead
to a concrete pathway to peace.
Regarding Yemen, Indonesia welcomes the
various United Nations-led processes, including the
establishment of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement. The Mission is a critical step
towards establishing peace and facilitating humanitarian
access. Indonesia stands ready to contribute.
With respect to Lebanon, we pay tribute to the
excellent work of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in keeping peace. We are honoured

19-0167811/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/01/2019

that 1,308 Indonesian peacekeepers, 45 of whom are
women, are part of UNIFIL.

deal with Iran, built on the shared global understanding
that the country must cease its destabilizing activities.

Finally, any violence and disproportionate use of
force against civilians by anyone, anywhere, must be
rejected. All parties must exercise maximum restraint
and continue working in good faith to move the
peace process forward. I underline that the spirit of
multilateralism must be revived.

Recent months have made clear the need for further
international action on Iran’s missile programme.
Only last week, Secretary Pompeo called attention to
Iran’s firing of a space launch vehicle, which yet again
demonstrates Iran’s defiance of the Security Council and
resolution 2231 (2015). Similarly, we see Iran’s proxies
taking dangerous steps that threaten international peace
and security. Israel has exposed extensive tunnelling by
Hizbullah under the Blue Line. As the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) made clear, such
construction violates resolution 1701 (2006). We
commend UNIFIL’s work to keep the Blue Line under
control. However, it is unacceptable that the Lebanese
Government has not yet given UNIFIL access to the
tunnel entrances on its side of the Blue Line.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I
welcome Indonesian Foreign Minister Marsudi and
thank her for joining us in the Security Council for
today’s briefing. We offer our deepest condolences
to Chad on the loss of 10 peacekeepers in Mali over
the weekend.
Turning to today’s subject, as we have often said in
the Chamber, the Security Council spends far too much
time focused on Israeli-Palestinian issues, while not
paying enough attention to the many other threats to
international peace and security that exist in the Middle
East. The approach of this monthly meeting not only
has failed to advance Israeli-Palestinian peace but has
distracted us and the world from looking at the region
as a whole. We fail to focus on steps that would address
the instability affecting the Syrians, Lebanese, Iraqis,
Yemenis, Libyans and Iranians, among others.
In order to address the region’s challenges, with our
colleagues from Poland, the United States will jointly
host a ministerial meeting to promote peace and security
in the Middle East in Warsaw on 13 and 14 February.
The ministerial meeting will provide an opportunity
to share our experiences, insights and assessments
as we work together to support a more stable and
peaceful Middle East. The meeting will serve as a
global brainstorming session, where we can develop the
outline of a stronger security architecture in the region
and establish clear benchmarks for measuring progress.
Agenda items include a discussion on the humanitarian
crises in Syria and Yemen, as well as sessions on missile
development, extremism and cybersecurity.
It is also important to state clearly what the
ministerial meeting is not. It is not a forum to relitigate
the merits of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). While we have made our concerns about the
JCPOA clear, we respect the decision by other States to
support it. It is also not a venue to demonize or attack
Iran. Indeed, the United States Secretary of State has
outlined a clear strategy to reach a new comprehensive
12/66

Given the events over the weekend, let me state
clearly that the United States condemns the launching
of a rocket from Syria towards Israel. That was an
unacceptably provocative act by the Iranian and Syrian
regimes. We again call on Iran to withdraw all forces
from Syria and to reaffirm Israel’s right to self-defence.
The upcoming ministerial meeting in Warsaw
will acknowledge such activities, among others, as
drivers of instability in the Middle East. However, the
scope of the discussion will be much broader than any
one country or set of issues. As a testament to that,
countries from around the world have been invited to
participate. The meeting will provide an opportunity
for all countries that attend to engage in a dynamic
discussion and collaborative thinking with the goal of
contributing to a more peaceful, stable and prosperous
Middle East, which would also be a more productive
and appropriate approach for these monthly Council
meetings. We look forward to following up on the
outcomes of the ministerial meeting with the Security
Council in the coming months.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for a very
comprehensive briefing. Allow me also to welcome
among us Her Excellency Ms. Retno Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia. We are very pleased
to see her here today.
I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later today on behalf of the
European Union.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, unfortunately, there has not been any
progress at all. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent
further loss of life. We once again call on all sides to
act with the utmost restraint in order to avoid further
casualties. In recent violent episodes, civilians on both
sides, including children, were killed or wounded.
The recent developments in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank remind us how important it is
to continue the de-escalation process. Our priority
is to restore a political horizon for the resumption
of a meaningful peace process. We believe that a
negotiated two-State solution and the resolution of all
final-status issues, including Jerusalem, settlements,
the future of Palestinian refugees, borders and security
arrangements, still remain a realistic way to fulfil the
legitimate aspirations of both parties and achieve longterm peace.
We appeal to both sides to refrain from unilateral
steps that prejudge the outcome of final-status
negotiations and expect them to demonstrate their
commitment to peace through their action and polices.
In more general terms, let me underline that Poland
supports a two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, as well as the Israeli right to
ensure its security and normalization of relations with
Arab States. Unfortunately, so far, we have not seen
significant positive moves towards achieving that goal.
Let me now touch briefly on the situation in the
Gaza Strip, where the political and security conditions
remain volatile. We are particularly concerned about
the humanitarian situation of the 2 million people in
the Gaza Strip.
We believe that only by returning to meaningful
bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law, which
encapsulate the internationally agreed parameters, will
it be possible to bring positive input to the process. That
is the only path towards a two-State solution and the
resolution of all final-status issues. The creation of a
political horizon, as well as an appropriate framework
for the political process, will be possible only by
working together with our regional and international
partners, including the Middle East Quartet.

S/PV. 8449

Unfortunately, the two-State solution seems to be at
risk of fading away. Advancing Israel’s settlement plans
has the potential of splitting the West Bank into two
parts, which would make the two-State solution almost
impossible. We are worried also about the looming
possibility of the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar.
We followed closely the Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that
that process will be successful. We therefore urge all
Palestinian factions to work together to achieve the
sustainable development of that process, allowing the
Palestinian Authority to resume its full responsibilities
in Gaza. A single, legitimate Palestinian Authority
could represent an important step towards the unity
of the future Palestinian State and the basis for a
sustainable peace agreement.
Let me underline also the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in the region. We strongly believe
that stopping UNRWA’s important activities could
cause instability and create a vacuum, which would
serve only the extremists. We should do our utmost to
preserve the crucial role of UNRWA in this context.
The stabilization of the Middle East is key to global
security. To that end, as mentioned by my United States
colleague, a ministerial conference devoted to security
in and the stabilization of the Middle East, co-hosted by
Poland and the United States, will take place in Warsaw
in February. We believe that the conference will bring
added value to efforts towards peace in the Middle East
by creating a positive vision for the region. We have
invited representatives of more than 70 countries from
all regions of the world. As has already been mentioned,
the conference will focus on a range of horizontal issues
that affect the whole region. We do not intend to focus
on particular countries during the conference.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I should like at the outset to sincerely thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and for the
work that he and his team are doing. I should like also
to welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
As this is my first statement on this item as a member
of the Council, I should like to underscore a number of
points that are of vital importance to my country.

19-0167813/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Belgium sees no option other than a negotiated
solution based on the coexistence of two States, with
the city of Jerusalem as their future capital, in line with
agreed international parameters, all of which must be
respected. International law and the relevant Council
resolutions must be the basis for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace plan. Belgium believes that all
credible diplomatic initiatives must be based on these
parameters, which enjoy international consensus.
My statement today will focus on international
efforts to facilitate the two-State solution — the only
solution that could realize in a lasting manner the
legitimate aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
However, Belgium believes that such a solution will
requires a more peaceful international and regional
environment — a far cry from the current one given the
developments that have taken place recently, on which
Belgium and the other members of the Security Council
will have to express their views shortly.
The year 2018 reaffirmed the trend that started in
2017 of a relentless pursuit of the settlement policy,
including in the heart of the West Bank, in areas
that are strategic to the territorial continuity of a
future Palestinian State. Belgium is also concerned
about the fact that ongoing settlement activity on
the ground is accompanied by legislative initiatives
aimed at facilitating further such activity. In line with
resolution 2334 (2016), we are resolutely opposed to
that settlement policy and to the measures taken in this
context, including forced displacement, evictions and
demolitions, which also increased in 2018, in particular
in East Jerusalem.
Settlement activity is illegal in the eyes of
international law, undermines the establishment of the
trust necessary to any peace process and contributes
to fuelling tensions. We urge the Israeli authorities
to reconsider and to rescind their decisions on that
issue. Furthermore, we note with concern that there
has been an increase in the use of violence not only
by settlers, but also against them. We reiterate our
firm condemnation of all use of violence, regardless of
the perpetrators. These developments bring us closer
to a point of no return for the two-State solution; the
only diminish the already fragile prospects for peace
between the two parties.
The situation in the Gaza Strip continues to
command our full attention. Demonstrations intensified
in recent weeks, with violent incidents. While we
14/66

22/01/2019

recognize the right of Israel to ensure its own security,
we condemn the disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force. We urge Israel to respect the right of the
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully and to abide by
its legal obligations to protect civilians.
However, irresponsibly inciting the inhabitants
of Gaza to cross the perimeter fence into Israel and
cause damage cannot be tolerated either. We condemn
all acts of provocation and incitement to violence.
Demonstrations must remain strictly non-violent and
not be exploited for other purposes. We firmly condemn
the rocket fire towards Israeli territory and urge all
stakeholders to demonstrate restraint in order to avert a
fresh cycle of violence.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fate of the most vulnerable in this conflict. In 2018,
57 children were killed, most of them in the context
of the Great March of Return in Gaza. In no case
did there seem to be any imminent threat that could
have justified the use of live fire. We are concerned
by this number, which is much higher than in 2017.
Belgium urges Israeli leaders to strengthen oversight
and accountability mechanisms, which should include
in-depth, independent investigations into each case
involving the death of a child.
The humanitarian and socioeconomic situation in
the Gaza Strip must be urgently improved. We support
the Special Coordinator’s efforts to that end as well as
the activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
But a humanitarian response alone is not enough;
a fundamental change in the situation in Gaza is
necessary, one that would include a lifting of the
blockade and the full opening of crossing points, while
taking into consideration Israel’s legitimate concerns
regarding its own security. A political solution to the
crisis also requires that control of the territory be
returned to the Palestinian Authority.
We deplore the fact that intra-Palestinian
reconciliation talks appear to be deadlocked and
urge all parties to invest in dialogue and, to that end,
commend the efforts made by Egypt. We take note of
the dissolution of the Palestinian Legislative Council
and express our concern at this development, since
it is an elected body of the Palestinian Authority. We
encourage Palestinian leaders to strive to build strong,
inclusive, responsible and democratic institutions that
are based on respect for the rule of law and human
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rights. We urge the Palestinian Authority to work
towards credible democratic elections.
I would like to conclude by repeating the fact that
there can be no alternative to a two-State solution.
A just and lasting peace can be realized only by
responding to the legitimate aspirations of all the
parties. Recent developments clearly show that the
current situation is untenable. It is no longer the status
quo. It is deteriorating and creating instability that the
region definitely does not need. We should continue
to work on the issue together with our Palestinian and
Israeli friends.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
briefing on events in the Middle East and the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Today, as violent conflicts — in Syria, Yemen and
Libya — have continued to break out in the Middle East
and North Africa, the lack of progress in resolving the
Palestinian issue is seriously worrying. We have always
said that the existing status quo is not viable. It only
reinforces the negative trends that render the prospect
of achieving peace in the heart of the Middle East ever
more distant. But today what we are seeing is not even
the status quo. As Mr. Mladenov rightly noted, we are
witnessing a dangerous deterioration in the situation.
As a result, and as the regular report of the Special
Coordinator confirms, the parties are intensifying their
unilateral activity, which only exacerbates the existing
problems. Israel’s settlement activity is picking up
speed. The inflammatory rhetoric continues on both
sides. Reports of violent incidents are more and more
frequent. We urge both Palestinians and Israelis to
refrain from acts of aggression and we firmly condemn
terrorist attacks. We emphasize the unacceptability
of any indiscriminate use of force and of purposeful
attacks on civilian targets.
The only way out of the situation is by relaunching
the political process with a view to resuming direct
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations as soon as possible on
a generally accepted international legal basis, which
includes the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map of the Quartet of mediators for a settlement
in the Middle East. Only the implementation of the
formula for a two-State solution, whereby the two
States of Palestine and Israel coexist in peace and
security, will enable the crisis to be overcome and

S/PV. 8449

create the conditions necessary for sustainable progress
towards a durable peace. We should point out that an
overwhelming majority of Member States will not
accept attempts to revise that basis for a Middle East
settlement. That was confirmed once again during
the vote in the General Assembly in December (see
A/73/PV.47). We believe firmly that any actions and
proposals that do not result from Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations are doomed to failure. Nor will it be
possible to resolve the so-called final status issues for
the Palestinians and Israelis themselves, just as it has
not been possible to achieve a lasting stabilization of
the Middle East without a just and long-term resolution
of the Palestinian question.
Russia will continue taking steps to restore positive
momentum to the Palestinian-Israeli dossier. Our
proposal for providing a platform in Russia for a personal
meeting between the Palestinian and Israeli leaders is
still on the table. We are certain that the Quartet still has
its potential as the only mediation format approved by
Security Council resolutions. We support reactivating
it in its regular and close cooperation with the League
of Arab States and all regional and world stakeholders
who can contribute to overcoming the dangerous
stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli settlement. We will
continue our efforts to help reunify the Palestinians. In
the past few weeks the leadership of the Russian Foreign
Ministry has conducted a series of intensive contacts
with representatives of the various Palestinian factions.
We hope that the Palestinians will be able to achieve a
new rapprochement among themselves in order to put
an end to the schism and reunite the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. We have noted and appreciate the efforts of
Cairo and Amman in that regard.
We cannot ignore the dedicated efforts of
humanitarian personnel in Palestine. We note the
important work being done by the United Nations,
particularly the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in the occupied Palestinian territories and
in refugee camps. Russia is also helping our Palestinian
friends by making contributions both to the UNRWA
budget and on a bilateral basis. We cannot permit a
situation in which Palestinians find themselves in
a position where they basically have nothing to lose.
That fuels radicalism and is capable of blowing up the
situation in the Palestinian territories and far beyond
their borders.

19-0167815/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We already have quite enough radicalism in the
Middle East. If we are to combat that threat, we especially
need the coordinated efforts of the entire international
community on a daily basis. Once again, in accordance
with the position that Russia’s representatives have
repeatedly expressed, including at the Security Council
meeting held on 25 June last year that comprehensively
reviewed the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa (see S/PV.8293), we call for genuinely collective
measures for integrated efforts to improve the situation
in the region. It is essential to unite our efforts on the
Palestinian-Israeli question, as well as in other areas,
including Syria, Yemen and Libya. It is important
not to cut back our support to the authorities in Iraq
in their efforts to further stabilize their situation. The
violations of Syria’s sovereignty must end and we must
all engage in the collective work of achieving a political
settlement and reintegrating Syria into the Arab family.
We have to support that process, not create obstacles to
it from outside. We want to once again draw attention
to our concept for developing confidence-building
measures in the Persian Gulf, which is aimed at creating
a region-wide security architecture.
Today in this Chamber we heard some delegations
assert that the upcoming ministerial meeting in Warsaw
has no specific national aspects. While I would very
much like to believe that, I have to ask why Iran, one of
the biggest and most important countries of the region,
was not invited to it. Attempts to cobble together
military and political alliances in the region, holding
various conferences designed to paint a one-sided,
simplistic picture of the problems in the Middle East,
which are apparently all connected to Iran and Iran
alone, are counterproductive and merely render the
prospect of establishing a genuine, inclusive and
comprehensive security architecture in the region ever
more distant, just as there can be no truly inclusive and
comprehensive regional security architecture without a
just solution to the Palestinian question.
Ultimately, security is the fundamental and natural
policy priority for every State in the region. We believe
that devising rules of conduct that are acceptable to all
can only be done within the framework of a negotiation
process, perhaps one similar to Helsinki, as SecretaryGeneral Guterres has said more than once. We fully
support his efforts to develop that initiative.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
16/66

22/01/2019

question. We welcome the presence in the Council
today of Ms. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia, and we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the many complex challenges to
peace and stability in the region affected by the IsraeliPalestinian crisis and the armed conflicts in Yemen
and Syria.
The Israeli-Palestinian question is undoubtedly the
most complex crisis that the international community has
dealt with for the past more than 70 years. Compounding
the political and security issues is the humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, which is
in urgent need of coordinated solutions. With regard
to this situation, my country, which values equally the
security of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, reaffirms
its firm support for a two-State solution in which both
countries coexist peacefully within the 1967 borders.
In order to achieve that, it is essential that the Israeli
and Palestinian leadership show proof that they can rise
above their differences by resuming their dialogue and
building the foundations of a new understanding that
guarantees just and lasting peace on the achievements
of the past.
Numerous reports from the various United Nations
agencies call the Council’s attention to the structural
vulnerabilities affecting the Palestinian territories,
including unemployment, which is at a record
27 per cent, and the lack of decent housing, health
infrastructure or basic social services such as access
to drinking water and electricity. In view of the serious
humanitarian situation, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
call to the Council to work together urgently with the
United Nations specialized agencies and all partners
to find ways to mobilize the assistance necessary for
meeting the basic needs of the affected populations. In
that regard, we urge international partners to continue
their financial support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We firmly believe that will make it possible to gradually
make up the more than $200 million estimated budget
deficit of an agency that plays a key role in providing
international assistance to populations in distress.
On the political front, my country calls on Fatah
and Hamas to resume their dialogue in order to enable
the Palestinian Authority, which has the primary
responsibility for responding to the Palestinian people’s
social needs, to carry out its sovereign duties in Gaza
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the West Bank. We also reiterate our support for
a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute through
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the international
consensus on the need for a resumption of the peace
process as the only viable framework for mutually
acceptable solutions on such crucial issues as the status
of Jerusalem and the lifting of the blockade on Gaza.
We encourage all parties to exercise restraint and urge
them to engage in constructive dialogue and refrain
from any unilateral action that could compromise the
international community’s efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
We continue to be concerned about the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen, which all observers describe as the
worst in the world. Millions of Yemenis are threatened
by food insecurity, which in turn exposes them to
famine and malnutrition. On top of that, civilians
have limited access to drinking water and primary
health care and are dealing with problems related to
waterborne diseases and the risk of epidemics. In
view of the alarming humanitarian situation, Côte
d’Ivoire calls on the parties to the conflict to respect
the ceasefire in order to ensure the safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian aid to people in distress, and
urges them to focus on dialogue with a view to arriving
at a political solution to the current crisis and to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Despite the continuing numerous challenges,
we believe that the Stockholm Agreement, signed on
13 December 2018, and the resulting arrangements
give hope for achieving lasting peace and stability in
Yemen. The Council, which has endorsed this longawaited peace agreement, should make every effort
to implement its relevant provisions, including the
cessation of hostilities in Al-Hudaydah governorate
and the withdrawal by both sides of their forces from
Al-Hudaydah city and the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Issa, as well as prisoner exchanges and
arrangements for Taiz city.
With regard to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire would like to raise the issues
of the use of chemical weapons, the humanitarian
situation and the political process. Regarding the issue
of the use of chemical weapons, we appreciate Syria’s
continued cooperation with the relevant entities of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which has enabled progress to be made
on the programme for destroying Syria’s chemical
weapons. However, we remain concerned about the

S/PV. 8449

unresolved issues raised by the Syrian Arab Republic’s
declaration on its chemical weapons, and we urge the
Syrian authorities to cooperate further with the OPCW
Technical Secretariat on the issue.
The humanitarian situation is still a major concern
for my delegation, owing to the military escalation and
its impact on civilians in north-western Syria, including
the demilitarized zone in Idlib governorate established
pursuant to the agreement signed on 17 September 2018
by the Russian Federation and Turkey. My delegation
is concerned about the capture of Idlib by the Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham group, a former branch of Al-Qaida,
which also raises fears of a further deterioration in
the humanitarian organizations’ working conditions.
In that regard, my country affirms the importance of
safe, prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access to persons in distress both in Idlib and
throughout Syria. We therefore call on the parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights.
With regard to the political process, we deplore the
fact that the resurgence of fighting in Idlib governorate
and other parts of Syria could jeopardize the meagre
achievements of the intra-Syrian peace process, which is
why we encourage stakeholders to commit to engaging
in the United Nations negotiations and the Astana and
Sochi processes. We therefore once again urges the
warring parties to agree on the effective establishment
of the constitutional committee that will be tasked with
drafting a new constitution.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to express its support
for Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy of the
United Nations Secretary-General, and to wish him
every success in carrying out his mission. We continue
to believe firmly that there can be no military solution
to the various crises in the Middle East. Only a bold
and inclusive dialogue, supported by the international
community, including the Council, can lead to lasting
peace and stability for shared prosperity in the region.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his valuable briefing on the latest developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory, reminding us once
again of the ongoing tragedy there. We commend his
efforts and endeavours to ensure de-escalation and
contain the current tensions. We also welcome Her

19-0167817/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Excellency Ms. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, and thank her for participating in
today’s meeting.
We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its election by
acclamation to chair the Group of 77 and China. We
wish it every success. We agree with my colleague the
observer of Palestine that this is a positive and hopeful
development that confirms that the international
community continues to support the cause of the
Palestinian people.
The Security Council is once again meeting at
the start of a new year to address the Palestinian
question. The year 2018 was marked by detentions, the
demolition of homes and destruction of property and
the unprecedented expansion of illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem. It was also marked by the forced
displacement and killings of Palestinian civilians and
by a tightening of the blockade that was first imposed
on the Gaza Strip 12 years ago. Those practices have
been factors in the daily lives of the Palestinian people
for the past year. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has not acted to compel the occupying Power to
implement its resolutions, thereby giving Israel a green
light to continue its practices aimed at perpetuating
the occupation and undermining any prospects for a
genuine peace that would grant the Palestinian people
their legitimate and basic human rights, including the
right to independence, sovereignty and a dignified life.
That is the situation of the Palestinian question at
the beginning of its sixth decade. The international
community remains unable to find a solution to it,
not for lack of determination or will but due to the
absolute rejection of any proposed solution by Israel,
the occupying Power. History shows that successive
Israeli Governments have refused to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions or with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
and have continued to violate them. I will focus on
the suffering just this past year of the Palestinian
people under occupation, by citing some statistics and
numbers provided by United Nations reports, including
those prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).
18/66

22/01/2019

First, regarding settlement activities, in 2018 Israel,
the occupying Power, continued to seize Palestinian
territories by force and evict their original inhabitants.
It began building at least 5,618 settlement units during
the past year, most of them deep into the occupied West
Bank, notably in East Jerusalem and Bethlehem. It has
also recently approved the construction of an additional
2,500 settlement units. The number of settlers living
in the occupied West Bank increased by 3 per cent,
reaching 448,000, not including 200,000 more who live
in occupied East Jerusalem. In that regard, we once
again call for implementing resolution 2334 (2016),
which stresses that Israel’s settlement activity is a
flagrant violation of international law and an obstacle
to peace. We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to
fully and immediately cease all its settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
Secondly, with regard to the demolition of houses
and buildings, in 2018 Israel continued its policy of
demolishing Palestinian houses, dismantling 460
structures in the West Bank, mostly in Jerusalem, and
affecting the lives of around 7,000 Palestinian citizens.
According to OCHA, more than 13,000 demolition
orders were issued, including for 50 schools. All of
those illegal practices show that Israel has continued its
efforts to destroy all prospects for a two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders.
Thirdly, with regard to settler violence, in 2018 we
witnessed an increase in violations committed by the
occupying army and settlers against Palestinians and
their property, with a total of 4,318 violations — an
average of 11 per day — including action at checkpoints,
detentions, the confiscation of funds, vehicles and
properties, and the destruction of agricultural crops.
Acts of aggression by settlers against Palestinians,
which are considered hate crimes, increased by 60 per
cent in 2018 as compared to 2017.
Fourthly, with respect to deaths and injuries,
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policies
against Palestinian civilians suffering under the yoke
of the occupation, in contravention of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. In 2018, no fewer than
295 Palestinians were killed and 29,000 injured, the
highest number of casualties since the Israeli war on
the Gaza Strip in 2014. In the Gaza Strip itself, 257
Palestinians have been killed since the start of the
Great March of Return on 30 March 2018, including
181 during demonstrations.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Fifthly, with regard to detentions, in 2018 some
6,000 Palestinian people were detained, including 358
children, 128 women and seven parliamentarians.
The State of Kuwait condemns Israel’s systematic
and extensive practices and policies towards the
defenceless Palestinian people, which according to
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We call on the Security Council to enforce
its resolutions on the protection of Palestinian civilians,
especially resolutions 904 (1994) and 605 (1987),
which confirm the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory. This
is a simple overview of the crimes, illegal policies
and practices of Israel, the occupying Power. We
would need more than these few minutes to accurately
reflect the bitter reality that the Palestinian people are
living through. There can be no question that those
statistics and figures should compel us, as members
of the Security Council, to shoulder our responsibility
to support the rule of law and ensure accountability
while ending the illegal policies that deny a people
their legitimate rights. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General to address UNRWA’s
financial shortfall, as well as the generous response by
donors, including Kuwait, to ensure that it can continue
to provide its services to Palestinian refugees.
We reiterate our support for the Palestinian people’s
struggle to realize all their legitimate political rights
and establish their own independent State on their land,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We fully support
the right of the State of Palestine to become a fullyfledged Member of the United Nations. Conversely,
as we condemn Israel’s policies aimed at changing the
demographics of Jerusalem and its continued violations
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, we call on States to refrain from
establishing their diplomatic missions in Jerusalem,
in line with international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980),
which stresses that Jerusalem is a final-status issue.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to fulfil its commitments and take the
necessary measures to revive the peace process with
the aim of reaching a two-State solution, putting an
end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, and ensuring a just and lasting
peace in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including

S/PV. 8449

the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
I have listened carefully to the statements by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. I warmly
welcome Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, and thank her for her presence here today
and her statement.
The question of Palestine is at the core and root
of the Middle East issue. Its resolution is crucial to
achieving peace and development in this region. At
the moment, the conflict in the Gaza Strip continues.
The West Bank is frequently attacked, and settlement
activities are still going on, while Palestinian homes
continue to be demolished. At the same time, we are
seeing challenges to the possibility of a two-State
solution. Efforts to achieve a resumption of the dialogue
between Palestine and Israel show no progress, while
the risk of escalation of the conflict cannot be ignored.
China is deeply worried about the current
developments. The Council and the international
community should maintain a united front and adopt
a long-term perspective in advancing a political
settlement of the Palestinian question. Using violence
to quell violence will not solve any problems. China
strongly opposes any acts of violence against civilians.
We urge the parties concerned to bear in mind the
security and safety of the local populations and
the crucial importance of peaceful coexistence by
exercising restraint and thereby preventing the situation
from escalating. The grave humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip does not serve regional stability. We
hope that the relevant parties will lift the blockade
of Gaza quickly and entirely. China regrets Israel’s
decision to close schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East in East Jerusalem, and we call on the
international community to increase funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and help Palestine improve
its economic circumstances.
The fundamental path to resolving the PalestinianIsraeli conflict is through a two-State solution. The
international community should adhere to the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, among other things,
in working to intensify efforts for a resumption of talks

19-0167819/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and for achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question. Any new initiative
should be aimed at making a two-State solution a
reality. Concrete action should be taken to implement
resolution 2334 (2016) and to end all settlement
activities in the occupied territories and the demolition
of Palestinian homes and property. Steps should also be
taken to prevent violence against civilians.
The question of the final status of Jerusalem is
a complex and sensitive one. It underpins any future
settlement of the Palestinian question as well as the
future of a two-State solution. The parties should act
with prudence and follow the principles of respecting
historical pluralities, upholding fairness and justice,
implementing international agreements, striving for
peaceful coexistence and adhering to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international consensus so as to
reach a solution through negotiations that accommodates
the interests of all sides. The international community
should stay united in advocating for a resumption of
peace talks between the two sides as soon as possible.
The parties should meet halfway, avoid any action or
rhetoric that might exacerbate the situation and refrain
from any unilateral measures that could undermine
trust, with a view to creating the necessary conditions
for a resumption of dialogue and expediting the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. Parties that
can bring serious influence to bear on the Middle East
issue should also play a constructive role.
China has always been committed to moving the
Middle East process forward and has been supportive
of the Palestinian people’s just cause, that of regaining
their legitimate national rights. We support the
establishment of an independent and fully sovereign
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We support Palestine’s
greater integration into the international community.
In line with His Excellency President Xi Jinping’s
four-point proposal promoting a political settlement
of the Palestinian question. China will step up its
communication and cooperation with countries of the
region and work to maintain peace and stability, uphold
fairness and justice and promote common development
in the Middle East, thereby playing a proactive and
constructive role for peace in the region.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his clear and detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
20/66

22/01/2019

the Palestinian question. We hope that both he and the
team he represents will continue to work this year with
the same zeal and spirit of dedication and collaboration
on this delicate issue. We welcome the delegations of
Israel and Palestine, as well as the other delegations
that have decided to make statements in this important
meeting because of how important they consider the
issue. We especially welcome Mrs. Retno Lestari
Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, and appreciate her presence here during
our debate.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following the developments in the Middle East, which
has been the scene of numerous conflicts for several
decades. Though they may be different from one
another, while frequently related, and although they may
vary in the degree of devastation they inflict, what they
all share is the fact that they have claimed numerous
human lives, destroyed a great deal of infrastructure
and damaged all sorts of services, thereby wasting their
populations’ efforts to improve their lives and ensure a
decent future for their children. That destruction has
caused the displacement of considerable portions of the
populations of Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Palestine and
other neighbouring areas affected by these struggles.
The persistence and ongoing exacerbation of this
situation has not only left the region in a constant state of
instability, it also continually jeopardizes international
peace and security. It is therefore urgent and essential
that the Security Council and the international
community continue to put pressure on the parties who
sustain these conflicts.
On the question of Palestine, we deplore the tension
that has continued between the parties during the past
year, with violent and deadly incidents that we have
mainly witnessed since the Great March of Return
began, on 30 March 2018, through December. In that
regard, and now that we are beginning a new year,
we want to call on the parties to refrain from taking
unilateral actions that incite violence and could harm
any future negotiation process. In the past there have
been worse moments in the history of this conflict,
with much bloodshed and destruction, but they have not
brought the guarantee of security that the Israelis desire
or facilitated the establishment of a Palestinian State
recognized by Israel. We therefore once again reiterate
our fundamental position, which is that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict can only be resolved through
negotiations based on the idea of two independent
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within mutually recognized borders.
Violence is not and will never be the best way to resolve
this dispute that pits Israelis against Palestinians.
However, my delegation wants to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that Palestine’s leaders address
the security concerns of the Jewish State with sincerity
and pragmatism. As always, we insist on the return of
the Palestinian National Authority to the Gaza Strip.
In recent years, most of the violent exchanges between
Israel and Palestine have been related to Gaza. The
Palestinian National Authority, supported by the
international community, should be able to work more
effectively to improve socioeconomic conditions and
ensure a secure environment that guarantees peace and
tranquillity both for the 2 million Palestinians living in
the Gaza Strip and for the people of neighbouring Israel.
It is therefore essential to support and encourage the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process under Egypt’s
auspices. We have been closely following the situation
on the border of the Gaza Strip, and we hope that the
drop in the number of violent episodes in recent weeks
will continue and can result in a mutual understanding
on the transportation of goods and on maintaining the
current atmosphere of tranquillity.
We also urge the Government of Israel, to the
extent that it wants to find a solution to the conflict, to
ease its policies in the occupied Palestinian territories
with regard to issues such as the demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, as well as the ongoing
construction of settlements that will continue to pose
a huge obstacle to achieving a reasonable agreement
in future. We also urge the Israeli security forces, in
cases where they are exercising their inalienable right
to self-defence, to take into account their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and avoid actions that make it more
difficult to resume dialogue.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will agree to any
approach that takes into account the various relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and other current
legal instruments that provide for a peaceful solution to
this conflict. In that regard, we once again affirm our
support for a solution based on two independent States
of Israel and Palestine, within the 1967 borders, and in
the hope that with the support of confidence-building
measures, the two States can live side by side in
harmony and with the other countries of the region.

S/PV. 8449

Finally, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
United States Administration intends to issue a plan
for a resumption of the negotiation process. We hope
and wish that it will be issued as soon as possible and
will represent a genuinely positive starting point for a
resumption of negotiations. In that regard, we invite the
United States to ensure that its plan is impartial and fair
to all the parties involved.
It is very likely that the elections planned for April in
Israel will end up postponing the possibility of promoting
the peace process during the electoral campaign. In that
regard, we ask the Israeli Government to abstain from
taking unilateral action as part of the campaign, which
would have long-term consequences.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this topic on the agenda. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his very impressive and, at the same time,
worrisome statement.
Mr. Mladenov spoke clearly of the dangerous
dynamic that he is observing and stated there is no
status quo to preserve. He said that we are living in
times of deterioration and radicalization. Therefore, I
think a debate is warranted even though there are other
crises in the region, such as Syria and Yemen, with very
bleak ongoing humanitarian disasters.
I would like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union (EU), who will lay out the common
EU position. Let me make five points.
First, Germany is steadfast in its commitment to
Israel, its security and Israel as a Jewish and democratic
State. Germany will not remain silent when Israel’s
right to exist is questioned or compromised, as it is by
Iran. The Israeli Ambassador reminded the Council
that there are still Iranian missiles that are inscribed
with the phrase “Death to Israel”.
Secondly, Germany underscores the importance of
the political process. We continue to promote and favour
prospects for a political process, which we believe is
urgently needed. In that regard, we support any attempt
to restart meaningful, direct negotiations between the
parties with the objective of reaching lasting peace.
We must all work together to bring the parties back to
the negotiating table. In that respect, almost everybody
around the table said that they remained fully and
firmly committed to the two-State solution. As the

19-0167821/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Indonesian minister, who I welcome here today, said
in her statement, the only option to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is a two-State solution based on
Council resolutions and the known parameters. That
also applies to the status of Jerusalem. In that context,
I also recall the relevant Security Council resolutions,
such as resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which
are binding international law. Resolutions are not an
à la carte menu. With regard to the political process,
we believe that confidence-building measures and
positive steps by both parties are essential and require
leadership, political will and very hard work. We call
on both sides to live up to their responsibilities so that
future generations can live in peace.
Thirdly, we must focus on Israel’s settlement
policies. Israel’s continuous expansion of settlement
activity is a matter of great concern. I want to highlight
what Mr. Mladenov said in his strong statement. I note
the figures that he gave on permits and what he said
about demolitions, displacement, seizures, as well
as what he said about the fear of future annexation. I
remind the Council that all of those settlement activities
are illegal under international law. They jeopardize
prospects for a future peace agreement on the basis of
a two-State solution. They create enclaves, obstruct
Palestinian development and incite violence on both
sides. I therefore call upon Israel to freeze its expansion
of settlements, its legalization of outposts, as well as its
demolition of Palestinian property.
Special Coordinator Mladenov also noted that
the increase in violence is a matter of great concern.
Germany strongly condemns all attacks, including the
firing of rockets and the use of incendiary kites and
balloons from Gaza, which put Israel’s security at risk.
To those responsible, in particular Hamas, we affirm that
those attacks are unacceptable and must stop. Violence,
including terrorist attacks, and unrest increased in
the final months of 2018 in the West Bank, Gaza and
Jerusalem. We strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise restraint and refrain from putting the lives of
innocent civilians in danger. Violence against civilians,
especially if directed against the most vulnerable, such
as children or disabled persons, is unacceptable and
unjustifiable. Human rights need to be respected at all
times. At the same time, protests have to be peaceful
and the rights of demonstrators have to be respected.
We call on all sides to refrain from the use of excessive
force. On a more positive note, Germany encourages
all people-to-people exchanges, some of which are
22/66

22/01/2019

led by women. We want to explicitly commend such
exchanges, which can contribute to easing tensions
between the parties.
Fourthly, on the humanitarian situation, in addition
to the increase in violence, the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza remains a matter of great
concern. Our immediate priority must be to ease
restrictions on movement and access. Humanitarian
and financial assistance to Gaza must not be obstructed.
We call on the Palestinian Authority to do its part to
improve the living conditions in Gaza. Let me also
commend the important work of United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). To echo the words of Mr. Mladenov,
the work of UNRWA is essential and critical for
Palestinians. Nobody has been able to explain to me why
cutting funds to Agency is good for peace prospects.
All studies point to the fact that depriving young people
of the possibility of enjoying education leads directly
to terrorism and extremism. I once again thank all of
those who have supported UNRWA. It is important for
the youth in the region.
Lastly, on the process of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, not least for the situation in Gaza, it is
very important for intra-Palestinian reconciliation to
resume. On this topic, Special Coordinator Mladenov
said that the hope for reconciliation is fading by the day.
We still believe that we must do all we can, even though
the situation is grim, particularly after the dissolution
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. We have seen the
prospects for reconciliation deteriorate and confidence
further erode. I would like to commend our Egyptian
friends for their relentless efforts to get Hamas and
Fatah together. We encourage Egypt to continue its
efforts despite the current situation. I call on Palestinian
actors to show leadership in finding common ground
to address the needs of the Palestinian people. We
are ready to continue to work with the Palestinian
Authority to strengthen democratic institutions.
Instead of fighting among themselves, I think that the
Palestinian leaders have an obligation to concentrate
on how they can support the frustrated youth and have
them go to school and work constructively so that they
do not become radicalized.
Let me end by echoing the words of our colleague
from Côte d’Ivoire, who focused not only on Middle
East peace but also peace in Syria and Yemen. He said
that for all of the problems that we face in the Middle
East, only a political solution can lead the way forward.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the Indonesian Foreign Minister, who is
a very good friend of the United Nations. I also join
the American representative in expressing our deepest
condolences to Chad for the loss of its peacekeepers.
We send our condolences also to the victims’ families.
As other speakers have noted, there are a range
of issues in the Middle East today that deserve the
Council’s concern, but, as Mr. Mladenov was our
briefer, I will confine my remarks today to the issues
that he covered. I want to start by echoing the German
representative’s statement that Israel’s security should
not be put in doubt. We condemn unreservedly the
rocket launches from Syria and Gaza into Israel.
I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As he set
out, the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories remains deeply concerning. Mr. Mladenov’s
statement about the erosion of prospects for establishing
a Palestinian State as a result of the facts on the ground
really should guide the Council’s consideration. What
he said about 25 years from Oslo is also a very salutary
reminder of the fact that we do not have the luxury of
time in which to make progress on the Middle East
peace process.
Turning to the situation on the ground, and,
again, as others have noted, the last three months of
2018 saw a dreadful increase in violence in the West
Bank. Three Israelis, including a baby, were killed in
Palestinian terror attacks for which Hamas has claimed
responsibility. There is no justification for such acts
of violence. During the same time in the West Bank
and Gaza, 70 Palestinians were killed. On 14 January,
a 14-year-old Palestinian boy died as a result of injuries
sustained from live fire following a protest at the Gaza
fence. We fully support Israel’s right to defend itself, but
the Israeli security forces should refrain from the use of
excessive force against unarmed civilians. Lethal use of
force should be exercised with maximum restraint and
only as a last resort to protect life.
Turning to Gaza, the security remains precarious.
Sporadic rocket attacks by militants continue,
and a miscalculation could easily lead to renewed
confrontation. We need to do everything we can
to avoid another devastating war, which would
compound the already dire humanitarian and security
conditions in Gaza and threaten the security of Israeli
border communities.

S/PV. 8449

I wanted to draw the Council’s attention to Gaza’s
health sector, which remains under significant strain,
and to the problems with the shortage of essential drugs
and limited access to clean water. Israel’s movement
restrictions, we believe, continue to affect the health
of the population. In the longer term, renewed
political resolve is required to improve the situation.
Several speakers today have drawn attention to the
reconciliation process begun under Egyptian auspices
among the Palestinian Authority and others. We were
very concerned by the Palestinian Authority’s decision
to withdraw their guards from the Rafah crossing point.
It is vital that the Council impress upon the Palestinian
factions that they need to work together to break the
deadlock. We welcome continued Egyptian efforts in
that regard.
On the West Bank, recent developments continue
to undermine the achievements of the Oslo Accords
and jeopardize the prospects for a two-State solution.
Following the violent attacks in the West Bank, there
have been a large number of incursions by Israeli
security forces into Area A, and Palestinian movement
in the West Bank has been significantly restricted
and disrupted. Full security cooperation between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel remains crucial for the
safety of both parties.
I wanted to express our disappointment at the
fact that, on 27 December, just days after the Council
discussed the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) (see S/PV.8429), Israel advanced plans for the
construction of nearly 2,800 illegal settlement housing
units. It is doubly disappointing that more than half of
these units are located east of the separation barrier in
areas deep into the West Bank. Plans outlined by the
Israeli Government on 26 December to construct a new
settlement, Givat Eitam, close to Bethlehem represent
a further threat to the territorial integrity of the future
Palestinian State. If built, this new settlement would
prevent the growth of Bethlehem and further fragment
the West Bank.
We are closely following the developments in East
Jerusalem. The eviction notice served to the Sabah
family in Sheikh Jarrah, on 3 January, places 45
people at risk of losing their home. Therefore, I want
to encourage the Israeli Government not to enforce this
eviction, as we continue to urge it not to demolish the
Bedouin community of Khan Al-Ahmar.

19-0167823/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning to Israel/Lebanon, we are concerned by
the recent rise in tensions along the Blue Line. We
condemn all violations of resolution 1701 (2006). The
United Kingdom has been clear in the Council on many
occasions that we condemn Israeli violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, whether by land or sea or air. Such actions
undermine confidence and stability, and we look for all
relevant Security Council resolutions — but notably
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) — to be respected in full.
For too long we have witnessed Hizbullah blatantly
disregard United Nations resolutions. Its continued
possession of weapons outside of Lebanese State
control and its reported attempts to acquire dangerous
new missile capabilities remain deeply alarming, as do
their statements threatening Israel. Without an end to
these illegal activities by Hizbullah in Lebanon and
the region, we will continue to see regional stability
threatened. We condemn Hizbullah’s aggressive
activities, and we are clear that we should not allow
them to go unchecked.
In conclusion, though prospects for peace may
seem bleak, as Mr. Mladenov outlined, we should not
give up on the two-State solution. It remains the only
viable resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For
this reason, the United Kingdom remains committed
to the internationally agreed parameters for a durable
peace in the Middle East. It is critical that negotiations
be resumed towards an agreement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States, and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of this quarterly open
debate and thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very
comprehensive briefing.
Peru is following with deep concern the
developments related to the question of Palestine.
We can only deplore the persistent hostile climate
and the unacceptable and unsustainable stalling of
the peace process. We note with alarm the serious
and ongoing deterioration of security conditions for
millions of Palestinians and Israelis, as evidenced in
the indiscriminate attacks against civilians by Hamas
and the clearly disproportionate Israeli responses.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation is
worsening on the ground, where the lack of basic goods
24/66

22/01/2019

and services is compounded by the isolation to which
millions of Palestinians are subjected. This is an ideal
scenario for those who promote violence and extremism
and for creating a feeling of oppression and frustration.
Under these circumstances, we wish to reaffirm
our commitment to the only solution that we consider
viable and consistent with international law: the twoState solution, with internationally recognized and
secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, which must lead to the determination of the
final status of Jerusalem, in compliance with United
Nations resolutions.
To that end, we consider it vital to refrain from all
actions that undermine the necessary confidence and to
undertake instead genuine steps aimed at reconciliation
and commitment, beginning with a renewed willingness
to engage in ongoing dialogue.
We strongly deplore the intensification of
settlement, demolition and eviction practices that
have been observed in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which are in violation of the provisions of
various Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). We are especially concerned over the possible
demolition of a structures in Khan Al-Ahmar, which
would have a very negative political impact.
We also deem it imperative to reject hate speech,
anti-Semitism and all forms of discrimination. In any
society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
appreciated as a value, and never as a threat. Similarly,
we categorically condemn Hamas’s use of violence and
terrorist practices. We stress also the need to alleviate
the tragic humanitarian situation that civilians in Gaza
are facing. We urge continuity in infrastructure and
development projects, and that further efforts be made
to enable the Palestinian Authority to regain effective
control of the area and to ensure the provision of stable
and predictable funding to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We commend the willingness shown by many
countries to use their good offices, particularly those
that have historically participated in this process. We
underscore the work of the Quartet and the Arab Peace
Initiative and encourage them to continue with their
efforts. In that regard, we emphasize that the Council
must show itself able to reach a minimum consensus
in order to make a decision and outline the steps to
be taken, particularly in relation to the resumption of
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

political dialogue, in line with the lofty responsibilities
that the international community has conferred upon it.
I want to very briefly comment on the situation
in Yemen, given that it remains highly volatile, which
continues to impact civilians and seriously jeopardizes
the agreements reached in Sweden. Those agreements
are a turning point in the bloody and prolonged conflict
in Yemen, and under no circumstances can potential
delays or breaches serve as justification to abandon
the commitments made. We underline the importance
of preserving the unity of the Council around its
responsibility to protect the people of Yemen and its
remaining attentive to the proper implementation of
the agreement between the Yemeni parties and the
provisions of its resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019).
I will conclude by reiterating our appeal to the
Yemeni parties and the various actors involved in
the conflict to reaffirm their commitment to the
inclusive political solution that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General has been advocating and to address
the difficulties arising in the context of that complex
process with prudence and in good faith.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by honouring the memory
of the 10 Chadian Blue Helmets of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) who lost their lives on Sunday in
northern Mali. I offer my condolences to the families
of the victims and to the people and the Government of
Chad. The heroic sacrifice of those soldiers places on
obligation on all of us. It reminds us of how MINUSMA
operates in a difficult security environment. and of
the key role it plays in preserving Mali’s stability and
supporting the implementation of the Malian peace
process. In the face of the enemies of peace, our resolve
must remain strong.
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his persuasive and once again alarming briefing, as
well as for his daily commitment on the ground. I would
like also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia here today.
To echo what several of my colleagues — namely,
from Germany and the United Kingdom — just stated,
the undeniable truth so often observed in the Council
remains more relevant than ever: the illusion of a status
quo masks the daily deterioration of the situation, which
could devolve into a fresh conflict at any given moment.

S/PV. 8449

The violence that marked the end of 2018 — in Gaza in
November and the West Bank in December — should
serve as a warning. It must also remind us that when
peace recedes on the ground, it recedes also in people’s
minds and in rhetoric.
Twenty-five years after the Oslo Accords, less than
half of Palestinians and Israelis still believe in a twoState solution. Generation after generation, Palestinians
and Israelis are losing hope for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. It is therefore more important than ever
for the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to seek to
preserve an open, pluralist space within their respective
civilian populations that fosters the possibility of a true
dialogue between them.
The President of the Palestinian Authority
addressed the United Nations on 15 January during
the start of his chairmanship of the Group of 77. His
alarmist comments give us an idea of the gravity of the
crisis and situation that we are currently experiencing.
First, I would like to return to the situation in Gaza.
In mid-November, the Gaza Strip was on the brink of
sliding into another deadly conflict, as has happened
in the territory three times over the past decade. That
threat remains today; we must take full measure of its
seriousness, in a volatile regional context marked by
renewed tensions in northern Israel.
The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip remains
essentially the same, despite occasional improvements
in the area of energy supply. In that catastrophic
humanitarian situation, there have been repeated
outbreaks of violence in Gaza for almost a year now, at
a rate unprecedented since 2014.
The toll of the demonstrations along the
separation barrier has been heavy, with more than
180 Palestinians killed and 6,000 shot and injured
since 30 March — individuals who gathered in
demonstration out of despair. France has condemned
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
and called on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians
to demonstrate peacefully. We have also denounced the
instrumentalization of the demonstrations by Hamas
and other armed groups.
In the political sphere, the stalemate of the
inter-Palestinian reconciliation process is worsening
the situation for the people of Gaza. The closure of the
Rafah crossing point between Gaza and Egypt, which
resulted from the withdrawal of Palestinian Authority

19-0167825/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

personnel, intensifies the blockade imposed by Israel
on the Gaza Strip for more than a decade.
To restore immediate hope to the people of Gaza,
we must first respond to the urgent humanitarian
needs. The efforts of the Special Coordinator and of
all United Nations agencies contribute significantly
to that response. The conditions for a swift reopening
of the Rafah crossing point must also be met quickly.
Ultimately, it is only through lifting the blockade,
along with providing the necessary security guarantees
for Israel, that it will be possible to meet the needs of
the people.
The role of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in that context is more crucial than ever,
in both Gaza and the region. The Agency is playing
a key role at the humanitarian level, in addition to
providing stability and security. Let us therefore
continue to mobilize to support UNRWA after the
American withdrawal; France has done so by doubling
its contribution to the Agency this year.
However, there can be no lasting response to the
crisis in Gaza without a restoration of Palestinian unity,
which should enable the Palestinian Authority to regain
all its prerogatives on the territory. We support that
objective as part of the efforts undertaken by Egypt,
which we once again commend. We call on all parties to
resume dialogue so as to relaunch the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Beyond Gaza, the process will
require the holding of parliamentary elections, as
announced by President Mahmoud Abbas following his
decision to dissolve the Palestinian Legislative Council.
Those elections must be held in free and transparent
conditions, and all avenues must be explored for them
to take place throughout the Palestinian territories.
In the West Bank, the escalation from 9 to
13 December 2018, following the deadly attack on the
outskirts of the settlement of Ofra, which France
condemned in the strongest terms, also took place against
the backdrop of a gravely worsening situation caused by
the lack of any political horizon and the consequences
of settlement activities. Settlement policy, on which
Nickolay Mladenov briefed the Council last month (see
S/PV.8429), continued in every aspect throughout 2018
at a sustained pace. In Jerusalem, it approached the
depressing 2012 record level in terms of the number of
announcements of new housing units. It was also seen
in the continued policy of evicting Palestinians from
26/66

22/01/2019

the city’s Arab neighbourhoods such as Sheikh Jarrah.
Such developments distance us every day further from
the goal of making Jerusalem the capital of the two
States — Israel and Palestine — living side by side in
peace and security.
In the West Bank, the implementation of the
settlement policy has also been pursued systematically,
with a succession of announcements concerning
new housing units in settlements that culminated
in the approval of nearly 2,200 such units on 24 and
25 December 2018. Last year’s increased number of
announcements include isolated areas in the heart of
the West Bank and particularly sensitive sites such as
Hebron. Similarly, the recent decision by the Israeli
Government to allocate land for the construction of
the new settlement of Givat Eitam, in an area that
is important for ensuring the viability of the twoState solution and the continuity of the Palestinian
territories to the south of Bethlehem, is a worrisome
new development. In addition, at another location
critical for ensuring the two-State solution near the E-1
area, we continue to wait for the decision to postpone
the demolition of the village of Khan Al-Ahmar to
be converted into a permanent one and for the Israeli
authorities to definitively abandon its demolition and
the forced displacement of its inhabitants. Finally, we
call for a halt to legislative initiatives aimed at the
normalization of unauthorized settlement outposts,
which are illegal even under Israeli law. In that regard, I
reiterate our condemnation of settlement activity, which
is illegal under international law and runs contrary to
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).
Against the backdrop of the situation I just
described, the Security Council was never able to
speak as one voice last year. With every passing day,
that deafening silence is increasingly incomprehensible
for the peoples of the region, as well as for the world
watching us. We therefore call for restarting and
re-energizing our efforts this year.
Moreover, it is urgent that we restore a credible
political horizon. Any negotiation must be part of an
internationally agreed framework based on international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such
parameters are not optional or to be chosen as one likes.
They are to be taken together as the indispensable basis
for any peace plan and future negotiations. We are close
to the point of no return. The fragmented territorial
landscape taking shape before our eyes is already
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resulting in two peoples coexisting on unequal footing
on the same territory. Should that trend continue, for the
Palestinians it would mean abandoning their national
aspirations based on the establishment of a State, and,
for the Israelis, giving up the democratic character of
the State of Israel.
But as we all know, the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intertwined. Neither of the two
peoples will lastingly achieve its aspirations if it is to
the detriment of the other. France is a friend to both
the Israelis and the Palestinians. President Emmanuel
Macron will meet with Israeli President Reuven Rivlin
during the latter’s visit to France, which began today, and
Prime Minister Edouard Philippe met with Palestinian
Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah last month in Paris.
France has only one goal — the implementation,
through negotiations, of the two-State solution, with
two States living side by side in peace and security with
Jerusalem as their capital, as the only solution capable
of bringing about a just and lasting peace. Rest assured
that we will continue to spare no effort in that regard to
foster peace.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, I would like to
thank colleagues for their condolences and solidarity in
connection with the passing of Ambassador Dumisani
Kumalo. Ambassador Kumalo used to sit where I am
sitting and always contributed to finding solutions
aimed at bringing about peace and security and stability,
issues of which the Security Council is always seized.
Likewise, we would also like to convey our condolences
to our brothers and sisters in Chad.
South Africa welcomes this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, focusing on the
question of Palestine. We thank Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing. We also thank the observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel for their
respective statements.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
We want to begin this debate by congratulating
the State of Palestine on assuming the chairmanship of
the Group of 77 and China. We also welcome Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.

S/PV. 8449

This is the first open debate in which South Africa
is participating as a member of the Security Council
during its current term as an elected member. We wish
to use this opportunity to emphasize the importance
of the Council ensuring that it remains committed to
meaningfully contributing to the resolution of one of
its longest-standing agenda items — the question of
Palestine — of which it has been seized for more than
70 years. While the Council’s monthly meetings and
quarterly open debates afford an opportunity to have a
significant influence on the Middle East peace process,
this has not yielded the necessary results that it has the
potential to lead to. The adoption of landmark resolution
2334 (2016) in December 2016 is one important
such example of the potential outcome of Council
deliberations on the matter. Unfortunately, there has
been minimal effort to implement that resolution. That
calls into question the credibility of the decisions of
the Council, especially if it is the Council itself that
does not take any action to ensure the implementation
of its own decisions. In resolution 2334 (2016), we
reaffirmed that Israeli settlements, which have steadily
been expanding into Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute a
violation of international law. Furthermore, resolution
2334 (2016) recognizes that the settlements are a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.
The recent upsurge in tensions between Israeli
settlers and the Palestinian people in settlements such
as Ofra and the broader cycle of violence resulting from
those heightened antagonisms are indicative of the
obstacles created by the illegal expansion of settlement
activity to the peace process. According to the recent
report of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, about 250 Israeli settlements have been
established in the occupied West Bank since 1967, and
approximately 611,000 Israelis — or 10 per cent of the
Israeli population — have been pushed into Palestine
and forcibly settled in flagrant violation of international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, thereby
replacing 12 per cent of the Palestinian population,
which is similar to the apartheid-era forceful removal
of black people from their ancestral productive land
to barren, unproductive wasteland in the middle
of nowhere. South Africa therefore calls for the full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), including
the timely submission to the Council of written reports
of the Secretary-General every three months in order

19-0167827/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for progress to be adequately monitored. The Council
receives written reports on other matters with which
it is seized, and the situation in Palestine should be
no different. We must not allow the decisions of the
Security Council to be undermined and blatantly
violated in some areas.
Even more troubling is the deliberate targeting of
children, the continued violation of human rights in the
occupied territories and the continued imprisonment
of Palestinian minors in military detention in Israel.
The impact of such violations on the future of peace
between the two parties cannot be underestimated. The
fomenting of hatred and a culture of violence in the
formative stages of development of those children will
only make peace and reconciliation even more distant
and unachievable. As long as the Council remains
silent on such issues, a just peace becomes more and
more out of reach. We cannot afford inaction and must
instead inject much-needed urgency into resolving the
conflict, including by safeguarding the gains made over
decades of diplomacy and preventing any prejudging
of outcomes on final-status issues, such as Jerusalem,
security and the return of Palestinian refugees.
I wish to reiterate South Africa’s support for a
two-State solution. We would also like to reiterate
that the primary responsibility for peace rests with
the Palestinians and Israelis themselves. South Africa,
as part of the international community, has always
sought to encourage peace between the two parties. In
that regard, we convened the Spier Presidential Peace
Retreat in January 2002, to which we invited senior
representatives of both Palestine and Israel with the
aim of strengthening the peace camp in both Israel and
Palestine, while sharing the South African experience
in negotiations, peacemaking and the transition to
democracy. We have also supported international
peace efforts, in particular through the United Nations
system. Those initiatives have demonstrated a spirit
of commitment to dialogue and partnership for peace
between the parties.
In line with the outcomes of the Spier Retreat, we
continue to support and encourage the parties to work
together towards peaceful dialogue and negotiation as
the only way to find a lasting solution. The guidelines
for those negotiations have been based on the
established international legal framework, including
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map, among other things.
28/66

22/01/2019

We wish to once again recognize the importance of
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
which has provided crucial socioeconomic assistance to
Palestinian refugees for decades. Cuts in the UNRWA
budget threaten the lives of many vulnerable people
and undermine any confidence in a resolution to the
conflict. Punishing civilians by cutting humanitarian
funding cannot in any way be conceived as moving the
peace process forward; rather, it serves only to entrench
animosity and heighten tensions between the parties.
South Africa is deeply concerned about reports of
Israel’s plans to shut down UNRWA-run schools in East
Jerusalem. Closing schools affects the most vulnerable
refugee population — children, at their most vulnerable
stage of development and in the formative years of their
education. South Africa welcomes recent pledges made
to support UNRWA. We affirm that such humanitarian
support creates the conditions that contribute to easing
the dire conditions of the Palestinian people.
The Council must do everything it can to remove all
obstacles to peace between Israel and Palestine and no
longer allow continued hatred, human rights violations
and disregard for international law. Generations of
Palestinians and Israelis have known only conflict and
violence. We must do all we can now to create a culture
of peace and foster hope for a future free of conflict for
both communities.
Any time Palestinians want to bring the issue of
Palestine’s full membership of the United Nations to
the Security Council, they will find South Africa ready
to support them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
First, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his detailed and comprehensive briefing on the
current situation in the region. We would also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, Ms. Retno Marsudi.
The Dominican Republic, guided by respect for
human rights and international law, is extremely
concerned about the recent increase in tensions in
the occupied Palestinian territory, and in the Gaza
Strip in particular. We are also very concerned about
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian and
socioeconomic situation. We therefore reaffirm our
support for a two-State solution, based on the pre-1967
borders and on what is determined by the parties in
the negotiation process. We understand that that is the
only way to obtain a just and lasting peace to resolve
a conflict that, for decades, has eclipsed international
peace and security.
To that end, the Dominican Republic believes that
it is vital to redouble efforts at reconciliation between
the parties, with the support of the international
community, in order to guarantee the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the right of Israel to live in peace within secure and
recognized borders. We consider those objectives to
be incompatible with the continued construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, violence against civilians, including acts
of terrorism, attacks against Israeli territory and
incitement and the use of inflammatory rhetoric.
We emphatically condemn all such acts, in line with
resolution 2334 (2016).
Our country was appalled by the escalation of
violence in Gaza and the West Bank in the last quarter
of 2018. The tragic deaths of Israeli and Palestinian
civilians and members of the military once again
brought us dangerously close to a conflagration of
greater proportions, which no one wants. Similarly, the
Dominican Republic is extremely concerned about the
serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, which is reflected by the high levels
of food insecurity and very limited access to basic
services, including energy, water and health services.
We call on the international community to respond
effectively to the pressing needs of the inhabitants of
the Gaza Strip. At this juncture, we acknowledge the
efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which requires
adequate funding for its critical work.
With regard to the Golan Heights, the Dominican
Republic believes that only genuine will on the part of
the parties to reach consensus, pursuant to resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), can end the conflict.
With regard to Jerusalem, we recognize its special
status and reaffirm the need to protect and to preserve
the plurality of its cultural and religious dimension,
unique in the world.

S/PV. 8449

As the international community, we must channel
our best efforts towards achieving a negotiated solution
between the parties on the basis of the General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map,
the Arab Peace Initiative and previous agreements.
We must not deviate from the goal of two democratic
States, living side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. That vision must continue to inspire us to
work tirelessly until all men, women and children of
the region can live with the hope and security that they
long for and deserve.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will
continue this open debate through the lunch hour, since
there are a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the
Dominican Republic on its non-permanent membership
of the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I also congratulate the other
new non-permanent members of the Council and wish
them every success in their new important duties.
I would also like to congratulate the State of
Palestine on chairing the Group of 77 and China and
to wish it every success in fulfilling that historic
task, hoping that it will obtain full membership status
at the United Nations. I would like as well to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his useful but worrying briefing. I
also welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Retno
Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, at
this meeting. On behalf of Lebanon, I thank her and
Indonesia for the important role that its troops are
playing within the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).
Yesterday marked the anniversary of the birth of
Martin Luther King Jr. I therefore recall his important
words, which are very relevant to today’s debate on the
Palestinian question: “The arc of the moral universe is
long but it bends towards justice”. Justice is precisely

19-0167829/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

what the Palestinian people have been denied for many
decades. Today, that people still face an open war
against them, their territories, their properties, their
sons and their holy sites, as well as their historical right
to self-determination.
The continuing Israeli occupation with impunity
and lack of punishment has led to that deplorable
situation and to the loss of justice. Even if the world has
failed in its obligations towards the Palestinian people,
it remains true that the Palestinian question continues
to be a priority concern for the Arabs. Two days ago, the
work of the Arab Economic and Social Development
Summit concluded in Beirut. It affirmed support for the
Palestinian people in their resistance to the increasing
Israeli aggressions followed by the destruction of the
Palestinian economy and infrastructure. Their right to
establish an independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital is also undermined.
The State of Palestine is more important than ever
owing to the Israeli practices, which seek to eradicate
the Palestinian question by eliminating any final-status
issues, such as the two-State solution, putting an end to
the settlements and the occupation, as well as the right
of refugees to return and the legal status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
In that regard, the Arab Summit in Beirut asserted
the need to join efforts in order to ensure the necessary
funding for the implementation of the strategic
development project for East Jerusalem. The Summit
also underscored the right of return and the need to
compensate Palestinian refugees and their descendants
in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular General Assembly resolution
194 (III), as well as the need to support the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Summit
called on all States to uphold international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy on the issue of
the legal status of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, not to
recognize it as the capital of the Israeli occupation and
not to move their embassies there. At the Summit the
Arab leaders underscored their determination to take
political and economic measures against any decision
that undermines the legal status of the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
Lebanon’s position is clear and steadfast. It supports
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people, in
particular the right to self-determination. My country’s
30/66

22/01/2019

delegation stresses the role of the international
community and the United Nations in safeguarding the
foundations for a comprehensive, lasting and just peace
in the Middle East by preserving the gains made during
more than 70 years of international efforts for the
Palestinian question, in particular by upholding United
Nations resolutions, the most recent of which is resolution
2334 (2016), which calls for ending the settlement
activities and protecting Palestinian civilians. It also
calls for upholding international resolutions concerning
the occupied Syrian Golan, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and especially resolution 497 (1981),
which rejects the annexation of the Golan by Israel.
Today, the region has lost hope with regard to
achieving peace and to having prospects for any political
solution. The peace process now belongs to the past and
there is no glimmer of hope for its possible resumption.
There is no trust between the parties and dialogue has
been suspended owing to each unilateral step taken
by Israel against peace. What is required today is an
international leadership that could be provided by the
Council in order to restore hope and move forward
towards achieving peace.
Concerning Lebanon, Israel continues to occupy
Lebanese territory while maintaining its threats and
violations against Lebanese sovereignty through
flagrant violation of resolution 1701 (2006). In 2018,
Israel violated the sovereignty of Lebanon and resolution
1701 (2006) no less than 2,034 times. That compelled
our Mission to lodge protests with the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations no fewer than 22 times. In the first week
of January, the number of Israeli violations amounted
to 23 — 13 air violations, 4 sea violations and 6 land
violations. In our letter dated 27 December 2018,
we drew the attention of the Security Council to the
threat posed by the Israeli air violations against civil
aviation, which jeopardized the safety of air navigation
by endangering the lives of hundreds of passengers.
However, despite the complaint lodged by Lebanon
with the Council, Israel also violated Lebanese airspace
this week, once again threatening the safety of air
navigation. Should we wait for a catastrophe to happen
in order to deter Israel from violating Lebanese airspace
and endangering civilian lives and air navigation?
The most recent Israeli violation represents the
building of a wall and structures within Lebanese
territory on reservation areas along the Blue Line.
While that incident could have dangerously escalated
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the situation, stability was maintained thanks to the
coordination between the Lebanese army and UNIFIL,
as well as the role of the tripartite committee in
reducing tensions.
Lebanon reaffirms its commitment to every inch
of its territory and every drop of its waters while
always remaining ready to work towards settling
border disputes within the framework of that tripartite
mechanism. We call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities and to issue a clear and unequivocal
message condemning Israel for any violation against
resolution 1701 (2006).
The adoption in August of resolution 2433 (2018),
which extends the mandate of UNIFIL, demonstrates
the commitment of all members of the Security Council
to ensuring peace and security in Lebanon and in the
region. Lebanon continues to shoulder its responsibilities
with regard to achieving a comprehensive ceasefire
on its southern borders. We are committed to all
international resolutions, in particular resolution
1701 (2006). We therefore expect the Council to take
the necessary measures in order to compel Israel to
shoulder its international responsibility in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for organizing this important
meeting. Let me start with some remarks concerning
the Israeli-Palestinian question.
Brazil supports a two-State solution, with peace
and security for Israelis and Palestinians. Recent
developments in Gaza only underscore the need for a
political solution to the question. In that regard, Brazil
welcomes the United States initiative to present a peace
plan. We understand that both sides will be asked to
make difficult decisions and concessions in order to
achieve peace, and we urge Israelis and Palestinians to
negotiate in good faith and with open minds. We need
to work towards a solution that is fair and just for all
parties involved. We note with satisfaction the current
rapprochement between Israel and the countries of the
Arab and Muslim worlds, as demonstrated by the recent
visits of heads of State and high-level authorities.
Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil urges
all parties to engage constructively with the new
Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we wish
every success. Brazil calls for the convening of a

S/PV. 8449

constitutional committee in Syria without further
delay. That is a crucial step towards a much-needed
political solution, based on the parameters set forth in
the relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 2254
(2015), and the Sochi declaration. We are convinced
that a political process mediated by the United Nations,
while owned and led by the Syrian people, will bring
the conflict to an end.
Concerning the situation in Yemen, Brazil
welcomes the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to reach a ceasefire in the port of
Al-Hudaydah, through which crucial humanitarian
aid can be delivered to the population affected by
the conflict. We urge the parties to refrain from any
measures that might lead to a breach of the truce
established by the Stockholm Agreement. We believe
that, at the present moment, United Nations mediation
is fundamental to launching the negotiation process. We
confirm that Brazil will contribute military observers
to the new United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement, approved by resolution 2452
(2019).
The recent crisis along the Blue Line between
Israel and Lebanon underscores the importance of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
stability in the region. Brazil is proud of its ongoing role
in UNIFIL, in which we currently deploy our largest
contingent of troops and have been in command of the
Maritime Task Force since 2011. We commend Israel
and Lebanon for their restraint and for avoiding any
provocative steps that could have further exacerbated
the situation, as well as for their shared commitment
to continue to work in coordination with UNIFIL to
maintain the prevailing calm along the Blue Line.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, on its non-permanent seat on
the Security Council, as well as to congratulate you
on presiding over the work of the Council this month.
I would also like to welcome Ms. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and to
congratulate the State of Palestine on chairing the
Group of 77 and China.
The Israeli occupation forces once again yesterday
committed a series of acts of aggression targeting the
Syrian Arab Republic, using guided missiles that were

19-0167831/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

fired over Lebanese territory, as just mentioned in
detail by my colleague the representative of Lebanon.
Israel also launched missiles from the occupied
Palestinian territory and Lake Tiberias in the occupied
Syrian Golan to conduct its aggression. Those actions
are in gross violation of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the 1974 Disengagement of
Forces Agreement.
Such acts of aggression would not have been
committed if the Security Council had not failed, for
decades, to impose the implementation of its relevant
resolutions regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict, and if
there was not unlimited support for that rogue entity
from certain permanent members of the Security
Council. Such behaviour has encouraged Israel to
continue to repeatedly commit crimes, violations
and State terrorism without even the most nominal
accountability, as demonstrated by the repeated Israeli
aggression committed against my country and Israel’s
multifaceted support for terrorist organizations. Such
actions have not been condemned and there have been no
calls by the Security Council to ensure accountability,
owing to the positions of the United States, Britain and
France, which are partners and supporters of Israel and
its aggression.
The policies of those three countries and their
position in the United Nations run counter to the
responsibility that they are supposed to shoulder in
maintaining international peace and security, in line
with international law and the provisions of the Charter.
Those three countries continue to bear false witness
and prevent the Security Council from shouldering its
responsibilities. However, that will not stop us from
exercising our legitimate right to self-defence and
working to regaining the occupied Syrian Golan by all
possible means.
Regaining the occupied Syrian Golan is the
steadfast right of the Syrian Arab Republic and is not
subject to negotiation, waiver or statutory limitation.
The full withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces and
a return to the border of 4 June 1967 is a commitment
that should be fulfilled. That is an unwavering request
based on the principles of international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy, including the
Security Council’s own resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981). Today we heard the Israeli
representative talking about Israel’s fevered attempts to
change and alter that fact. He covered every topic except
32/66

22/01/2019

the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Such fevered Israeli attempts to alter the situation,
including its aggressive statements and criminal acts,
are doomed to failure. They will never undermine in
any way the legal or sovereign rights of my country.
Some have invested in the terrorist war that is being
waged against my country and have taken advantage
of the circumstances of certain States in the region to
overshadow Arab rights and stifle calls to implement
resolutions of international legitimacy that call for
the end of the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories. Some have even tried to gain from the
occupation and promote suspicious deals to invalidate
the Palestinian question and the inalienable rights of
the people and countries of the region. They have tried
to ignite artificial and surreal conflicts among the
countries of the region to divert attention from the real
cause of the situation in the Middle East, namely, the
lack of stability, prosperity and welfare resulting from
the continued Israeli occupation, the Israeli settlements
and Israeli attempts to stifle the Palestinian question.
In recent times we have witnessed dangerous and
systematic practices by means of which the Israeli
occupying forces have attempted to consolidate their
control and impose their will on the occupied Syrian
Golan. For example, Israel convened a meeting of
its Government in the occupied Syrian Golan and
attempted to organize illegitimate local elections there.
It also signed deals and issued permits to plunder the
natural resources of the Golan, including, most recently,
to plunder the property of Syrian people and displace
them to make space for a project to generate wind
energy on about 6,000 acres in the vicinity of the cities
of Majdal Shams, Ein Qiniyye, Bakata and Mas’adah.
Israel has continued its settlement activities, crimes
and daily repressive practices against Syrian citizens
who are living under the yolk of occupation, while
also arbitrarily incarcerating them in Israeli prisons,
as is the case with freedom fighters Sedqi Suleiman
Al-Maqet — known as Syria’s Mandela — and Amal
Abu Saleh The occupation has also subjected some to
house arrest. Israeli officials have also repeatedly issued
aggressive statements reaffirming the indifference
of the occupying Power to international law, the
resolutions of the Council and its determination to
continue its occupation.
Unfortunately, all of those facts and their rejection
by our people in the Golan did not grab the attention
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, and were
therefore not included in his monthly briefings to the
Council. Instead, Mr. Mladenov intentionally failed
to call things by their true names. He talked to the
Council about the Alfa and Bravo, sides as if everyone
knows what that means. He should have issued a clear
condemnation of the almost daily Israeli aggression
against the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including the continued aggression against Damascus
International Civil Airport. Such gross disregard
represents a moral and political breach of his mandate,
in a manner contrary to the applicable principles and
rules of the United Nations, and therefore delegitimizes
his work.
Is it not high time for the Council to take the
necessary measures to stop the repeated Israeli attacks
against my country’s territories? Or should we attract
the attention of the warmongers of the Council by
exercising our legitimate right to self-defence and
responding to the Israeli aggression against Damascus
International Civil Airport by launching a similar
attack on Tel Aviv Airport?
We are pragmatic. We recognize the different
political stances of Council members. However, we
urge members to focus on our common denominators,
namely, international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and Council resolutions. We therefore stress
the need for the countries that support Israel and its
policies and positions to review such policies, bear in
mind those common denominators and work to restore
legitimate rights to the owners of those rights, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
and internationally agreed terms of reference.
Otherwise, this international Organization will fail for
the same reasons as the League of Nations did.
Let us all remember that many of the crises suffered
by our countries were due to a violation of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations through the
creation of illegal coalitions, such as those targeting
Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Syria and others, and due to the call
for meetings that transcend the Security Council, such
as the Warsaw meeting and the Middle East Strategic
Alliance, known by intelligence experts as the NATO
of the Middle East. Those are coalitions that transcend
the Security Council. They raise the following
questions. From where do such coalitions and meetings
derive their legitimacy? Are international relations
governed by international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, upon which our founding fathers made

S/PV. 8449

every effort to agree? Are they governed by the will and
destructive agendas of some countries? Are we wrong
to warn the Organization that its fate might be similar
to that of the League of Nations if we do not all take a
stand against the policies of those States? The absence
of United Nations sponsorship for the Warsaw meeting
proves that such an approach will not contribute to
drafting a common strategy on the Middle East, as was
stated by the very organizers of the meeting, who said
that it aimed to forge agreement on a common strategy
to address the situation in the Middle East.
My country stresses its steadfast and principled
position in support of the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and to establish an independent
State covering all their territories, with Jerusalem as
its capital, while guaranteeing the right of refugees to
return in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
We reaffirm that any measures aimed at jeopardizing
those rights are invalid and rejected, because they serve
only to escalate tension and threaten peace and security
in the region and the world.
In conclusion, I say to those who are trying to
re-map the area according to their whims that our people
have stood against the unprecedented international
terrorist war imposed upon us. They will continue to
stand against such miserable plans and will ensure
that they fail, just as they have defeated other plans in
past decades.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to congratulate the
delegations of the Dominican Republic, Germany,
Belgium, Indonesia and South Africa on recently joining
the Security Council as non-permanent members
for the period 2019-2020. We wish them success in
performing their duties. We particularly congratulate
the delegation of the Dominican Republic, as its firsttime membership of this organ is historic. We are
convinced that its dedication and ability will positively
contribute to the work of the Council, especially during
this month of its presidency.
We are also grateful for the convening of this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. This is an issue of vital importance
for the international community and the Council,
which has the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, as only an atmosphere

19-0167833/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of peace and security can foster the cooperation and
development of nations.
Since the previous open debate convened by
the Council on the matter, on 18 October 2018 (see
S/PV.8375), we regret that the events of the two
final months of last year continued to aggravate and
deteriorate the humanitarian situation, with human
rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Deaths, attacks, arrests, violence and confrontations
continue unabated.
According to reports by Mr. Jamie McGoldrick,
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, since
9 December 2018 Israelis and Palestinians have been
killed as a result of the violence in the West Bank.
Moreover, more than 400 Palestinians and at least
13 Israelis have been injured, while more than 200
Palestinians have been arrested. Palestinians continue
to encounter obstacles in accessing health services,
clean water and sources of livelihoods and education,
among other amenities, and humanitarian workers face
unprecedented challenges, including a lack of funding
and an increase in attacks aimed at delegitimizing
humanitarian action. The reality on the ground is a
high-risk warning for international peace and security.
Now more than ever, it is imperative that the Council
take action to fully apply the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
It is important to highlight the report covering
the period of September to December 2018 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
was presented on behalf of the Secretary-General
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. In general terms,
he reported that Israel is not stopping its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem; on the contrary, Israeli
authorities approved plans for approximately 2,200
homes in West Bank settlements, and progress is being
made in the construction of 31 units in Hebron, which
would be the first new construction in 16 years. He also
reported that demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures by the Israeli authorities continued
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and that the overall situation is dominated
by negative trends.
Likewise, other actions, such as the decision by the
Ministerial Committee for Legislation to move forward
34/66

22/01/2019

with draft laws, including so-called Regulation Law
2, which seeks to regulate hillside communities built
beyond the Green Line in the past 20 years, and the
announcement by Israeli authorities of the opening of
Route 4370 in occupied Jerusalem, which consists of
an eight-metre-high wall separating Israeli traffic from
Palestinian traffic, shows the persistent, exclusionary
and discriminatory settlement and expansion policies.
They are in contravention of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) and jeopardize the possibility of
the two-State solution. His report also revealed that no
immediate measures have been taken to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians, including acts of terror,
provocation and destruction. Provocative actions and
statements encouraging violence and inflammatory
rhetoric are ongoing.
Resolution 2334 (2016) sets out the most viable path
to restoring peace in the region. The implementation
of the resolution is vital to resolving the IsraeliPalestinian issue and cannot be divorced from the
Security Council’s action to ensure compliance with,
and observance of, resolution 1322 (2000), which urges
Israel, the occupying Power, to scrupulously comply
with its obligations and responsibilities under the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949. Moreover,
our delegation once again places value on, and reiterates
its support for, the various international initiatives that
have taken place with the aim of restarting negotiations
and peace talks between Israel and Palestine.
Our delegation reiterates its call on the international
community to make tangible progress to support the
advancement of a political, peaceful, definitive and
just solution for the parties, based on the existence of
two States: Palestine and Israel. It is imperative that
the two-State solution be maintained as the only way
to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East,
restore rights to the Palestinian people and finalize the
independent establishment of Palestine, incorporated
into the United Nations as a full Member.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank you, Mr. President,
and the Dominican Republic for your able presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also congratulate
Belgium, Germany, Indonesia, and South Africa on
joining the Security Council as non-permanent members
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for the next two years. I look forward to working with
them and with all Council members to maintain peace
and security in a world that is replete with challenges
and crises. I also express my appreciation for the
serious and tireless efforts of the outgoing members of
the Security Council, namely, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands
and Sweden. I wish those countries every success. I
congratulate Palestine as well on chairing the Group of
77 and China.
I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning, and I welcome Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
to this meeting.
By virtue of its geographical location and close
ties with the Palestinian people, Jordan has always
been close to the Palestinian cause and the suffering
of Palestinians. We have been on the side of their just
cause since the Palestinians were first uprooted from
their land and displaced until now. We have made every
effort through peaceful means to advance the peace
process and reach the noble goals of restoring all their
land for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, so
as to meet the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people and all the peoples of the region. That would end
their suffering and great human plight while granting
them their legitimate rights to freedom, a State and a
dignified life on their land.
The two-State solution, which guarantees the
establishment of an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and security
alongside Israel, is the only way to end the PalestinianIsraeli conflict and bring about comprehensive regional
peace. That would require intensified efforts to
overcome obstacles impeding the resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. It also
requires the cessation of all unilateral Israeli measures,
foremost of which is the settlement construction.
The most important issue is Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
which is a holy city for more than half of the world’s
population, including Muslims, Christians and Jews.
We must all preserve Jerusalem, with its ancient
history and various religions, a holy city that brings
us together and is a symbol of peace. In that context,
Jordan reaffirms its steadfast commitment to defend

S/PV. 8449

and protect the holy places of Islam and Christianity
in Jerusalem, within the framework of the historic
mandate of the Hashemite custodianship over those
holy sites in Jerusalem. In that regard, we underscore
Jordan’s firm stance that Jerusalem is a red line, as it
is part of the final-status issues that must be resolved
in negotiations in accordance with resolutions of the
international legitimacy and while ensuring that East
Jerusalem is the capital of the Palestinian State.
The issue of refugees is also part of the final-status
issues that must be resolved based on resolutions of
international legitimacy, foremost of which is resolution
194 (III), and the Arab Peace Initiative, that would ensure
the right of refugees to return and be compensated. In
that regard, we reiterate the need to continue to provide
the necessary support and protection to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). We will continue to work
with the international community in order to ensure
that UNRWA continues to provide its services to the
refugees as part of a world commitment. Any attempt
to reduce the role of UNRWA and the financial support
provided to it would have disastrous consequences.
With the beginning of a new year, we must also
turn a new chapter in dealing with the Syrian crisis. We
must all continue to work towards a political solution
to the crisis, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
so as to ensure Syria’s recovery and that it becomes a
pillar of stability in the region and a component of joint
Arab action, while allowing for the voluntary return
of refugees and the resumption of development and
construction in Syria and the States of the region, which
have politically, economically and socially suffered as a
result of the crisis.
With regard to the crisis in Yemen, my country
welcomed the political détente during the Stockholm
negotiations, the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire agreement,
the exchange of prisoners, the access by humanitarian
convoys to besieged areas in the city and the
establishment of a framework for future negotiations.
The Kingdom of Jordan hosted a meeting between
the Government of Yemen and the Ansar Allah
group, which was convened by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen. The aim was to
discuss the exchange of prisoners. We stand by our
brothers in Yemen in order to resolve the crisis and stop
their suffering.

19-0167835/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Wars and crises have depleted our resources,
frustrated our youth and deprived the region of the
stability and security needed to achieve economic
growth that meets the demands of developed societies.
Finding solutions for the problems in the region
requires addressing the deep-rooted causes of political,
economic and social crises, as well as establishing
policies and mechanisms so as to enable our young
people to actively participate in peacebuilding and
promoting a culture of tolerance and coexistence.
In conclusion, allow me to paraphrase the words
of His Hashemite Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn
Al-Hussein, who said that when all people, in particular
the young, see a promising future, that will bring
benefits to the international community in its entirety.
When our region, which has strategic importance,
becomes strong and successful, the whole world will
benefit from our stability, security and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank the delegation of the Dominican
Republic for the invitation to participate in this debate.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on your excellent
job in conducting the work of the Security Council
this month. The peace process between Palestinians
and Israelis is experiencing its most fraught moment
since the Oslo Accords in 1993. The seriousness of the
situation on the ground requires a collective effort to
keep alive the prospect of a two-State solution, based
on the 1967 borders, and to move forward in resolving
all final-status issues identified in those agreements,
namely, the issues of Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders and security measures.
Argentina resolutely supports all efforts aimed at
achieving peace and stability in the region. We also
support the efforts of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and
acknowledge the important contribution of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in preventing further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We urge the countries friends of Israel
and Palestine to work constructively to help the
parties advance in the peaceful settlement of their
differences, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the
Quartet road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
36/66

22/01/2019

Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of a viable and independent State
that is recognized by all countries, as well as the right
of the State of Israel to live in peace with its neighbours
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
Argentina reiterates its concern about the growth
of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and urges Israel to cease such expansionist
activities. As recognized by the Security Council in
resolution 2334 (2016), the settlements are a breach
of international law, hamper peace and weaken the
prospect of a two-State solution whereby both live in
peace and security, thereby promoting the perpetuation
of an unsustainable status quo.
On the other hand, attacks against Israeli citizens
are inadmissible and must cease immediately. My
country vehemently condemns all terrorist acts, as well
as the violent actions of Hamas and other Palestinian
organizations, including the launching of missiles
from the Gaza Strip and the construction of tunnels to
infiltrate Israel.
In that context, we recognize the right of Israel to
exercise legitimate self-defence. Without prejudice to
that, however, we recall the need for Israel’s actions to
be compatible with international humanitarian law and
take into account, inter alia, the principles of distinction
between civilians and combatants, proportionality and
military necessity in terms of the use of force.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
in accordance with the relevant resolutions, including
resolution 478 (1980). In that regard, my country rejects
any unilateral attempt to alter the status of the city
of Jerusalem. Argentina therefore believes that, as a
final-status issue, the matter should be decided by the
parties in bilateral negotiations.
Turning to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
achieved through dialogue and diplomacy, in
accordance with international law and while respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria. Argentina attaches special importance to the
Geneva talks under the auspices of the United Nations.
We appreciate the work of Mr. Staffan de Mistura in
his tireless efforts as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral since 2014. We express our support for his
successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, in continuing negotiations
to reach a peaceful solution to the crisis, in line with
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8449

the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Moreover, we
recognize the contribution of the Astana agreements
and other ceasefire agreements to de-escalate violence
and alleviate the humanitarian situation on the ground,
with a view to creating the conditions conducive to
moving towards a definitive, inclusive and long-term
settlement. The establishment and integration of the
constitutional committee would be an important step
in that direction.

This month marks 10 years since Israel’s first major
military assault on the Gaza Strip. Two further major
conflicts have taken place since then, and repeated
outbreaks of violence have ensued. Most recently,
the end of last year saw one of the worst outbreaks
of violence. We once again take this opportunity to
thank the United Nations and Egypt for intervening
to de-escalate tensions, therefore preventing yet
another conflict.

Finally, with regard to Yemen, Argentina welcomes
the establishment of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hudaydah Agreement, with the goal of
supporting its implementation in the city of Al-Hudaydah
and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa,
as established in the Stockholm Agreement. We hope
that the Agreement will be the first step towards a
peaceful and definitive settlement of Yemen’s internal
conflict so that the very grave humanitarian crisis
facing the Yemeni civilian population can begin to be
reversed quickly.

Those recurrent conflicts and outbreaks of violence
have had a devastating effect on Gaza and its 2 million
inhabitants. The economic and humanitarian situation
remains dire. Nevertheless, thanks to funding provided
by the State of Qatar, a number of positive developments
have materialized. The United Nations was able to
import fuel to operate the Gaza power plant and, as a
result, the daily availability of electricity has increased
to more than 11 hours, benefiting homes, schools,
businesses and hospitals. I am sure that development
is welcomed by all residents, after approximately two
years of electricity being limited to four hours per day,
or fewer. Another positive outcome is the noted 40 per
cent increase in piped water supply, thereby almost
fully meeting water demands for household purposes.
We hope to see further positive developments as
2019 progresses.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the Dominican Republic’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I also thank you for organizing this debate
on the important topic of the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I would also
like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
As we enter the year 2019, I wish to recall that
we are now in the seventy-first year of this longdrawn-out process and the denial of the right to selfdetermination for the people of Palestine. While we
appreciate the commitment of the Security Council, the
United Nations and all interested parties in helping to
resolve the matter, one is left to ponder the unthinkable
question: Is it conceivable that, in another 29 years, it
will have taken us 100 years to not do what is right and
just? We must redouble our collective efforts to work
more diligently and with more determination to bring
the conflict to an end and to assist the two peoples
of Israel and Palestine to come together and live side
by side in peace, harmony, stability and dignity. The
time has come for us to move with more urgency to
deliver to the Palestinian people their legitimate right
to independence and nationhood.

As we enter a new year, secured and stable funding
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
should remain a concern and a priority. We call on
the international community to continue availing the
required resources to sustain the important services
provided by UNRWA for the year ahead of us.
In his report to the Security Council in December
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
Mr. Mladenov informed us yet again that no steps had
been taken by Israel to implement that all-important
resolution (see S/PV.8429). Settlement activity
continued. During the reporting period from September
to December 2018, plans for about 2,200 housing units
in settlements in the West Bank were advanced or
approved by the Israeli authorities. Most of them were
advanced in East Jerusalem. The demolition and seizure
of Palestinian properties also continued unabated.
Those actions are illegal under international law and
represent an impediment to peace and the two-State
solution. Namibia reiterates its firm support for the
General Assembly resolution on the status of Jerusalem
(General Assembly resolution 72/15), which states

19-0167837/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

categorically that Jerusalem is a final-status issue to
be resolved through negotiations in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Global support for Palestine was reaffirmed
in the General Assembly in December 2018 with
the successful adoption of a resolution entitled
“Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East” (General Assembly resolution 73/89). One week
ago, at its hand-over ceremony, the Group of 77 and
China firmly restated its support for Palestine as it
became the Group’s Chair for the year 2019. We look
forward to working closely with Palestine this year.
To conclude, Namibia reiterates its calls on the
Israeli Government to cease its settlement expansion
and destruction of Palestinian homes and infrastructure.
We further reiterate the call for Israel’s complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. We
should harness reconciliation as a tool to overcome
great societal barriers and work on mechanisms to
address and heal the wounds caused to the Palestinian
people many decades ago. Therefore, a return to the
negotiations table to ensure a two-State solution, with
both living side by side, is the only solution.
I remind Council members that that was the
decision taken by the Council with the adoption of
resolution 181 (1947), which called for the creation
of two States to exist side by side. The Council has
yet to fulfil the commitment made in that landmark
resolution. The two-State solution must be based on the
pre-1967 borders, in accordance with international law
and United Nations resolutions. It is the only way to
ensure peaceful relations between Israel and Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas
Auza, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the
Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
with particular reference to Israel and Palestine.
In his message for the 2019 World Day of Peace,
focused on the theme “Good politics at the service
of peace”, Pope Francis compared peace to a delicate
flower struggling to blossom on the stony ground of
violence. Such an image vividly captures the enduring
situation between Israel and Palestine, where we know
38/66

22/01/2019

how fragile peace is and how its tenuous existence is
constantly threatened by harmful rhetoric, provocations
and attacks, violations of human rights and unilateral
actions hampering efforts towards a resolution,
bringing about untold suffering and causing the deaths
of innocent, defenceless civilians.
In such a context, the Holy See continues to appeal
fervently to both Israeli and Palestinian authorities to
resume dialogue and undertake a journey of peace that
can put an end to a conflict that, for over 70 years, has
rent the land that is not only home to those two peoples,
but also of great historical and cultural importance
for the whole world and a spiritual home for the three
monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam. With regard to its religious significance, the
Holy See seeks international guarantees for the Holy
City of Jerusalem, as recommended by the 1947 General
Assembly resolution 181 (II).
Notwithstanding the fundamental importance of
the holy places, there is the risk of transforming what
is a territorial and political conflict into one about
religion and identity. That must be avoided so as not
to compromise further the search for a much-needed
political solution. It therefore remains essential that
those who hold political office use their authority in
a responsible manner, while overcoming disputes
by engaging in an open and honest dialogue to
secure genuine and lasting peace, rather than simply
maintaining an illusory peace that is, in essence, only
a balance between power and fear. Genuine and lasting
peace, on the other hand, is the fruit of a political
project grounded in the mutual responsibility and
interdependence of human beings — one that goes
beyond the difficulties that characterize these times of
mistrust rooted in the fear of others or of strangers or
anxiety about one’s personal security.
A responsible political project spares no effort to
protect the lives of all citizens, regardless of origin or
religious affiliation, thereby creating the conditions
necessary for a worthy and just future for all. In
that regard, it is important not to lose sight of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and the other occupied
territories, as well as to highlight the generous response
of the international community to the financial deficit
faced last year by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Assistance to those most in need must always go before
political considerations, and aid to Palestine refugees
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must be allowed to continue unimpeded as long as the
situation remains unresolved.
With reference to the grave humanitarian crises
affecting several parts of the Middle East, it seems
appropriate in this forum to reiterate Pope Francis’ own
remarks made in reference to the generous welcome
and solidarity offered by Lebanon and Jordan — made
possible not by what is in excess, but by the sacrifices
of their citizens — to alleviate the suffering of
those affected by conflicts in the region, including
Palestinian refugees.
In his recent address to the diplomatic corps on
the occasion of the traditional exchange of New Year’s
greetings, Pope Francis stated:
“The Holy See expresses the hope, too, that
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians will
resume, so that an agreement at last can be reached
and a response given to the legitimate aspirations
of both peoples by ensuring the coexistence of
two States and the attainment of a long-awaited
and desired peace. A united commitment on the
part of the international community is extremely
important and necessary for attaining this goal, as
also for promoting peace in the entire region”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
today. We also thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing earlier today.
Last week, as the State of Palestine assumed the
Chair of the Group of 77 and China for 2019, it was
not only a vote of confidence by the international
community on Palestine’s ability to steer the Group, but
also an expression of solidarity with the long-suffering
Palestinian people. Unfortunately, such moments of
hope and optimism have become increasingly rare in
the parched political landscape of the region. For the
Palestinians, the looming shadow of an illegal and
oppressive occupation has grown only darker with every
passing year. Their fundamental human rights continue
to be violated with abandon. Their aspiration for a life
of dignity and freedom remains a distant ideal. Besides
generating endless hostility and discord, that has also
diminished prospects for durable peace in the region.
The Special Coordinator already provided a
grim assessment that the region stands on the brink

S/PV. 8449

of another precipice. Unabated settlement activity
in the occupied territory directly contributes to this
worsening situation. As the Special Coordinator noted,
instead of ceasing those illegal settlements, Israel has
in fact stepped up construction of new housing units
in the occupied West Bank. That trend is emblematic
of the blatant Israeli disregard for international law
and the collective will of the international community,
including resolution 2334 (2016). It is also a setback
to peace and a retreat from a two-State solution to a
one-State reality. Creating alternate facts on the ground
cannot change historic realities or neutralize the legal
rights of people living under occupation — in Palestine
or, indeed, elsewhere.
Meanwhile, the plight of the ordinary citizens of
Gaza is not only an unabated humanitarian tragedy;
it is also a moral outrage. That travesty must end. A
viable, independent and contiguous State of Palestine,
on the basis of internationally agreed parameters, the
pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, is the only sustainable assurance for enduring
peace in the Middle East. It is also a prerequisite for
international peace and stability. Sufficient, predictable
and sustainable financing for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is equally imperative.
The situation in the Middle East is a sobering
reminder that the region remains engulfed in the throes
of conflict, instability and violence. The conflict in
Syria continues to exact an enormous human cost. An
intra-Syrian process of inclusive political engagement
remains the only pathway to achieve durable peace and
stability in the country. We are confident that ongoing
efforts under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen, will make a
tangible contribution towards this end.
Pakistan also welcomes the renewed diplomatic
momentum to find a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen. The Stockholm Agreement was an important
first step. It is now critical that the sides follow through
on their commitments in a credible and transparent
manner. This is vital not only for lasting peace in
the country, but also for the well-being of millions of
Yemeni people — including women and children — in
desperate need of urgent humanitarian assistance. The
forthcoming high-level pledging conference in Geneva
will also be a good measure of the international
community’s continued support to the Yemeni people.

19-0167839/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Outlining his priorities for 2019, the SecretaryGeneral underscored the fact that the needs and
expectations of people with respect to the United
Nations can be met only by accelerating the surge in
diplomacy. Nowhere is such a surge more urgently
needed than in the Middle East, especially in Palestine.
For far too long, the Palestinians have looked to this
Chamber with expectant eyes and wondered, as
President Abbas reminded us in February 2018: “If
justice for all people cannot be attained here, where
should we go?” (S/PV.8183, p.10)
We should not fail the Palestinian people, for what
is at stake is the credibility of the Organization and
the fundamental tenets of the Charter of the United
Nations, based on the inherent dignity of the individual
and respect for the fundamental human rights of all,
including the right to self-determination.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Today I will focus on three
themes: the conflicts in Syria and Yemen and the
Middle East peace process.
On Syria, we would like to thank Special Envoy
Staffan De Mistura for his tireless efforts to bring peace
to the Syrian people. He has set an example for how
peace processes must devise inclusive mechanisms and
involve civil society and women’s groups. We wish the
new Envoy, Geir Pedersen, every success in his efforts
to forge a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria. We
strongly encourage Council members to come together
and agree on a durable political solution for the benefit
of the Syrian people.
On Yemen, Norway welcomes the Stockholm
Agreement and the adoption of resolutions 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019). As the situation on the ground
remains very fragile, it is important to uphold the
momentum achieved in Sweden. The concerted efforts
of international, regional and national actors will be
necessary to make sure that the Stockholm Agreement
is implemented on the ground and that political
and humanitarian progress is achieved. Women’s
representation at all levels of the political process is
key. Norway will continue to prioritize humanitarian
aid to Yemen.
There is a strong international consensus that only
a negotiated two-State solution can lead to durable
peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
40/66

22/01/2019

Palestinian State-building and economic development
remain essential building blocks to achieve this goal,
but cannot substitute the need for a political resolution.
Norway will chair the next meeting of the
international donor group to Palestine, the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, hosted by the
European Union in Brussels on 12 April. Leading up
to the meeting, Norway will encourage progress on
the outstanding fiscal issues between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel and take concerted action to
mitigate the risks to the Palestinian economy. The
parties and the donors also need to move faster on
implementing key infrastructure projects in the water
and energy sectors, especially in Gaza.
The situation in Gaza remains of great concern.
Increased access to energy, clean water, health services,
job creation and movement of people and goods in and
out of Gaza are crucial. The political brinkmanship
in and around Gaza will not lead to any stability or
development. The interests of the people of Gaza must
be put first. Donors should mobilize support to the
humanitarian package for Gaza in coordination with the
Palestinian Authority. The monthly financial transfers
to Gaza by the Palestinian Authority are a lifeline for
the population and must continue. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East remains indispensable. It is vital that donors
remain committed to supporting the organization.
Norway has been a consistent partner in promoting
peace and security in the Middle East for decades. Our
commitment to helping resolve the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is based on our firm support for the
two-State solution. In the absence of political progress,
we call on all parties and donors to do their utmost to
preserve the institutional and economic foundation of a
future Palestinian State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I congratulate the Dominican
Republic on presiding over the Security Council for
this month and I thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this important debate. I also take this opportunity
to express my delegation’s appreciation to the five
outgoing members of the Council and to welcome
the new non-permanent members, to whom we wish
every success.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Bangladesh,
and Libya on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Group of Arab States, respectively.
We also thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing this morning.
The current situation in the Middle East requires
the international community and the Security Council
to find solutions to the crises in the region. That
would prompt us to move from crises management
to a comprehensive conflict resolution approach in
order to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and work
seriously toward establishing peace and stability. The
international community — and the Security Council in
particular — must confront the parties that continue to
undermine regional stability and peaceful coexistence.
That would enable the region to invest its energies
and resources in building societies that enjoy peace,
prosperity and tolerance free of conflicts, violence
and terrorism.
My country believes that ending the Israeli
occupation of all Arab and Palestinian territories;
reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question; and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of
4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line
with the resolutions of the international legitimacy, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid principles, are all
prerequisites for stability in the region. We emphasize
the need for Israel to end all its illegal practices against
the Palestinian people, particularly the construction
and expansion of settlements and the violation of holy
sites, as well as its law of Jewish nationalism, all of
which undermine the two-State solution and hinder
international peace efforts.
In that regard, we underscore the responsibility
of the international community, under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, to take all
measures that advance the peace process in the Middle
East and end the Israeli occupation of all Palestinian and
Arab territories. The United Arab Emirates commends
the efforts of the Arab Republic of Egypt to promote
Palestinian reconciliation.
In the absence of a just and comprehensive solution,
the international community should continue to assist
the Palestinian people in all areas, including education,
health care and food security, in order to let them

S/PV. 8449

cope with the challenges of occupation and attain the
Sustainable Development Goals, just like other peoples.
In 2017 and 2018, the United Arab Emirates donated
more than $173 million to assist Palestine and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We stress our
historic commitment to supporting UNRWA and our
brotherly Palestinian people directly.
We continue to assist in restoring peace and stability
within the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen by
meeting the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni people
and supporting the political process overseen by the
United Nations with the aim of expediting a lasting
and sustained political solution based on resolution
2216 (2015). In that context, the United Arab Emirates
reaffirms its support for the tireless efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to
reach a comprehensive political settlement.
The coalition welcomes the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019). It has proved its commitment to implementing
them at a practical level. The Houthi militias have not
fulfilled their obligations and continue to violate the
agreement on a daily and repeated basis, committing
the most heinous crimes against the Yemeni people
and threatening the security and stability of the
region, as well as international navigation. They are
also looting international aid. All of those acts are
documented violations.
Those crimes and violations would not have taken
place if the Houthis had not received support and care
from Iran, which continues to violate resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015) by supplying the Houthis with
weapons, ballistic missiles and drones, as documented
by the reports of the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), as well
as reports of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
We are all aware of Iran’s negative and destabilizing
influence in Syria. The Iranian presence in that Arab
country is obstructing any political solution that would
allow the Syrians themselves to determine the future
of their country without external interference. In that
regard, we stress the importance of an Arab role in
reaching a political solution. We express our full support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, in seeking a

19-0167841/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
On the situations in Syria and Yemen, it is clear
that Iran is the common denominator in both conflicts.
It represents a serious threat to the stability and security
of the Middle East region. We therefore call on the
international community and the Security Council to
put pressure on Iran in order to end its destabilizing
and expansionist intervention in the region, let alone
supporting and arming terrorist and sectarian militias
in the Arab countries.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the United
Nations action plan for Libya represents the most
viable framework for resolving the political crisis in
that country. We welcome the progress made so far
and reaffirm our full support for the tireless efforts of
the Special Envoy for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to
implement the action plan, starting with the convening
of a national gathering early this year, to include all
Libyan actors, with the aim of agreeing a solution to the
current political crisis. However, we express our concern
at the growing threat of terrorist groups in Libya and
emphasize the need to prevent their spread to all areas
of the country and to vital Libyan infrastructure. More
international efforts should be made to restore security
and stability in Libya.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its cooperation with regional and international partners
in order to achieve stability and progress in the region,
combat terrorism, prevent extremism and reject external
interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
We should revitalize the Arab role in resolving Arab
issues, while promoting values of moderation to protect
communities and achieve prosperity.

22/01/2019

inexorably towards a negative conclusion for the Syrian
people. The conflict continues to be characterized by
systematic and egregious violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including the use of chemical weapons, mass
displacement, torture and forced disappearances. We
continue to value and support the important work of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic in investigating grave human
rights violations, and we thank the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Factfinding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic for its
continued efforts to bring to light details of chemical
weapons use in Syria.
Liechtenstein welcomes the decision of the special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction to task the OPCW with
identifying the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, as an important contribution to the
efforts of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria to advance justice and individual
criminal responsibility for those acts.
Accountability must be part and parcel of any
political agreement to end the conflict in Syria. That has
long been a demand of the Syrian people and countless
Syrian civil society groups. Sustainable peace and the
effective rebuilding of the country will be possible only
if those who have perpetrated crimes against humanity
and large-scale war crimes are held to account and
excluded from the political leadership.

Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us this opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Middle East. Developments in
different parts of the region have made this an important
and meaningful topic for discussion among the entire
membership, which should also be afforded the same
opportunity to express itself on other crises of which
the Council is seized.

We are encouraged by the effective work being
carried out by the Independent Mechanism, whose
mandate encompasses crimes committed by all
perpetrators, irrespective of affiliation. The work of
the Mechanism is having a concrete impact, as we are
seeing criminal proceedings move forward on the basis
of universal jurisdiction in several European judiciaries.
In addition, we reiterate our call on the Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court with a view to providing a comprehensive
justice perspective to the Syrian people, echoing the
clear call of the Secretary-General at the previous
Brussels conference.

We continue to be disappointed by the failure of the
Security Council to exert its leverage over the parties
to the conflict in Syria as the conflict appears to move

We share the Council’s cautious optimism
regarding recent developments in the efforts to end the
war in Yemen and hope that the new support mission

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.

42/66

19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8449

will ensure that the agreements reached in Stockholm
are fully implemented and can be further built upon.
Liechtenstein supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen and his team, and
hopes that the parties will be able to maintain the recent
positive momentum.

Work must be done to ensure Israel’s compliance with
international resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), in order to lift the siege of the Gaza Strip, open
border crossings immediately and definitively, and
end the humanitarian and economic crisis facing the
Palestinian people.

As the peace process moves forward, it is key that
the Council work to address atrocity crimes committed
during the conflict. We note that two-thirds of current
Council members are signatories to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group code of conduct on
mass atrocity crimes, which includes the commitments
to not voting against a resolution in cases of mass
atrocity crimes and to taking action to prevent and
put an end to those crimes. Guided by the latter of
those commitments, the Council should also take
steps to ensure that accountability for atrocity crimes
is included in any final peace settlement in order to
prevent a return to conflict and to bring real, tangible
justice to the people of Yemen.

My country stresses the importance of a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
as a strategic option to put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in accordance with international benchmarks
and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. That initiative,
introduced by my country, includes the establishment
of a Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the return
of refugees and an end to the Israeli occupation of all
Arab territories, including the Arab Syrian Golan and
the occupied Lebanese territories.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also congratulate
your friendly country on its accession to membership
of the Council, as well as Germany, Indonesia, Belgium
and South Africa on theirs. We wish them every success
in working to maintain international peace and security.
I also thank the countries whose membership of the
Council has come to an end and wish them every success
in their work within other United Nations bodies.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer a tragic
plight. Seventy years have passed and the world
continues to bear witness to the most destructive
human tragedy, in which a people has been displaced
from the land that was rightfully its own and handed
to those who did not own it. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia reaffirms its unequivocal rejection of all
Israeli policies, practices, void and illegal plans aimed
at perpetuating racial discrimination against the
Palestinian people, obliterating their national identity
and infringing on their legitimate rights. We call on the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular to shoulder their responsibilities
by immediately intervening to put an end to Israeli
settlement projects and to protect the Palestinian people.

The Syrian people continue to suffer the worst
crisis that humankind has yet witnessed this century.
The former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, completed his mandate
without having achieved his desired objectives of
making progress on a political process and convening
the constitutional committee, owing to the intransigence
of the Syrian regime and its unwillingness to reach a
just political solution to put an end to the plight of the
Syrian people. We welcome the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
wishing him every success and underscoring that he has
the full support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in his
efforts to reach a political solution based on resolution
2254 (2015), which emphasizes the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.
My Government stresses the importance of
reaching a just political solution in order to put an end
to the suffering of Syrians, both within and outside
Syria. We call for the withdrawal of all foreign forces
and foreign fighters — especially the Iranian forces
and their militias — from all Syrian territories. We also
condemn and reject any use of chemical weapons in
Syria and call on the international community to hold
to account those responsible for such crimes.
The region has recently witnessed new
developments in the Yemeni file, the most prominent
of which was the holding of consultations in Sweden in
December 2018 resulting in the Stockholm Agreement,
which is considered a new breakthrough towards
achieving a political solution in Yemen. The Council

19-0167843/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

also adopted resolution 2451 (2018) in support of that
agreement between the parties, emphasizing the need
for a political solution to the Yemeni crisis in line with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).
However, the recklessness shown by the
Houthis — who are supported by the Iranian
regime — suggests that their intentions to adhere to
the agreement are not sincere, as demonstrated through
the brutal attack of the Houthis by an Iranian drone
on Al-Anad military base that left six martyrs of
Yemeni officers and many injured, as well as the attack
against the Redeployment Coordination Committee in
Al-Hudaydah, which was also carried out by Houthi
militias. Independent observer reports have also shown
that Iran continues to support the Houthi militias by
providing them with weapons and military expertise.
The Council must therefore compel Iran to abide by the
relevant Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
2231 (2015), 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015).
Houthi militias have violated the ceasefire
agreement 679 times to date, in addition to the
recent attack against the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the theft of humanitarian aid that was
reported by the World Food Programme on 31 December
2018. The Houthis have shown a total disregard for all
United Nations and regional efforts aimed at resolving
the Yemeni crisis, proving that they are unwilling
to engage in any efforts that seek to bring happiness
back to Yemen. We stress the importance of reaching
a comprehensive political solution in Yemen that will
guarantee State sovereignty across its entire territory,
with one national army. We reiterate our commitment
to the three principles for peace in the region, namely,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes
of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions — especially
resolution 2216 (2015). My country will continue to
support the brotherly Yemeni people and its legitimate
leadership by responding to its humanitarian needs at
any time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I wish to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Dominican
Republic on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish it every
success in carrying out the work of the Council.
44/66

22/01/2019

The dynamics in the Middle East continue to
worry the international community, and Kazakhstan
therefore wishes to echo the concerns that the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, has expressed today. We are
alarmed to note the tragic loss of the lives of almost
300 civilians — including more than 50 children — as
well as 29,000 casualties among Palestinian civilians in
2018. The Israeli security forces must calibrate the use
of force and employ lethal force only as a last resort.
Our position on the Middle East peace process
remains unchanged. We fully support the two-State
solution and call for the early resumption of negotiations
in the bilateral format and without preconditions. That
should be done in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, relevant Security Council resolutions
and other mechanisms and initiatives, such as the road
map for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
principles and the land-for-peace formula.
We fully support the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and the creation of a free, sovereign
and independent State within the international borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Jerusalem
is the common homeland of different ethnicities and
religions. Palestine and Israel must respect each other’s
right to existence and avoid taking provocative actions
that might further escalate the situation. We condemn
all acts of violence and terrorism, in particular against
innocent civilians.
We would like to underline that the rapidly
expanding construction of new Israeli settlements, in
violation of resolution 2334 (2016), has become a major
obstacle to peace in the region and has brought about
intense suffering and hardship for the Palestinians. The
deliberate policy of demolishing Palestinian buildings,
the expansion of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the transfer of land for the exclusive use
of one party undermine the viability of the two-State
solution. The Council must ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016).
Turning to Gaza, the difficult humanitarian
situation there should remain of great concern to all of
us. Kazakhstan reiterates the critical need to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the light of a
decade of blockades that have deprived the people of
their basic rights and left two-thirds of the population
dependent on humanitarian aid. At risk are education,
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

health care and emergency and social services that
contribute to the dignity and hope of 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees. More importantly, meeting
human needs leads to social content and subsequently
to the stability of the region. We also express our
concern at Israel’s intention to close UNRWA schools
in East Jerusalem. Astana encourages Member States
with influence, in particular the Arab countries, the
United States, Russia and the European Union, to
urge Israel and Palestine to return to the negotiating
table. That should be done with the aim of reaching an
agreement on mutually acceptable principles relating
to the coexistence of two States based on international
law and Security Council resolutions.
Turning to Yemen, Kazakhstan welcomes the
adoption, on 16 January, of resolution 2452 (2019), on
the establishment of the new, political United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement by
implementing the Stockholm Agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Houthi militia in the city
of Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. Another important step towards peace in
Yemen that we recognized was the meeting between the
parties to the conflict held in Amman on 18 January to
exchange prisoners. We hope that the recent positive
steps in the right direction will provide an opportunity
to revive the economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis
and restore basic public services in Yemen.
Finally, Kazakhstan reiterates its deep commitment
to the multilateral effort to secure stability in the
Middle East, which, at the same time, will hold great
promise when peace prevails — a goal towards which
we all should work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): The situation across the
Middle East continues to be a source of grave concern.
Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in
the region. In the face of that grim reality, we must
maintain our focus on the urgent need to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Failing to do so will
continue to further destabilize the region and lead to
more radicalization and extremism.
Despite the continuous calls of the international
community, the Israeli violations of international law
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, have been increasing at an alarming rate.

S/PV. 8449

The continuation of settlement activities, which intend
to create new realities on the ground, are particularly
worrisome. That is unacceptable. Resolution 2334
(2016) is clear on the destructive effects of illegal
settlement activities. The provisions of that resolution
must be implemented. Israel should immediately cease
all settlement activities as well as house demolitions,
land confiscations and other policies that deny the
Palestinians’ right to development.
There have also been attempts to deny the historical
and legal rights of Palestinian people. According to
United Nations resolutions, Palestinians have the
right to return to their homeland. That right cannot be
withheld. The refugee status of the people of Palestine
is a legitimate right — it cannot be used as a bargaining
chip. The continuation of those practices will only
deepen the sense of injustice and breed desperation.
That is in nobody’s interest.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is also deeply
worrying. Gazans, who are under blockade, continue to
live in tremendous despair and insecurity. That tragedy
is compounded by the worst financial crisis in the history
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Until a
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict
is achieved, the work of UNRWA will remain vital. It
is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency.
As Chair of the UNRWA Advisory Commission and the
Working Group on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey
will continue to contribute to the Agency’s work and
calls on all actors to do the same.
The latest developments remind us once again of
the urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A twoState solution, with the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine within the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way for
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. Any peace
plan or initiative should be based on those established
parameters. That could be achieved, and we should
have reasons to be optimistic.
Last week, the State of Palestine assumed the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
That is a historic development. We congratulate the
State of Palestine and wish it success. Palestinians
have first-hand experience of many of the major global
problems. Their chairmanship is an opportunity for
the G-77 and the General Assembly. We hope that the
State of Palestine will soon be a Member of the United

19-0167845/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations and that Palestinians will take their rightful
place among us in order to contribute to the United
Nations agenda across all pillars.
Let me also highlight a couple of points on Syria.
We continue to support the advancement of the political
process through our efforts to finalize the establishment
of the constitutional committee. The involvement of the
United Nations and a balanced composition are crucial
for a legitimate and credible constitutional committee.
In recent months, we have intensified our consultations
with the other Astana guarantors and the Special Envoy
for Syria to that end. We will continue to cooperate
closely with the new Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen.
Turkey’s resolve to fight terrorism in Syria is firm,
which we have proven through two major counterterrorism operations against Da’esh and the Democratic
Union Party and Kurdish People’s Protection Units.
We will not tolerate the finding of safe havens for any
terrorist organizations right next to our borders. We
will not consent to the pursuit of any agenda that works
against Syria’s unity and the will of the Syrian people.
As a global coalition member, Turkey is committed
to ensuring the permanent defeat of Da’esh. Turkey
and the United States have agreed to coordinate the
withdrawal process to avoid the creation of a power
vacuum to the east of the Euphrates. Turkey stands
ready to continue to do its part for a stable, peaceful
and democratic Syria, while preserving its political
unity and territorial integrity.

22/01/2019

OIC Group’s full support as they strive to uphold their
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
This meeting takes place at a time overshadowed
by a series of unfortunate developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, that are
deepening the suffering of the Palestinian people and
further undermining the peace prospects. The limitless
aggression of Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people and the intensification of colonial
settlement policies, along with ongoing assaults
on Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, are creating an ever-more
unsustainable and volatile situation and exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis of the Palestinian people,
especially in the besieged Gaza Strip.
The prevailing crises and challenges cannot
be seen in isolation from measures, statements and
provocations by Israel, the occupying Power, or other
parties aimed at forcibly and unlawfully altering
the legal status of Jerusalem, including attempts to
relocate some diplomatic missions thereto, in defiance
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Such irresponsible acts threaten to weaken
the international system, strengthen the Israeli policy
of imposing a fait accompli and contribute to further
deepening the current political impasse and jeopardizing
opportunities for actualizing the two-State solution.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour
to deliver my statement on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

The dire situation on the ground is deteriorating and
becoming more dangerous as a result of the illegal Israeli
blockade and the escalation of military aggression and
raids being carried out all over the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, which have resulted
in the tragic loss of civilian lives and a high level of
casualties among Palestinian civilians, including many
innocent children. We reiterate, in that regard, the
responsibility of this organ to act appropriately so as to
bring an end to such lawlessness and impunity for Israel,
the occupying Power. The international community,
with the Security Council at the forefront, must act to
ensure accountability for all Israeli violations, in line
with international law, including humanitarian law,
human rights law and criminal law, and to provide
protection to the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in the Gaza Strip.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and welcome the
new members of the Council. I also wish to express the

Despite the hopes that the start of each new year
ushers in, we once again regrettably observe that Israel,
the occupying Power, has persisted with a further
illegal policy of colonial settlement construction

In each and every open debate on the Middle East,
we are obliged to focus on a dim picture. But these
problems are not inherent to the history or culture of
the region. We can overcome them, as long as we work
together and in the right direction. We can start by
collectively upholding international law. That requires
unity, courage and resilience, particularly on the part of
the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.

46/66

19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in order to further entrench its illegal occupation,
facilitate the exploitation of Palestinian land and
natural resources, foreclose all prospects for peace and
irreversibly undermine the two-State solution. As the
Israeli colonial settlement policy constitutes blatant
contempt for, and systematic violations of, numerous
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), we reiterate that the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and all key actors should
fulfil their responsibilities in ensuring accountability,
upholding the rule of international law and halting
those illegal acts.
We reaffirm our support for the accession of the
State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties that would establish its legal personality at the
international level, which is an inherent right of the
State of Palestine. That could facilitate strengthening
the legal tools that provide protection for the Palestinian
people. We reiterate our call upon the Security Council
to positively consider and recommend the admission of
the State of Palestine as a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations. We therefore invite the States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine to do so to
promote the chances for peace and establish political
and legal measures to protect and support the twoState solution.
The OIC Group remains deeply worried by
the instability and insufficiency of funding for
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). While
the impressive mobilization and solidarity of the
international community, including OIC countries as
well as traditional and new donors, helped the Agency
to address its unprecedented financial crisis in 2018,
the start of the new year serves to renew concerns
about sustainable funding to ensure the uninterrupted
provision of its vital services. We urge the international
community to come forward generously and responsibly
to ensure more predictable and sustained funding for
UNRWA so that it may effectively carry out its General
Assembly mandate in support of Palestinian refugees,
pending a just solution to their plight, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation urges
the Security Council to uphold its commitment and
act responsibly to revive hope and opportunities
for real progress on the stalled peace process. The
engagement of international actors in constructively
and effectively sponsoring multilateral political peace

S/PV. 8449

efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative carries decisive moral and political weight
with a view to enabling the Palestinian people to live
in freedom and dignity in their Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Martín Prada: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. Moreover, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia align themselves with this statement.
Let me begin by reaffirming the European Union’s
commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through a two-State
solution and an agreement that ends the occupation
that began in 1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the
aspirations of both parties.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continued to deteriorate over the past three months,
with no prospect of a clear political horizon. Violence,
including terrorist attacks, and unrest increased in the
final months of last year, both in the West Bank and
Jerusalem. Civilians on both sides, including children,
were killed or wounded in violent episodes. While
acknowledging Israel’s legitimate right to safeguard
the security of the Israeli people, the European Union
expects the Israeli authorities to adhere strictly to
the principles of necessity and proportionality in its
use of force and to take steps against the increasing
settler violence.
The EU firmly condemns all acts of violence,
terrorism and incitement to violence and hate, which are
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
two-State solution. Today there is a risk of further
escalation that would move Israelis and Palestinians
further away from an end to the conflict. The risk is
compounded by the advancement in December 2018 of
Israeli plans for more than 2,000 settlement units and
renewed plans to legalize West Bank outposts. The
allocation of an area south of Bethlehem for the purpose
of planning a new settlement constitutes a serious blow
to the viability of the two-State solution.
The European Union’s position on Israeli settlement
policy, including the eviction of Palestinians — for
example, in Sheikh Jarrah — and related activities in

19-0167847/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged: all settlement activity is illegal under
international law and erodes the viability of the twoState solution and the prospects for lasting peace, as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016). In that context, we
wish to underline once again that, although we welcome
the fact that the planned demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar,
including its school, has not taken place, we continue
to call upon Israel to withdraw those plans indefinitely.
The political and security situation in Gaza remains
volatile, and the dire humanitarian situation a matter of
grave concern. Miscalculations could easily lead to the
outbreak of a dangerous spiral of violence, which would
be detrimental to both sides. The European Union,
working closely together with the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
will continue its support for the provision of lifesaving
health-care support, its engagement to increase access
to clean water and energy supplies and its efforts
to improve the overall humanitarian and economic
conditions. Our priority remains to reduce tensions and
avoid another conflict in Gaza.
Humanitarian and financial assistance directed
to Gaza may help address the most urgent needs of
civilians, but it cannot be a sustainable solution in
the long term. Financial efforts by any member of
the international community can have a constructive
and lasting effect only if they are coordinated with
the Palestinian Authority and the international
community and underpinned by progress towards a
political solution in Gaza. To ensure lasting results, a
fundamental change of the situation in Gaza is crucial.
That should include an end to the closure and the full
opening of crossing points, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. The EU calls on all parties
to ensure unfettered access inside the Gaza Strip for
humanitarian assistance and the protection of civilians,
including for all the relevant United Nations bodies.
The EU reiterates its call that Palestinian factions
engage in good faith towards reconciliation. The return
of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip is needed
to durably improve the conditions and the humanitarian
situation. Punitive measures on Gaza need to end.
Despite
commendable
Egyptian
efforts,
intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks seem to have
reached a deadlock. Prospects for an effective
reconciliation deteriorated further after the decision of
the Constitutional Court in December to dissolve the
48/66

22/01/2019

Palestinian Legislative Council and hold legislative
elections within six months. Only a few days ago, the
Palestinian Authority withdrew its personnel from the
Rafah crossing point, resulting in the border being
closed. Again, those are negative developments for the
people in Gaza.
The European Union calls on all Palestinian factions
to find common ground and work together to address
the needs of the Palestinian population. We expect the
Government to work towards genuine and democratic
elections for all Palestinians. Strong, inclusive and
democratic institutions based on respect for the rule of
law and human rights are crucial for the establishment
of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. Palestinian
divisions do not serve the interests of the people and
undermine the prospects for a two-State solution.
In that context, it is important to underline that the
European Union will continue to support Palestinian
aspirations to statehood. However, it is of the utmost
importance that the positive results of the past not be
lost and that Palestinian institutions grow stronger,
more transparent, accountable and democratic.
The continued support of the international
community for the important work done by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) remains crucial. Stopping
UNRWA’s assistance to Palestine refugees would affect
a large number of Palestinian refugees, cause more
instability — including beyond the occupied Palestinian
territory — and create a vacuum that would only serve
extremists. The European Union and its member States
are collectively the largest contributors to the UNRWA
budget. We will continue to support the agency in
its efforts to put in place cost-saving measures and
reforms. We are and will continue to be strong, reliable
and predictable supporters of the Agency, and we will
strive to enable UNRWA to continue its operations
until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the
final status issue of Palestine refugees is reached.
Recent and increasing violence in Gaza and in the
West Bank remind us that there is no such thing as
the status quo. Restoring a political horizon for peace
between Israelis and Palestinians is essential to reducing
violence and containing extremism in the region.
Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, their achievements are under increasing threat
because of negative developments on the ground, on
both sides. Palestinian institutions are weakened. The
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian economy is not growing to its full potential,
not least because of the occupation and a lack of full
implementation of the Paris Protocol. The ability of
the Palestinian Authority to exert control over its own
resources is still hindered, particularly in Area C. Lack
of meaningful progress towards reconciliation and the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza continues
to impact negatively the situation on the ground. As
a result, the prospect of a two-State solution is being
dismantled piece by piece.
However, there is no credible alternative to it.
That is why the European Union remains committed
to the internationally agreed parameters for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on international
law, relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 1860 (2009) and 2334
(2016), and previous agreements. To be successful,
any peace plan should recognize those internationally
agreed parameters.
The European Union is truly convinced that
serious efforts must be made towards a resumption of
meaningful negotiations aimed at a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States, that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood
and sovereignty, ends the occupation and resolves all
final status issues in order to end the conflict. The EU
will continue to work with our partners, the Israelis and
the Palestinians; with regional actors, such as Jordan
and Egypt; and with our partners within the Middle
East Quartet to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
I would like to join others in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the Dominican Republic’s accession to
membership of the Security Council, joining the ranks
of Belgium, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa. I
trust that, with the mandate given, you will be able to
implement great tasks ahead with the ultimate view of
maintaining world peace and security, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The growing tension in the Gaza Strip and West
Bank in recent week, leaving dozens more innocent
Palestinian civilians — including children — dead, with
the continued illegal demolishing of Palestinian homes,
continues to paint a bleak future for the prospects of
a two-State solution. The situation in Palestine, as

S/PV. 8449

illustrated by Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov,
continues to spiral downward each day. Malaysia
strongly condemns the excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate uses of force by Israeli forces against
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem, the West Bank
and, particularly, the Gaza Strip.
We have heard repeated warnings by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Special Coordinator
Mladenov on Israel’s expansion of illegal settlement
activity, despite considerable international pressure
for its immediate and complete cessation. As those
violations continue and grow more prolonged, the
prospects of a two-State solution could just as well
become another utopian dream. In the interest of
progress, Malaysia reiterates its call on the parties to
the conflict concerned to exercise the utmost restraint
with a view to de-escalating tensions.
After decades of Israel being allowed to commit
violation after violation, Malaysia would like to reiterate
its call on all United Nations Member States and the
international community to continue pressing Israel and
to demand that it cease immediately and completely all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied territories,
as well as all other violations of international law and
international humanitarian law, and that it fully comply
with all relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and the United Nations Charter.
The current deadlock in the Middle East
peace process needs pragmatic solutions based on
international law and norms. It is therefore important
that the international community create such conditions
for peace talks in advancing prospects for a peaceful
solution to this long-standing conflict.
Malaysia remains steadfast in its long-standing
and principled position in favour of the inalienable
rights of Palestinians, including the establishment
of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We are unequivocal in our belief that the
Security Council must reassume once more its rightful
role as the ultimate broker of peace, particularly with
respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The longstanding trust deficit due to the Council’s inaction must
be overcome now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.

19-0167849/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President. I also thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing and ongoing efforts to promote the
peace process in the Middle East and maintain its
terms of reference, as well as his attempts to contain
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip while continuously encouraging Palestinian
reconciliation efforts.
Today’s briefing and statements only reflect the
injustice suffered by the Palestinian people. We all know
it full well. Therefore, I will not touch upon the factors
or reasons behind the situation, which is due mainly
to the continued occupation and practices of Israel,
which, despite the illegality of its actions, has been able
to maintain an unacceptable situation on the ground.
We have already witnessed the negative repercussions
of those actions, and we will see further repercussions
in the future if we maintain the status quo.

22/01/2019

I understand the view of those who believe that
talking about international law, Security Council
resolutions or the Arab Peace Initiative is redundant.
However, I differ from those who believe that the
substance and content of such parameters have failed
to bring about the desired peace. We have all heard
that before in past years, both inside and outside the
Council. However, we have never witnessed their
implementation or any serious attempt to do so, and
have thus never been in a position to honestly judge if
they are able to bring about peace.

Instead, I will touch on the main points of the
objectives that we must all work for so as to restore the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and put in
place the building blocks for security and stability in
the region, including for the Israeli people themselves.

I therefore call on those who claim that such
parameters represent injustice against Israel or an
attempt to impose a settlement without negotiations to
read the Arab Peace Initiative carefully or to compare
it with the contents of General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which established the State of Israel, or even
international consensus following the 1967 occupation.
Only then will they realize the level of flexibility
reflected in that Initiative by Arab States on all aspects.
I call on them to also study all resolutions adopted by
the Council so as to realize that they all provide for
negotiations as a path to settlement. They establish
a path that takes into account the interests of the
Palestinian and the Israeli peoples alike.

Therefore, allow me to reiterate the ongoing
Egyptian efforts to achieve Palestinian reconciliation
and the return of legitimate authority in Gaza. I would
like to seize this opportunity to call on the parties to
give priority to the interests of the Palestinian people
and to recognize that the different strata of society
in the Gaza Strip or the West Bank are those bearing
the exorbitant cost of division. Restoring the rights of
the Palestinian people and ending occupation requires
united leadership, objectives and policies.

I reiterate that we are committed to a twoState solution based on international legitimacy,
and negotiations on the 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital of Palestine. We agree with the
affirmation that has been repeated by the SecretaryGeneral to the effect that there is no plan B. Disregarding
this path amounts to the destruction of 25 years of work
since the signing of the Oslo Accords. What is more
dangerous is that it entrenches the fact of a one-State
solution, which both peoples reject.

Turning to the core of the conflict and the crisis
under consideration — that is, the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif since 1967 — it might be helpful to draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that the road to peace
is still clear. We need the parties to recognize only
that the fates of the Palestinian and Israeli people are
intertwined. Bringing security to Israelis and achieving
the true integration of Israel within its geographical
parameters will not be accomplished by building walls
or illegal settlements, or by maintaining the state
of injustice that has been suffered by the Palestinian
people on a daily basis since last century.

In conclusion, I warn the Council against the
illusion of maintaining the status quo. That is a false
belief that clearly disregards the parameters I just
mentioned. It would only lead Israelis and Palestinians
towards a one-State solution rejected by all. There is
no middle ground, which leads me to pose a legitimate
question to all those who find it useless to refer to the
framework or parameters of the two-State solutions:
Has the surrender to the one-State solution become their
final choice? I hope that the answer to that question
is no.

50/66

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Cuban delegation deplores the fact that since
the last open debate (see S/PV.8375) on this theme, no
progress has been made in advancing the just cause of
the Palestinian people. On the contrary, the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate, with unilateral
actions such as the withdrawal of United States financial
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
truly regrettable that, due to the repeated obstruction
of the United States, the Security Council has not even
denounced the escalation of violence and the tragic
developments in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.
The delegation of Cuba emphatically rejects the
use of disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem and particularly
in the Gaza Strip, in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international humanitarian
law. We once again condemn the illegal construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as the demolition or
seizure of Palestinian properties. All such measures,
compounded by the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode
the viability of a two-State solution.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must demand that Israel
put an immediate end to the occupation of Palestinian
territories, aggressive policies and settlement practices,
and that it implement all Council resolutions on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, based on a two-State solution that allows
the Palestinian people to exercise its right to selfdetermination, its right to an independent sovereign
State with pre-1967 borders and East Jerusalem as its
capital, and the right of return for refugees.
We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government to establish its diplomatic presence in

S/PV. 8449

Jerusalem, which further exacerbates tensions in
the region.
We also reiterate our call for support for the
proposal of President Mahmoud Abbas to convene an
international peace conference based on the agreed
parameters and terms of reference. We express our
unswerving solidarity with the Palestinian Government
and people, and support the accession of Palestine as a
full-fledged Member of the United Nations. We welcome
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 73/89,
entitled “Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East”, which endorses the two-State solution.
The delegation of Cuba once again demands the
total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
the Syrian Golan and from all other occupied Arab
territories. We note that any measure or action to
modify the legal, physical and demographic status or
the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian Golan,
or any Israeli measure to exercise its jurisdiction over
and administration of that territory, runs counter to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We demand respect for multilateralism. Foreign
intervention in domestic affairs, foreign aggression and
sponsorship of terrorist groups to promote instability
and conflict in the Middle East, and the fabrication of
excuses and justifications in the Council to legitimize
the unilateral use of force and aggression against
sovereign States, must stop.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on your initiative to organize this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate the new members of the Council and to
wish them success.
We also congratulate the State of Palestine on its
election by acclamation to the chairmanship of the
Group of 77 and China this year and wish it success.
I thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing on this agenda item.

19-0167851/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We were disappointed last year by the various
challenges, obstacles and frustrations that arose with
regard to the Palestinian question, hampering all efforts
to restore confidence and resume negotiations on the
peace process. The situation in occupied Palestine
continues to deteriorate as a result of the Judaization
policies, settlement-building and systematic oppression
of the Palestinian people by the Israeli occupying Power.
Those policies have obstructed the two-State solution,
exacerbated the situation and increased tensions, all
of which only hinders the peace process, which has
already been stalled for five years.
The use of force, the killing of unarmed civilians
and the ongoing construction of settlements are
all violations of United Nations resolutions and in
particular resolution 2334 (2016). They impede the
peace process and provoke the Palestinians and the
international community. The lack of a dignified life
does not help to create confidence or the appropriate
framework for launching the peace process.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King His Majesty
Mohammed VI presides over the Al-Quds Committee,
underscores the importance of safeguarding the
historic, legal and political status of Jerusalem, while
calling the United Nations, especially the permanent
members of the Security Council and the Quartet, to
fully shoulder their responsibilities in order to prevent
any action that could undermine the situation or
impede international efforts to settle the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. His Majesty has called many times
for restraint from undermining the current political
situation of Jerusalem, on the basis that Jerusalem is at
the core of the final-status issues.
The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People was another opportunity for His
Majesty King Mohammed VI to reiterate Morocco’s
unwavering support for the historic and legitimate right
of the Palestinian people to have a viable, independent
State within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security, in accordance with resolutions
of international legitimacy. In a letter of solidarity sent
by His Majesty in November 2018 to the Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, and through him to the
Palestinian people led by President Abbas, His Majesty
noted that:
52/66

22/01/2019

“The issue of Palestine is crucial for the Middle
East and represents the core of the conflict in the
region. Achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace as a part of a two-State solution is a strategic
choice in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, and not
simply a political tactic. The question of Palestine
is of crucial importance to the Arab and Islamic
nation, as the Al-Aqsa Mosque is located in
Jerusalem. It is therefore a symbol of tolerance
and coexistence among religions. The unilateral
measures that impact Jerusalem are completely
unacceptable, illegal and illegitimate. They are
gross violations of international law and United
Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) and General
Assembly resolution ES-10/20, adopted at its tenth
emergency special session.
“The settlement of the Palestinian question
in accordance with international resolutions
prevents terrorism and extremism from taking
any opportunity to prevail after investing in the
lack of prospects for a solution of the Palestinian
question and the issue of Jerusalem in order to
justify their criminal approach in the region. The
concern surrounding the illegal measures imposed
against Jerusalem evokes religious sentiments and
therefore takes the conflict along a path that is not
political, but rather religious. That would be an
extremely dangerous matter for international peace
and security and for the desired coexistence among
various civilizations and cultures.”
In conclusion, Morocco’s stance towards the
conflict is a steadfast one based on the Arab Peace
Initiative and the terms of reference for achieving peace
on the basis of the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with
Israel in peace, security and harmony.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, my
delegation takes this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
the Dominican Republic, on your election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for
the term 2019-2020. We also congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the month of January, immediately upon your election
to the Council.
In the same vein, we convey our deepest
congratulations to the other new members of the Council:
South Africa, Belgium, Germany and Indonesia. We
wish them well as they assume their duties in this very
important organ of the United Nations.
At this juncture, allow me to convey our
delegation’s sincere condolences and sympathies to
our dear brother and friend Ambassador Jerry Matjila
and the people of South Africa on the passing of the
former Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations, Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo.
Representatives who knew him knew his contributions
not only to the Security Council, but also in many other
ways, including his leadership of the Group of 77 (G77) and China.
My delegation further condemns in the strongest
terms possible the recent acts of terrorism in Kenya and
Colombia, both of which claimed many innocent lives
and caused injury to many more. We also condemn the
deadly attack on a United Nations camp in northern
Mali, which claimed the lives of 10 peacekeepers
from Chad. It is our hope that the perpetrators of these
heinous crimes will be tracked, found and brought
to justice.
My delegation conveys its sincere appreciation
to your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this
quarterly open debate on a matter of great importance
to many of us, including my delegation — that is, the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his invaluable perspectives on
this subject.
My delegation aligns itself in advance with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Allow me to further use this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its historic
election to the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and
China for 2019. Its election to that very important
role demonstrates the confidence of a large number of
Member States in the State of Palestine. There is no
doubt that regional and other groupings — including
the largest of all, the G-77 and China — play an

S/PV. 8449

instrumental role in ensuring a harmonized approach
to multilateral engagements and better coordination
among the United Nations main organs, such as the
General Assembly and the Security Council. It is not
surprising that a large number of countries, including
my own, stands firm in solidarity with, and support for,
the Palestinian people in their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence.
Botswana’s pronouncement on this subject in
various forums has always been that there is merit in
the two-State solution. We still believe that Israel and
Palestine can coexist as two sovereign States that not
only share a common border, but a common desire for
peace, security and prosperity.
However, we remain concerned by the ongoing
impasse in the negotiations on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as that poses a serious threat to international
peace and security and in the Middle East as a whole.
We are of the view that there must be intensified efforts
to eventually return to meaningful negotiations aimed
at bringing about a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. We therefore urge the
international community to strengthen efforts towards
finding a negotiated settlement, facilitated by the
Middle East Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Madrid terms of reference, as well as other actors, on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions.
We furthermore encourage all peace-loving nations,
especially those in the Middle East region with a better
understanding of the dynamics to the conflict and
leverage, to summon the necessary will and courage
to work towards embracing dialogue as a means to a
lasting solution.
Certainly, both the old, who have endured the
situation for far too long, and the younger generation in
the Middle East, as anywhere else in the world, deserve
a future of peace, tolerance and harmony. In the interests
of peace and protecting the lives of innocent civilians,
we wish to echo the call for all actors to fulfil their
obligations under various international instruments
and refrain from any steps that could undermine the
momentum of the negotiation process.
We furthermore call for all the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
to be respected and given full effect, along with strict
observance of basic international humanitarian law and
human rights law by all parties to the conflict.

19-0167853/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the midst of the worsening humanitarian
situation in Gaza and other affected areas, we implore
both parties to cease hostilities, return to peace talks
and refrain from exacerbating an already deteriorating
situation. We have the utmost faith in the international
community’s collective ability to put more pressure on
the parties to resume dialogue and intra-Palestinian
peace talks and relaunch the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.
We note with regret that, despite global condemnation
and pronouncements from the Security Council and the
General Assembly, settlement activities continue in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. We
reiterate that those actions violate international law and
constitute a significant obstacle to achieving peace.
Furthermore, we are gravely concerned about pockets
of violence and tensions, which pose challenges to
the deteriorated humanitarian, security and political
situation, especially in Gaza.
In conclusion, I once again reiterate my delegation’s
long-standing position and conviction that there is no
alternative to the two-State solution. We believe that
to be the only long-term solution that can provide a
safer, freer and sovereign Palestinian State, along the
pre-1967 international borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We reaffirm Botswana’s solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as our unwavering support
for their just cause. We renew our call for strengthening
the coordination of international efforts to promote a
just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
question of Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): At the outset, my delegation would like
to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation has full
confidence that the current debate will be a meaningful
opportunity to contribute substantially to a settlement
of Middle East issues.
The peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question
is today one of the top priorities among the Middle East
54/66

22/01/2019

issues that cannot be delayed and is directly linked to
ensuring world peace and security. The Middle East
issue, which was triggered by Israel’s occupation of
Arab territories in 1948, has not been solved to date,
more than 70 years later, due to the high-handedness of
Israel, coupled with the biased policies voiced by some.
Israel’s fast expansion of settlements, the ongoing
blockade of the Gaza Strip and ruthless suppression
of peaceful Palestinian protesters have sparked
condemnation and rejection across the world, as they
constitute a series of obstacles for the Palestinian people
in their struggle to reclaim their occupied territories
and establish an independent State.
The unlawful and unjust behaviour of Israel is
closely linked to the double-standard attitude of a
specific permanent member of the Security Council that
bankrolls and sponsors Israel’s territorial expansion.
We cannot overlook the fact that permanent members
of the Security Council insist, on the one hand, on the
importance of ensuring peace while, on the other hand,
back Israel’s ruthless crackdown on the Palestinian
people while arrogantly seeking to change the status of
East Jerusalem. The status of East Jerusalem is a very
sensitive issue. It must be treated fairly by restoring
the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination and
through a comprehensive and lasting solution to Middle
East issues.
In that context, my delegation asserts that it is
important to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016),
which sets forth requirements for establishing an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders, as well
as the other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for a complete halt to the expansion
of settlements and the ruthless crackdown on the
Palestinian people and opposing any attempt to change
the status of East Jerusalem.
Furthermore, the Security Council should fully
discharge its responsibility to ensure international peace
and security, as desired by the international community.
The Council is mandated to ensure international peace
and security and should focus directly on the nature of
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and take measures to fairly address those
issues. It should also thoroughly investigate every type
of illegal act committed by Israel, including territorial
expansion, and take legally binding measures aimed at
completely halting those acts.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will continue to extend its unwavering support for
and solidarity with the Palestinian people in their
struggle to end the occupation by Israel and regain
their legitimate national rights, including the right to
establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. At the same time, my delegation expresses
its full support for and solidarity with the Syrian people
in their struggle to regain the occupied Syrian Golan
and achieve their country’s territorial integrity.
In conclusion, my delegation avails itself of this
opportunity to clarify once again the principled position
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that all
controversial issues must be solved through dialogue
and negotiations among the parties concerned without
any foreign intervention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today’s meeting
of the Security Council is being held in the absence of
any clear prospect for a peace process in the Middle
East, and in the light of intentional disregard for the
main international terms of reference of the peace
process, including Oslo and Madrid accords, including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the international Quartet
road map, the principle of land for peace, the twoState solution and the 4 June 1967 borders. That in
itself constitutes a terrible failure of the international
multilateral order and the steadfast positions laid out
in the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, which indicate broad international
consensus in support of the just Palestinian question
and rejection of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories and all unilateral Israeli practices in violation
of international agreements.
The League of Arab States supports the
commendable stand taken by States and peoples of
all geographical groups to resist pressures to move
their embassies to Jerusalem, which runs contrary to
international legitimacy and all relevant United Nations
resolutions. Accordingly, the League of Arab States
reaffirms the illegality of the United States decision to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to move
its embassy there. Furthermore, the League thanks
those States that refused to cede to the pressure and
decided not to relocate their embassies. We also express
our gratitude to those States that rejected implementing

S/PV. 8449

prior decisions in that regard as a sign of upholding
international multilateral legitimacy. The League calls
on all States to remain committed to rejecting the fierce
campaign to remove the issue of Jerusalem from the
five final-status issues.
We welcome the strong international support that
has been provided for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), enabling it to carry out its noble mission to
respond to the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people and to counter the negative effects of the United
States decision to cease its financial support for the
Agency, which resulted in a budget gap that was more
than bridged by States which believe in the just cause of
refugees, most notably the Arab States.
In that regard, the League of Arab States
reaffirms the need to guarantee the right of return of
the Palestinian refugees to the occupied Palestinian
territories, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948, and to uphold the cause
of refugees as a final-status issue that must be settled
definitively through direct negotiations between both
the Palestinian and Israeli parties.
At the same time, the increased pace of Israeli
settlement activities presents a great challenge to the
peace process in the Middle East, as well as a gross
violation of international law and resolution 2334
(2016). The League of Arab States therefore condemns
all Israeli settlement activities, including attempts by
Israel to control the nomad communities in Abu Nuwar
and Khan Al-Ahmar in order to establish a connection
between Israeli settlements and East Jerusalem, the
capital of the Palestinian State. Israel also continues
to besiege Jerusalem by surrounding the outer band of
the city with settlements, in addition to other projects
implemented under the guise of tourism, such as the
high-speed train that is on its way to be expeditiously
implemented. Another project is the creation of a
recreational park connecting the Mount of Olives
settlements facing the Al-Haram Al-Sharif from
the east.
The League of Arab States calls on the Security
Council to oppose those colonial and expansionist
plans, which are intended to change the historic, legal
and demographic status of occupied Jerusalem, in order
to protect the religious sites, sacred to all religions, and
defend the identity of the historic character of Jerusalem

19-0167855/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/01/2019

by preserving the established and steadfast rights of the
brotherly Palestinian people.

with Stockholm Agreement. That could be duplicated
on a larger scale in the occupied Palestinian territories.

At the same time, it is incumbent upon the
international community to reaffirm the illegality of
such heinous racist laws as the new nation-State law
adopted recently by the Knesset, which seeks to deny
the Palestinian people of their rights to their historic
territories by legislating settlement activities, the
confiscation of land, the demolition of homes and the
displacement of populations in flagrant violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The League of Arab States calls
attention to the ramifications of those laws and their
racist effects, which undermine the solid, inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, which are fully
supported by the international community.

Despite the suspension of Syria’s membership
in the League of Arab States, which was done in
accordance with the rules of the League, the issue of
Syria remains a fundamental one for the Arab world,
and the League remains interested in a comprehensive,
peaceful settlement of the Syrian issue so as to
ensure maximum protection for the brotherly Syrian
people. The League reaffirms the need to promote its
participation alongside the Arab States concerned in the
negotiating process to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, I underscore that the
League of Arab States is strongly opposed to any and
all illegal attempts to codify the occupation of Syrian
or Lebanese territory — be it in the Syrian Golan or the
Shaba’a farms. We call for Israel’s immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal from those territories, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy.

The Security Council should also intervene to
protect the right of the Palestinian people to protest
peacefully and express their legitimate stand against
the occupation without being subject to vicious attacks
by the occupying forces. Since the Land Day incidents
of 30 March 2018, more than 300 Palestinians have been
killed and tens of thousands of others wounded. The
demonstrators in question were all peaceful, defenceless
civilians demonstrating for the right of return to their
occupied territory. The occupation forces attacked them
with live ammunition, in flagrant violation of every
relevant law, without any accountability whatsoever.
There is a dire need to create a mechanism under the
auspices of the United Nations to protect the Palestinian
people through a group of observers who submit
periodic and prompt reports to the Security Council.
The Secretary-General has submitted a report
(A/ES-10/794) to the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the establishment of an international
mechanism to protect the rights of the Palestinian
people, as requested in General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20 of 13 June 2018. Despite that effort, the report
remains dead letter and the Security Council has taken
no measure relevant to it. In that regard, we call on
the Council to take action aimed at establishing such a
mechanism, based on the report and in cooperation with
the Group of Arab States and the League of Arab States,
and to ensure that it is under the supervision of the
United Nations to protect the Palestinian people. Such
action would be akin to the dispatch of 90 international
unarmed observers by the Security Council to Yemen
in order to monitor the situation there, in accordance
56/66

At the same time, the League of Arab States calls
on the Security Council to deal effectively with the
blatant Iranian interference in Arab affairs, in support
of the implementation of the League’s decisions
adopted at summit and ministerial levels. The League
also calls for the immediate withdrawal of Iran from
the three Emirati islands that it occupies. That should
take place in parallel with steady progress on other
main issues connected with establishing peace and
stability in the Arab world, foremost of which is the
peace process in the Middle East; establishing the
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital along the 1967 borders; and restoring peace
and security in Syria, Libya, Iraq, the Sudan, Yemen,
Somalia and other hotbeds of tension and instability
that continue to impede the efforts of Arab States to
achieve progress and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. The Committee also extends
its congratulations to all new members of the Council.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8449

As we meet for the first quarterly open debate
of the year to consider the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, we urge the
Security Council to make 2019 a year of action and
progress on the road to achieving just and lasting peace
and the full exercise of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. We must collectively redress the
historic injustice subjected upon an entire people under
occupation, without independence and deprived of their
basic dignity and rights, first and foremost the right to
self-determination.

East Jerusalem, continue unabated, as do incidents of
settler-related violence in violation of resolution 2334
(2016), among others. The recent announcement of
plans for new settlements deeper in the West Bank, near
Ramallah and Bethlehem, and for a new five-kilometre
road divided lengthwise by a concrete wall to separate
Israeli and Palestinian traffic and connect settlements
on the outskirts of Jerusalem, constitute new serious
violations of international law. Even the Israeli press
has spoken of “apartheid on the road” in reference to
the new route.

As further proof of the State of Palestine’s existence
as a full member of the community of nations, the largest
group of States Members of the United Nations elected
it to the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China,
which represents 80 per cent of the world community,
to lead us in all our collective negotiations in 2019. That
important event must be given due consideration.

The illegal activities of the occupying Power, in
particular the planned demolition of entire Bedouin
villages, such as Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and
the relocation of its population, have only fleetingly
captured the attention of the Council. The international
community ignores not only the obligations of the
occupying Power that are being violated, but also its
own obligations as a third party under international law.

Allow me to recall some events that marked the
past year and that should serve as a reminder of the
task ahead. The political paralysis and stalemate in the
peace process continued; the lack of a political horizon
remained a source of frustration for both Palestinians
and Israelis and the region continued to be threatened
by the constant risk of increased destabilization.
Protests by Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip have
been taking place since March 2018 and indiscriminate
violence by the Israeli occupying forces has resulted
in a large number of casualties, including the death of
several children.
The Committee has repeatedly called on Israel, the
occupying Power, to lift the illegal blockade of Gaza,
which has lasted for 12 years. Military escalation and a
catastrophic conflict must be avoided at all costs and an
immediate response is needed to the grave humanitarian
crisis, in particular through increased support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other United
Nations organizations that provide vital assistance.
Regrettably, despite the ongoing efforts of Egypt
and other actors, Palestinian reconciliation has not
progressed. The Committee believes that Palestinian
unity remains the best guarantee of a politically
stable and economically viable future for the
Palestinian people.
As we have just heard, the construction and
planning of Israeli settlements and the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian property, including in

Resolution 2334 (2016) provides a checklist and
a path towards a just and lasting settlement between
two States living side by side in security, within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital
of a sovereign and independent Palestinian State. The
Committee welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and looks forward to future reports in the same
format. We also welcome the initial steps taken by
some Parliaments to ensure national implementation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) and to encourage
others to do the same.
Lastly, the Committee calls on all Member States to
refrain from taking unilateral action on any final status
issue in contravention of international law and United
Nations resolutions. Such measures, if implemented,
would only further jeopardize the two-State solution
and the prospects for lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
On a positive note, I note that many Member States
have increased their financial support to UNRWA
to ensure the continuation of its vital operations
following its unprecedented financial crisis in 2018.
The Committee calls on all Member States to continue
to fund UNRWA in a reliable and predictable manner
until the refugee issue is resolved fairly and definitively
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions.
The Committee firmly believes that, although
unilateral initiatives to overcome the current impasse

19-0167857/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

could be useful, the Security Council has a clear
responsibility in that regard and is the key to resolving
the conflict.
In conclusion, the Committee calls on all Member
States that have not yet done so, in particular the
members of the European Union, to join the majority
of the States of the international community — 139 so
far — and recognize the State of Palestine, supporting
its efforts to become a full State Member of the United
Nations and take its rightful place in the community
of nations. That step would help make 2019 the year in
which peace between Israelis and Palestinians becomes
a reality and allow us to finally reach the goal we
collectively set 71 years ago.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): My delegation would like
to express its high appreciation to the Dominican
Republic’s presidency for organizing this very important
open debate. We also thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his
updates on the recent developments and remaining
challenges with regard to the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
A year ago, at the open debate on 25 January
2018, representatives expressed their hope for
positive changes in the Middle East (see S/PV.8167).
Throughout the year, the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies made continued efforts to
resolve those untenable problems. However, excessive
and indiscriminate force continued to be used. Innocent
civilians continued to be victimized. The death and
casualty tolls were the highest in the past five years.
People, especially women and children, continued to be
displaced. The future of the peace process and the twoState solution remained uncertain. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) faced a major funding crisis.
The situation in the Middle East remains unstable.
The plight of the Palestinian people is worse than a year
ago. One of the main reasons is that Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), have
not been respected or implemented, and have even
58/66

22/01/2019

been violated. There is clearly a lack of goodwill and
practical steps by many of the parties concerned to
comply with the Security Council and other United
Nations resolutions. As a country that has been through
many wars, Viet Nam shares the concerns over the
unjustifiable suffering of civilians. We follow the
situation closely, with a heavy feeling in our heart at
every sad event that takes place.
Viet Nam would once again like to reiterate its
solidarity with and support for the just struggle of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights, as well
as the two-State solution through the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine living in peace with
the State of Israel within the pre-1967 internationally
recognized borders.
Viet Nam opposes the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force and expresses concern over the escalation of
tensions and violations of Security Council resolutions
and international law. We urge all parties to uphold
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), and to resolve the conflict by
peaceful means in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Moving forward, Viet Nam supports the regular
consideration of such issues by the Security Council
with a view to strengthening its efforts to ultimately
achieve a long-lasting solution for the region. The unity
of the Council is crucial. Concrete actions are urgently
needed to uphold the Security Council resolutions, to
put an end to the suffering of the people on the ground
and to stop the violence and hostilities.
All efforts should seek to create an environment
that is conducive to reaching a comprehensive, fair
and sustainable solution that ensures the protection of
human life, dignity and safety, as well as regional peace
and security, while taking into account the legitimate
interests of all parties concerned. The work of UNRWA
and the efforts of the international community need to
be supported in order to address humanitarian concerns.
We sincerely hope that in 2019, the Council will
demonstrate its strong and effective leadership through
action-oriented efforts and call on all parties concerned
to abide by its decisions and resolutions with a view
to achieving a peaceful and long-lasting solution. Viet
Nam stands ready to support all efforts in that regard.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We highly
appreciate the efforts of your predecessor in his
excellent conduct of the work of the Council last month.
I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its election to the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China and to wish
it every success. We have confidence in the ability of
the Palestinian delegation to fully undertake that task.
Last month, we heard a briefing by Mr. Mladenov in
which he described alarming facts, the horror of which
he has reiterated today (see S/PV.8429). Those facts
reflect developments in occupied Palestine, including
the continued Israeli military occupation of Palestinian
territories; the confiscation of land; the demolition of
Palestinian homes in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; and the expansion of settlements, which has
become a genuine threat to the two-State solution. Those
facts also reflect the dangerous escalation of violence
against Palestinian protesters and demonstrators, the
increased threat of war and the lack of any progress in
implementing resolution 2334 (2016), which calls for an
end to all settlement activities. However, that resolution
is deliberately and blatantly violated every day by the
Israelis, particularly in East Jerusalem,
Regrettably, today’s briefing lacked any glimmer of
hope. All such reports lead only to further frustration
and disappointment among us as States Members of the
United Nations. What about the Palestinian citizens who
remain under the oppression of occupation on a daily
basis and enduring the repressive blockade in Gaza?
In the light of all those violations of international
legitimacy and Security Council resolutions, the
situation in Palestine today makes it incumbent upon
the Council to be more effective in order to preserve
its credibility, which is jeopardized by the Palestinian
question. The most important step that the Security
Council and the United Nations can take is to implement
General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on the protection
of Palestinian civilians, as mentioned in the report of the

S/PV. 8449

Secretary-General contained in document ES-10/794.
We urge all States and civil society organizations to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians and
to establish a practical and effective mechanism to
implement the General Assembly resolution and the
Secretary-General’s report.
We also call on the Secretary-General to step up
his efforts to facilitate the accession of the State of
Palestine to full membership of the United Nations
in order to preserve the two-State solution, which is
currently in genuine jeopardy. We call on the Security
Council to implement resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirms that the Israeli settlements constitute a
flagrant violation under international law and a major
obstacle to achieving peace.
We also call on the international community to
respect the legal status of the holy city of Jerusalem
and not to recognize any unilateral policy that would
alter the legal status of Jerusalem, since such unilateral
measures violate international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We urge the United Nations to also
work on finding a sustainable solution to the financial
deficit faced by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East through
predictable and sustainable mechanisms in order to
avoid exacerbating the status of Palestinian refugees.
We must offer the Palestinian people a glimmer
of hope. We have only described their plight, as
Mr. Mladenov stated in his briefing. However, we
must work to preserve the peace process in accordance
with relevant international resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the terms of reference recognized by the
United Nations.
Moreover, everything I have said also applies to
the occupied Syrian Golan. In that regard, we stress
the importance of the unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab territories and their freedom from
occupation of all kinds, which is to be condemned.
The occupying Power should not believe that what
is happening in Syria today will persuade the Arab
peoples to accept its occupation of the Syrian Golan,
no matter what illegal measures it takes to alter the
identity of the Syrian citizens in the Golan and detach
them from their motherland Syria, as it sought to do
by imposing municipal elections in the occupied Syrian
Golan, in gross violation of international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

19-0167859/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I congratulate your friendly
country on its accession to membership of the Security
Council and on assuming the presidency of the Council.
I also congratulate the new non-permanent members.
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his thorough briefing this morning.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Libya on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.
Today’s meeting is being held following a year
of suffering for the Palestinian people, during which
their rights were violated with increased violence.
The number of victims of violence has nearly reached
300. In addition to the stalemate in the peace process,
this deterioration of the security situation is another
factor underscoring the urgent need to reach sustained
solutions and for all stakeholders to work towards
that goal.
Achieving a permanent, just and comprehensive
peace requires the settlement of final status issues
through a serious negotiation process between the two
sides — Palestinian and Israeli — on the basis of agreed
upon terms of reference, including the Arab Peace
Initiative; the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital; the ending of the Israeli occupation of
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and Lebanese territory; the immediate
and complete cessation of settlement activities; the
return of refugees; and the restoration of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

22/01/2019

our Palestinian brothers, especially in the light of the
extremely deteriorated situation in the Gaza Strip due to
the continued unjust blockade that has been imposed on
Gaza for over a decade. The recent urgent humanitarian
assistance provided by the State of Qatar contributed
greatly to alleviating the severe electricity shortage
and helped to prevent the closure of the schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East as a result of a shortage
in funding.
The Syrian people continue to suffer from the
catastrophic consequences of the ongoing Syrian crisis,
especially the Syrian refugees and displaced persons
who are enduring the harsh winter. In that regard,
His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani,
Emir of the State of Qatar, allocated $50 million to
alleviate their suffering. That humanitarian response
was undoubtedly essential. However, the only way
to put an end to this suffering and to the threats to
international peace and security arising from this crisis
is through a political solution that meets the aspirations
of all the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), and
maintains the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria. Until a political transition
is achieved and national reconciliation is completed,
those who have perpetrated crimes that violate
international law and international humanitarian law
must be held accountable.

The issue of Jerusalem is of particular importance
owing to its centrality in the light of the ongoing
tensions. In that regard, we reject any attempt to change
the current status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and holy Muslim
and Christian sites, especially Al-Aqsa Mosque.

Despite the many serious crises in our region, an
additional irresponsible crisis was created through the
unjust blockade on the State of Qatar for over a year
and a half in an attempt to harm the State of Qatar
and tarnish its reputation. The campaigns of hatred
and deception carried out by countries of the blockade
failed to undermine the standing of the State of Qatar
or the steadfastness of its people. However, this crisis
has had dangerous consequences on the stability of the
region and the collective efforts of the Gulf Cooperation
Council to address threats and common challenges.

The State of Qatar continues to uphold its position
and policy in favour of playing a positive role in
achieving peace, stability and a just, permanent and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.
The State of Qatar recognizes the importance of
stability and an environment conducive to peace.
We will therefore pursue our efforts to contribute
positively to alleviating the humanitarian suffering of

Furthermore, the blockade has caused several
serious violations of the human rights of Qatari citizens
and all those residing in the State of Qatar. These
continued illegal unilateral measures set a precedent
and have had an impact on international relations based
on international law and good-neighbourliness. A
decisive stand should be taken against them to ensure
an immediate end to this unjust and illegal blockade.

60/66

19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The State of Qatar is committed to resolving the
crisis through dialogue in a way that guarantees its
sovereignty and puts an end to those illegal measures.
We have renewed our commitment to the mediation
carried out by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Emir of the sisterly State of
Kuwait. We appreciate his efforts and those of other
States to resolve the crisis. Qatar’s wise approach to this
crisis has been clear from the outset and is in accordance
with international law and international mechanisms
for settling disputes. This was reflected in the ruling
issued by the International Court of Justice in July 2018
in favour of the State of Qatar against the United Arab
Emirates for violating the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
I started my statement by speaking of the bleak
picture of 2018. Perhaps it would be appropriate for me
to conclude by expressing hope that the New Year will
be different and that all stakeholders will undertake
serious and genuine measures to resolve the Palestinian
question in a just, permanent and comprehensive way
and to wisely address all other crises in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate, and I
thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his
valuable briefing.
The year 2018 was challenging in terms of the
question of Palestine. In the absence of any political
horizon, mutual distrust deepened and civilian casualties
mounted. As a new year begins, we look to the parties
to take concrete steps to restore confidence and build
the right environment to eventually renew negotiations.
We reiterate our call for the cessation of all acts of
violence, provocations and incitement. Japan urges the
Government of Israel to freeze its settlement activities.
We call on the Palestinian parties to sincerely engage
in reconciliation in order to bring Gaza back under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. The Government
of Japan is determined to continue its engagement to
help keep the hope for a peaceful future alive.
Developing economic independence for Palestine
is a prerequisite for achieving the two-State solution.
Japan places importance on providing support in the
area of information and communications technology
(ICT), since ICT will enable Palestine to be connected
to global markets despite its geographical limitations.

S/PV. 8449

This year, at the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, we intend
to expand programmes to the ICT area, including by
establishing, inside the Park, a Palestinian industrial
capacity development centre focusing on ICT.
With respect to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in 2018 Japan provided its highest-ever
contribution, focusing more on education and health
care. We are committed to continuing our support to
UNRWA and encourage others to do likewise.
During the last high-level week, Prime Minister
Abe announced a new programme to invite elementary
and junior high school teachers from Gaza to Japan
each year. The first group of teachers will visit Japan
in March. We hope that programmes such as those will
help Palestinian youth find hope for the future rather
than turn to radicalism. Ultimately, Japan continues to
believe that the issue of Israel and Palestine, including
final-status issues, should be resolved through
negotiations, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and past agreements.
Let me also take this opportunity to the wider
region. With regard to Yemen, Japan welcomes the
breakthrough last month in Stockholm. We commend
the work of the Security Council to support the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including
through the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019) and the establishment of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement. We hope
that the Agreement will lead to peace in Yemen and
provide a swift resolution to the immense humanitarian
challenges the Yemeni people face.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to speak on behalf of the
120 member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM) during today’s quarterly open debate
to address an issue to which we have historically
attached particular importance — the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
As this is the first time we take the floor this
month, allow us to express our best wishes to your
delegation, Sir, in steering the work of this important
organ this month. We would also like to extend our

19-0167861/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sincere congratulations to all of the new members that
have joined the Security Council this year, in particular
Indonesia and South Africa, which, together with the
Dominican Republic, are also joining the Council’s
Non-Aligned Movement caucus.
Another year has passed and the Palestinian
question remains unresolved. Let us briefly review some
important 2018 statistics. Two hundred and ninety-five
Palestinians were killed and more than 29,000 were
injured by the Israeli occupying forces, which may
translate into the highest number of casualties since
Israel’s war on the Gaza Strip in 2014. At least 5,617
new settlements were built and at least 636 structures
were demolished or seized in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, which resulted in
the forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian
civilians, including 216 children and 127 women. In
addition, the occupying Power has issued more than
13,000 demolition orders on Palestinian homes and
other properties, including 40 schools, which are still
pending. To date, approximately 6,000 Palestinians
remain in captivity under the brutal occupation and
are subjected to extremely inhumane treatment without
ever surrendering.
As we reflect on that harsh and sad reality, NAM
takes this opportunity to reaffirm once again its
permanent and unwavering support for the Palestinian
people, their inalienable rights and their just cause, in
particular given that the current situation on the ground
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is at a critical and clearly unsustainable
point. In that regard, the member States of the Movement
again reaffirm that the current Israeli occupation
and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole are a
serious threat to international peace and security and
require urgent attention and a solution, in accordance
with international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the United
Nations and other multilateral diplomacy instruments.
We firmly believe in multilateralism and, as stipulated
in General Assembly resolution 73/127, promoted by
our Movement, we remain committed to the settlement
of disputes through peaceful mechanisms, including
through diplomacy.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility. It
must uphold its obligations under the Charter and act
accordingly to implement its own resolutions. Those
resolutions not only constitute the basis for a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the conflict, but are also
62/66

22/01/2019

legally binding on all States Members of the United
Nations. That is why we are deeply concerned about the
fact that, for far too long, the Council has been unable
to fulfil its mandate on such an important issue, due to
the use of the veto by one of its permanent members. We
are also concerned about its failure to hold Israel, the
occupying Power, accountable for all of its violations
and disregard for the authority of the Council.
Notwithstanding everything I have mentioned,
NAM continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016)
offers the most viable path to peace, by establishing the
essential requirements and parameters for achieving a
just settlement on the basis of the two-State solution,
based on pre-1967 borders, and while respecting
the terms of reference historically endorsed by the
international community, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the land for peace principle, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map. That should ensure
that the Palestinian people enjoy their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination
and independence in the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We therefore call for the full
and effective implementation of the resolution. This
important organ, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, must therefore insist
that resolution 2334 (2016) be respected, in particular
by the occupying Power.
Similarly, the member States of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for, and the
implementation of, all other relevant resolutions,
including those related to the total cessation of all
Israeli settlement activities and those related to the
status of occupied East Jerusalem. That would create
the necessary conditions to end the occupation,
justly resolve the conflict in all its aspects and make
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security possible, for the
benefit of both peoples, the region and the international
community as a whole. It is imperative that immediate
action be taken, in accordance with international law
and United Nations resolutions, to remedy the current
situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster
an environment conducive to the quest for peace. It
is also essential to avoid the adoption of unilateral,
provocative or arbitrary measures, which serve only
to embolden Israel to continue its illegal policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8449

The Movement continues to be very concerned
about the situation in the Gaza Strip, particularly on the
humanitarian front, where the situation unfortunately
continues to deteriorate from day to day. We therefore
reiterate our call for the Israeli blockade to be completely
lifted, since it continues to inflict unspeakable
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on the
more than 2 million Palestinian men, women and
children in Gaza. We want to emphasize once again
that this crisis must be addressed comprehensively
and in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law and
all the relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
context of the overall situation resulting from Israel’s
continued illegitimate, hostile foreign occupation of
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, since
1967, and of all of the unequivocal calls for an end to an
occupation that has lasted for more than half a century.

administration in this area, including attempting to
exercise sovereignty over it by calling local elections in
four Syrian localities — are null and void and have no
legal effect. Accordingly, and in line with our principled
position, we once again demand that Israel comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, as
outlined in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Furthermore, as Israel has clearly renounced its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention to protect Palestinian civilians, the
States members of the Movement reiterate their call to
the international community to ensure Palestinians’
protection in the Gaza Strip and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, in order to
alleviate the occupied population’s serious insecurity
and prevent further losses of innocent lives. Failure to
do so could further aggravate the situation and lead to
the tragic loss of more civilian lives. In that regard, the
Movement reiterates its deep concern that Israel will
not be held accountable for all the violations it has
committed, many of which could even be considered
war crimes. The lack of justice only enables impunity
and destabilizes the situation on the ground, which in
turn diminishes the prospects for peace. That is why
we continue to call for taking international action,
especially by the Security Council, to put an end to the
occupying Power’s systematic violations against the
occupied Palestinian civilians and make it accountable
for those violations. Israel must abide by its obligations
and responsibilities under international law.

To sum up, at the beginning of this new year of 2019,
the States members of the Movement would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate its calls to the international
community to act collectively and responsibly in
upholding international law and intensifying every
necessary effort in support of the Palestinian cause,
with the ultimate goal of putting an end to Israel’s
foreign occupation of Palestine and East Jerusalem,
an injustice that has lasted for more than 51 years, and
after more than 70 years have passed since the disaster
and tragedy that struck the Palestinian people in 1948,
as a result of which they lost their homeland and were
uprooted and forcibly displaced from their homes,
becoming refugees whose suffering has lasted to the
present day.

With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, we reaffirm that any measures or actions
that the occupying Power Israel may take or have
taken — such as the illegal decision of 14 December
1981, aimed at altering the legal status, physical
character, demographic composition and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel’s measures to implement its jurisdiction and

With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm the need
for Israel to withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including the areas of the Shaba’a farmlands, the
Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar
village up to the Blue Line. We also urge Israel to
cease its persistent grave violations of Lebanon’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance
with the relevant international resolutions, particularly
resolution 1701 (2006).

In conclusion, NAM reaffirms its permanent
solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as its
unwavering support for their just cause. At the same
time, it renews its commitment to continuing to
strengthen and coordinate international efforts aimed at
promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects,
including the suffering of Palestinian refugees, on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). It is
our fervent hope that significant progress will be made
this year in the Palestinian people’s historic struggle
for justice and the fulfilment of their inalienable rights
and legitimate national aspirations, including the right
to self-determination, freedom and independence in an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

19-0167863/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I thank you for convening today’s
meeting and congratulate the Security Council’s new
members. I welcome the Foreign Minister of Indonesia’s
participation in this important meeting.
I align myself with the statements made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We welcome Palestine’s assumption of the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China and call for
its full membership in the United Nations.
Palestine’s situation deteriorated last year. Israel
killed at least 295 Palestinian civilians and injured
more than 29,000. Many of the dead and about 7,000
of the injured were under 18 years old. That is a clear
example of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Also in 2018, more Palestinian homes were demolished
and more illegal Israeli settlements built in blatant
violation of international law. And there are more new
plans to demolish more Palestinian homes, confiscate
more Palestinian lands and build more illegal Israeli
settlements, which will mean the forced displacement
of even more Palestinian families.
Last year, Israel also intensified its decade-long
illegal inhumane blockade of Gaza, whose continuation
will drastically worsen the already grave humanitarian
situation. In 2018, by enacting a law designed to ensure
Jewish supremacy over its other citizens, Israel legalized
racism. Very recently, it inaugurated an apartheid
highway that features a large concrete wall, one side
of which is open only to Israeli vehicles and the other
only to Palestinian vehicles. That is not surprising.
Racism is in the very nature of the Israeli regime. First,
it constructed a racial segregation wall, then it enacted
a racial discrimination law, and it has now constructed
an apartheid highway. That is extremely shameful. It
must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
We should also strongly reject and condemn the
recognition of Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the Israeli capital
as well as the continued occupation of parts of Lebanon
and the Syrian Golan by Israel. Such acts are material
breaches of international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
64/66

22/01/2019

Last but not least, let us revisit the main question:
why has the systematic violation of the inherent rights
of Palestinians continued unabated over the past 70
years? The answer is simple: by shielding Israel, the
United States has rendered the Council completely
ineffective with respect to Israel. Consequently, Israel
has been emboldened by impunity. Instead of facing
punishment, it has been rewarded to continuously and
brazenly commit all international crimes.
That is why, during its short lifespan, Israel has
waged more than 15 wars, occupied the territories of
Arab countries, invaded all its neighbours without
exception, attacked other countries in the region and
beyond, from the Middle East to Africa, and possessed
every kind of weapon of mass destruction. The list
goes on.
In recent years, Israel has repeatedly attacked
countries in the region and brazenly assumed
responsibility. What action has the Council taken
against such material breaches of the Charter of the
United Nations? Have we heard anything from the
United States except biased statements in support of
Israel? Have those breaches been condemned by certain
Western members of the Council?
Israel has been emboldened to the extent that
very recently, it stated that it had developed offensive
missiles that could reach anywhere in the area and any
target, thereby implicitly threatening all countries in
the region. Likewise, some time ago, Israel threatened
Iran with nuclear annihilation. That is, of course, a
wishful dream.
The gross and systematic violation of the territory
and sovereignty of countries in the region by Israel must
stop. That country must be held accountable for all such
breaches. Recalling Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter, we stress that all countries in the region have
an inherent right to defend themselves against any
armed attack by Israel. No one can deny or suspend
that right. They will decide how and when to exercise it.
The only option now is to put an end to such
impunity by holding Israel accountable for its crimes
against the Palestinians. That can ensure the application
of international law and deter its future violation. That
is why we believe that the world should continue to
support the realization of Palestinian rights and reject
any further occupation, aggression, oppression or
intimidation. We will continue to do so.
19-01678

22/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank the Dominican Republic for convening today’s
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council — Belgium, the Dominican
Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa, which
became members of the Council this month.
The Government and the people of the Maldives
attach great importance to the issue of the Middle East,
especially the question of Palestine. I wish to reiterate
my Government’s steadfast support to the Council and
to the Secretary-General in all ongoing efforts to bring
lasting peace to the Middle East.
The conflict in Palestine has been going on for seven
decades despite the numerous discussions, debates and
resolutions adopted at the United Nations, including
by the Council. To this day, the illegal occupation of
Palestine continues with the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian-owned property, the building of illegal
settlements and the gross violation of the basic human
rights of the Palestinian people.
The Government of Maldives condemns those acts
of aggression and calls on Israel to lift the blockade
imposed on the civilian population in Gaza and to cease
the disproportionate attacks on Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. The restrictions imposed
on the movement of people and goods into and out of
the Gaza Strip must be lifted immediately to ensure the
safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Security
Council must take urgent action to protect civilians
and to ensure the delivery of the basic humanitarian
assistance much needed by millions of Palestinians.
Through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980),
the Security Council declared null and void the Israeli
occupation of Palestine, the annexation of the holy city
of Jerusalem and the moving of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem. It also declared it illegal for any country to
decide to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and
to move its embassy there. Through resolution 2334
(2016), the Council called upon all States to distinguish,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
Yet we are witnessing that some countries are ignoring
the Council’s resolutions.

S/PV. 8449

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based
on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and harmony with
Israel, is the best and only solution to the conflict. It is
depressing to see that such a solution, to which all sides
in the conflict once subscribed in the past, seems to
move further and further away.
The Maldives therefore calls on Israel to fully
implement the resolutions of the Security Council and
to respect the legal obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also urge the Security Council and
the entire United Nations membership to redouble their
efforts to end the conflict so as to bring meaningful
and lasting peace to the people of Palestine, as well
as Israel.
The conflict in Syria has already claimed the lives
of hundreds of thousands of people, including children.
It has levelled entire cities and towns to the ground and
reduced them to rubble. The resulting environment of
fear and uncertainty has caused millions of Syrians
to flee the country. Neighbouring Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey struggle to cope with that mass exodus of
refugees, further exacerbating the humanitarian crisis
faced by the Syrian people. Yet the conflict is locked in
a stalemate with no end in sight.
We are encouraged by the recent discussions,
including the Brussels conference on supporting
the future of Syria and the region, co-chaired by the
European Union and the United Nations in April 2018.
We acknowledge that the conference provided an
opportunity to gather political support for the peace
process and to mobilize aid for the Syrians. However,
the United Nations and the international community
must do more to reinvigorate talks in order to reach a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The war in Yemen has affected millions of
civilians, and children are the hardest hit. The Maldives
supports the United Nations-mediated ceasefire agreed
to by all the parties in December last year and the
establishment of humanitarian corridors supervised by
the United Nations. The Maldives is encouraged by the
Council’s decision to adopt resolution 2452 (2019) on
16 January to establish a special political mission to
support the implementation of the ceasefire agreement
of 13 December 2018.
Conflicts such as those in Yemen and Syria are a
breeding ground for terrorism, a global menace that pays

19-0167865/66

S/PV.8449

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

no heed to borders and does not distinguish between the
young and the elderly or women and men or respect
any religion or culture. It is a global threat to peace
and security, and therefore requires a global solution
rather than a local one. The international community
needs better coordination, information-sharing and
cooperative strategies to tackle the threat of terrorism.
The Security Council is the most vital organ of the
United Nations. It has the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. It therefore needs to
do more to ensure that its authority and legitimacy
are not compromised. The Council needs to step up
its efforts to ensure that its decisions are respected by
everyone — every Member State and every member of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel): With regard to the statement
made by the representative of Iran, the firing of
surface-to-surface missiles by the Quds Force to Israel
from Syrian territory is evidence of Iran’s intention
behind its entrenchment in Syria. Iran seeks for Syria,
like Lebanon, to be a launching pad for the products of
its missile programme, with Israel as the target. That is
the very programme that was prohibited by resolution
2231 (2015). It is indicative of Iran’s imperialistic
and subversive enterprise that it is exporting missiles

66/66

22/01/2019

and terror throughout the region, in violation of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006) and 2216 (2015),
and proliferating its destructive revolutionary ideology.
Iranian missiles bear a chillingly unequivocal slogan,
“Death to Israel”. Threatening the destruction of a State
Member of the United Nations is a blatant violation of
the very core of the Charter of the United Nations. It
jeopardizes global peace and security
With respect to the statement made by the
representative of Lebanon, let me stress once again
that Israel is not interested in escalation. But, as we
all know, the Iranian web of terrorism took deep root
in Lebanon. While Israel is dealing with an Iranian
transnational proxy of terror, whose very existence
is a blatant violation of the United Nations Charter,
the protective measures we take — the destruction of
Hizbullah’s tunnels and the building of the security
barrier — are entirely on our side of the Blue Line.
The Government of Lebanon has a clear responsibility
to preserve calm and prevent Hizbullah’s illegal and
destabilizing activities in Lebanon.
With regard to the statement made by the
representative of Syria, to the world’s great dismay, the
Al-Assad regime, which has been terrorizing its own
people for a decade, is now offering itself as a platform
for Iranian terror. The international community should
unite in countering that element of terror.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-01678
