United Nations

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6581st meeting
Tuesday, 12 July 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig/Mr. Berger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Ms. De Oliveira
Mr. Liu Bing
Mr. Quintana
Mr. Gonnet
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Ikuru
Mr. Madureira
Ms. Khvan
Mr. Murongwana
Mr. Green
Ms. Edelstein

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2011/250)
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/409)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-41151 (E)

*1141151*

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sri
Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Germany for convening this open
debate under its presidency, and also acknowledge the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Germany this
morning.
The
useful
work
done
by
the
Secretary-General’s Office, the Working Group on
Children
and Armed
Conflict,
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the UNICEF and other associated
agencies will no doubt add substantial value to
addressing this issue so vitally important to our times.
Sri Lanka endorses the three side events that were
organized by the Permanent Mission of Germany in
association with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Permanent
Mission of Canada and the United Nations Programme
on Youth in June. They incrementally advanced our
understanding of these issues. The relevant discussions
underlined the urgency of concerted action at the
national and international levels to contain and halt the
repugnant practice of child recruitment for armed
combat. To deprive a child of his smiles and dreams
and burden him with gore and machine guns is an
appalling indictment of the values of the certain groups
and individuals.
However, Sri Lanka has serious reservations
about the report issued by Conflict Dynamics
International under the auspices of the Permanent
Missions of Canada and Germany. For instance, its
assertion that individuals implicated in crimes against
children in armed conflict continue to hold high
Government positions is sadly incomplete and
misleading. My Government consistently encouraged
former armed groups to denounce violence and to enter
the democratic process as a part of the reconciliation
effort. Following this approach, the Tamil Makkal
Viduthalai Pulighal (TMVP), a breakaway faction of
the terrorist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
ceased to be an armed group and entered the political
process as a registered party.

2

Like in other countries where former terrorist
groups have transformed themselves into legitimate
political parties, the TMVP has also joined the
democratic process. It has released all child combatants
under a tripartite action plan with UNICEF and the
Government. The adult cadres are very much part of
the democratic process, which has had a salutary
impact across the board. It appears that the report will
stoke embers of a bitter past and politicize the issue of
accountability
related
to
child
recruitment.
Unfortunately, these complex underlying realities have
been ignored.
This debate takes place against the backdrop of
the increasing frequency and intensity of the identified
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.
Children are the most vulnerable group, and they
therefore require conscious protection. We therefore
welcome the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/250) on adopting targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children. In Sri Lanka, it was clear
that the child soldiers of the LTTE were cannon fodder
for the movement who were sent to early graves.
On the recommendation of filing systematic
information on violations against children in reports
and recommendations to sanctions committees, we
would like to urge the Council and the Working Group
to ensure that the information so collected is objective,
accurate, reliable and verified by experts, including
forensic experts, and in an open and transparent
manner with all the members represented in the
country task forces where they exist. Paragraph 3 of
resolution 1612 (2005), which clearly states that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism must work in
close consultation with the country concerned, must be
strictly adhered to. We add this note recalling Sri
Lanka’s unpleasant experience with the global
horizontal note filed from 1 May to 31 July 2009.
Many reports had been made to the Council without
reference to the country task force. Inaccurate
reporting would cast doubt on the credibility of both
reporting sources and the Secretary-General’s report
itself.
The progress made by Sri Lanka in realizing its
policy of zero tolerance in the case of child
recruitment,
including
the
rehabilitation
and
reintegration of former child combatants under its
“Bring Back the Child” campaign, is by any standard
salutary.

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

According to a UNICEF report made public
recently, over 60 per cent of the LTTE fighting forces
from 1983 to 2002 consisted of boys and girls under 18
years, including orphans harvested after the tsunami.
UNICEF recorded over 5,700 cases of child
recruitment by the LTTE from 2003 to 2009. Others
have suggested a figure closer to 20,000. Child soldiers
were often deployed to attack villagers with machetes
and used as suicide bombers, especially the girls.
Hundreds of such attacks were launched. In the final
stages of the conflict, children were thrown up in large
numbers as cannon fodder. More than one generation
of children were sacrificed to realize a megalomaniac’s
terrorist dream. These are our children.
Tremendous progress is being made in child
tracing and family reunions. According to a recently
released UNICEF study, 64 per cent of the missing
Tamil children had been recruited by the LTTE. Many
may have died in mosquito infested jungles.
In the post-conflict phase, significant attention is
being paid to restoring and rebuilding schools and to
the release of schools to the educational authorities.
Over 135 schools in the north that were abandoned
have now been rehabilitated and are functioning
normally. Sri Lanka provides free education to all its
children without distinction from kindergarten to
university level.
Recognizing that children formerly associated
with armed groups continue to be highly vulnerable,
the monitoring of the reintegrated former combatants
will continue. The Government recognizes that these
children should be placed under the purview of the
Department of Social Services. Children are an asset
and the country will invest heavily in their future, as it
had done in the past.
Unfortunately, despite the progress I have
outlined, Sri Lanka continues to remain on the naming
and shaming list in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The unresolved cases relating to five
children appear to be the reason for this. In comparison
with other situations in the world, this would appear to
be trite and unreasonable. The individual allegedly
responsible for the situation of the aforementioned
children was indicted for criminal intimidation, an
offence under the penal code. He pleaded guilty and
was convicted and sentenced to two years rigorous
imprisonment, suspended for 10 years with a fine of
250,000 Sri Lanka rupees.

11-41151

We call on the Council and the Working Group to
undertake a holistic and fair assessment of the Sri
Lankan case and to de-list Sri Lanka from the naming
and shaming list. Sri Lanka now has a representative
on the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and we
intend to play a very active role there. It is pertinent to
recall in this context a proposal made by a civil society
representative, Ms. Carla Stea, at the meeting convened
on June 30. She proposed that the Council consider
adopting an honours list for countries that have
registered appreciable progress in addressing issues of
former child soldiers, especially those countries that
are also parties to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The three-tier categorization maintained in the
methodology of the annual United States Trafficking in
Persons Report is also relevant and instructive in this
context. A corresponding list, we believe, would be
forward-looking and constructive. It would also
encourage more countries with the problem of child
recruitment to be willing partners to action plans.
We also agree with the views expressed by some
representatives during the side event held on 30 June
that the discourse on the issue of children and armed
conflict should involve the wider United Nations
membership if it is to be truly meaningful.
Furthermore, the mandate only covers situations of a
conflict. Limiting the discussion to the Security
Council and allowing the non-Security Council
members to speak on the issue only during open
debates really does not accord the issue the
seriousness, focus and attention it deserves among the
wider membership. Broadening the space of this debate
would bode well for ensuring collective responsibility
and effective monitoring.
The President: May I remind speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Longer statements can, of course, be
distributed in writing.
I give the floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez Arnillas (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): I welcome the convening of this open debate
on an issue that my country deems of great importance:
children and armed conflict. I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/250) on this
issue, as well as Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for the
information she provided in her capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children

3

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

and Armed Conflict and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF.
The Security Council in recent years has adopted
a series of resolutions that have provided the
international community with a legislative framework
for enabling progress to be made in the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict and in the
aftermath of conflict. The progress made in this respect
has been the result of the growing concern about the
issue as well as the political resolve of protagonists to
take concrete action. The resolution adopted today by
the Security Council represents a further step forward
in the gradual process of protecting children in armed
conflict.
However, the situation of children in armed
conflict remains of concern. Hence, in the view of the
delegation of Peru, it is imperative that we should
redouble our efforts to put an end to the recruiting and
use of children in armed conflict and take drastic
measures to punish those who perpetrate sexual
violence, maim or kill children in armed conflict.
Impunity in such cases can in no way be tolerated by
the international community.
In this report, the Secretary-General also referred
with concern to the increasing number of attacks on
schools and hospitals where children are among the
principal civilian victims. My country therefore
welcomes the important decision taken by the Security
Council to allow the Secretary-General to include,
annexed to his report, a list of those parties which in an
armed conflict, in violation of international law,
repeatedly attack schools and hospitals as well as those
who repeatedly attack, or threaten to attack, those who
are protected in connection with schools and hospitals.
Peru therefore believes that the inclusion of this new
criterion will contribute to providing greater and more
comprehensive protection to children in times of armed
conflict.
My delegation reiterates that it is important to
continue to strengthen communication between the
sanctions committees and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
in order to make it possible to adopt measures or
exchange information so as to provide greater
protection to children or impose appropriate sanctions
on those parties that commit serious violations against
them. It is important for the sanctions committees to
consider the possibility of including the situation of

4

children in its mandates. In that respect, the progress
made in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be viewed as a good precedent, as
suggested by the Secretary-General in his report.
It is also important to continue to include in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, as well as in
peacebuilding missions, specific provisions with the
clear and specific objective of protecting children.
My country believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a fundamental role to play in
supporting plans and programmes aimed at
reintegrating children who are former combatants in
the various spheres of economic and social life in the
aftermath of a conflict. The support of the international
community is therefore essential to support national
endeavours to that end.
As my country has indicated on several
occasions, crucial to addressing this problem and the
issue of sexual violence against children in conflict is
the possession of information that makes it possible to
adopt preventive measures that allow for a rapid and
effective response. It is necessary to continue to
explore mechanisms that allow for a reliable exchange
of information on acts of sexual violence, in order to
take action to reduce and combat this scourge.
My delegation believes that this exchange of
information must be substantively strengthened among
United Nations agencies, the various Security Council
committees and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Of equal importance is capacitybuilding and awareness-raising of military personnel
deployed in the field so that they can adequately
respond to situations involving sexual violence.
The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is evidence of the
growing commitment of the Security Council to
protecting children in armed conflict. In that respect, it
is important that the appropriate administrative and
substantive support be provided so that it can carry out
its functions effectively, including field visits, which
are of great importance.
I wish also to acknowledge and commend the
devoted and unflagging work carried out by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and the important work being

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

done by UNICEF, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child and other relevant institutions.
Finally, there is a broad international legislative
framework providing appropriate protection to children
in times of both peace and armed conflict. Hence it is
necessary to continue to urge the parties to fulfil their
obligations and to enhance the mechanisms that
promote that process.
We cannot waver in our efforts, allow impunity in
such cases, or yield to circumstances. It is an
undeniable and imperative duty of the international
community to guarantee peace, development and a
climate conducive to the enjoyment of human rights for
future generations. Peru is firmly committed to that
lofty objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish to
express strong appreciation for your interest in this
frank discussion on children and armed conflict. I wish
also to convey my very strong support for the diligence
of the Secretary-General in presenting the report
(S/2011/250) on time, for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the work she has put in and
for the Executive Director of UNICEF as well.
I need not go in detail about love for children and
how it transcends social, cultural and all developmental
factors. The United Nations Charter itself speaks of the
noble objective of saving succeeding generations. The
international community has conceived the Convention
on the Rights of the Child; Pakistan was one of the six
co-initiators of that summit in 1990 which provided the
due fillip for the ratification of the Convention.
Pakistan also takes pride in being actively
involved in promoting and protecting the rights of the
child. We have a national commission for child welfare
in development, in collaboration with UNICEF and the
International Labour Organization, and we have
worked for legislation on the progressive elimination
of child labour, the rehabilitation of working children,
formal and non-formal education, free vocational
training and skill development. The United Nations
agencies have been very helpful throughout this
process.
We have also signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of
children, and have worked on the Optional Protocol on

11-41151

the involvement of children in armed conflict, which is
at a very advanced stage and within this year will see
fruition. I do not think that anyone in this Chamber
will ignore these noble intentions; but even hell has a
path paved with good intentions, and we must have
what I consider strictures where the mandate is
concerned. The children and armed conflict mandate
was created by the Council precisely to look into such
situations, to ensure that the rights of children are
protected in the worst environments of conflict. This is
very important; indeed it is the crucial core of what
needs to be achieved.
There are thousands and thousands of derivations
of actions that this body takes. How many can we
stretch into without losing the direction of the core? I
think that all other situations should be aptly covered
by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and other
relevant United Nations agencies. As a refresher, I
would like to recall that in 2001 we adopted resolution
1379 (2001), of which paragraph 16 is the important
feature. That paragraph speaks of parties to armed
conflict that recruit or use children in violation of the
international obligations applicable to them, in
situations that are on the Security Council’s agenda or
that may be brought to the attention of the Council by
the Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 99 of
the Charter, which in his opinion — and I want to
underline this — may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Then in 2009, in resolution 1882 (2009), we
added, in paragraph 19 (a), the words “or in other
situations of concern”. The important phrase here is “in
accordance with paragraph 3 of the present resolution”.
Paragraph 3 says that the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s reports should be “in accordance with the
conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution
1379 (2001)”, which I just read. That remains the core,
which cannot be in any way mitigated or set aside.
When there have been attempts to do so, the
Office of Legal Affairs points out the difficulties. In a
note to the Special Representative in 2009, the Office
wrote that that this terminology has been used by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in the title of the annex,
without a clear mandate of the Security Council nor,
for that matter, its endorsement, and that that situation
gives rise to legal, political and practical difficulties
for the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
and the Secretariat as a whole.

5

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Today, the Council has decided to amend this
further, and in paragraph 22 (a) the wording about
situations of concern has been removed and replaced
by “or in other situations”. So we should start to lose
any ambiguity and understand where we stand to do
this good work. The work is exemplary, but it starts
moving elsewhere. I endorse what my Indian colleague
said earlier. We have four trigger mechanisms; let us
keep them going. Let us not make things contentious.
That is what the United Nations is all about: the letter
of the law. Who better than the Security Council to
know about that?
I would like to say that the reference to Pakistan,
from my Government’s point of view, is misleading
and serves to accord undeserved respectability to
terrorists and criminals — which would be greatly
unfortunate. There are no provisions for situations
other than armed conflict.
In conclusion, I have been asked by my
Government to condemn in the strongest possible terms
any use of children by extremists or any other groups
to promote their nihilistic agenda, and to say that my
Government is taking appropriate action to stop such
practices. At the same time, we sincerely hope that the
future reports of the Secretary-General will remain
higher on objectivity but squarely correspond to the
given mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me begin by
joining others in congratulating Germany on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. On a more personal note, Mr. President, it is a
pleasure to see you in the chair. My delegation also
congratulates and thanks Germany for holding this
open debate, which allows States that would not
otherwise have the chance to present their views on
this important issue to do so.
Thailand attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children. We
uphold the best interests of the child in our national
policy and its implementation, particularly the right to
education and universal access to it, which is
guaranteed by the Constitution. We also share the
concern of the international community over the issue
of children and armed conflict.

6

We note the efforts and intentions of the Council,
as evidenced in today’s adoption of resolution 1998
(2011), to better protect children in situations of armed
conflict. We support the effective implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue and
would like to offer a few modest suggestions on ways
to further improve work on this important issue.
First, according to resolution 1379 (2001) and
subsequent resolutions, the scope of the children and
armed conflict mandate continues to cover armed
conflict situations that are on the Security Council’s
agenda or that may be brought to the attention of the
Security Council by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
come to our attention, and as my Pakistani colleague
has mentioned, that the Office of Legal Affairs has
stated, in the 2009 United Nations Juridical Yearbook,
its opinion regarding the mandate on children and
armed conflict:
“You will recall that for a number of years this
terminology has been used by the SRSG for
children and armed conflict and included in the
title of annex II without a clear mandate of the
Security Council, nor, for that matter, its
endorsement; a situation which gave rise to legal,
political and practical difficulties for the
Secretary-General, the SRSG and the Secretariat
as a whole.”
In moving forward and resolving such a serious
systemic impediment, Thailand would like to suggest
that the work of the Special Representative be guided
by the definition of situations of armed conflict in
accordance with international law. In addition, we hope
that the Secretary-General will review and streamline
future reports consistent with the authorized mandate.
We are gravely concerned that any attempt to
reinterpret the mandate without due regard to the
original intention of the Security Council will
undermine this important mandate and the work of the
Council on this issue in the long-run.
Secondly, one can never emphasize enough the
importance of coordination. There are various
mechanisms within the United Nations system on
issues related to children, including the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Special Representative on violence against children,

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

the Special Rapporteur on the right to education and
the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography. Rather than
competing for work outside one’s authorized mandate,
coordination among those various mandate-holders is
vital to the overall effective work of the Organization
and to the rational use of its limited resources. In that
regard, we are considering proposing an initiative to
enhance coordination among the relevant United
Nations actors on children. We hope that such an
initiative will strengthen and increase the overall
effectiveness of all existing United Nations tools on the
protection of children.
Thirdly, it is imperative that information
collected and communicated in the production of the
reports on children and armed conflict be accurate,
objective, reliable and verifiable by the United Nations
system. That is the only kind of information that
should be the basis for listing parties to armed conflict
in the annex to the reports. In Thailand’s case, the
United Nations country team, including all United
Nations agencies, has unrestricted access to all areas of
the country and makes regular visits throughout the
year.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
concerned Governments is also indispensable. There
should be no denying that the Government has primary
responsibility and should play a central role in
promoting and protecting children’s rights, with the
support of the United Nations. Opinion and
information from the United Nations country teams on
the ground, in close coordination with concerned
Governments, should be given due recognition and
form the basis for the annual report. Allegations
unverified by the United Nations country team should
be removed from the report so as not to affect its
credibility.
Fourthly, we welcome the provision in resolution
1998 (2011), adopted today, requesting that Member
States communicate relevant information to the
Security Council on the implementation of its
resolutions on children and armed conflict. Such
engagement will further enhance coordination among
the various stakeholders, align child-related priorities
and ensure greater transparency and accountability in
carrying out this mandate.
My fifth and final point is that there is no onesize-fits-all solution to addressing challenges relating

11-41151

to children and armed conflict. Each situation is
fraught with political, socio-economic and cultural
considerations that make it a unique challenge. We
therefore urge the international community to invest
more in areas that can make a real difference on the
ground.
As was articulated in the statement, with which
we fully associate ourselves, delivered by the
representative of Switzerland this morning on behalf of
the Human Security Network, a group to which
Thailand belongs, we feel that demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation efforts are also crucial
to long-term impact. In this regard, investment in areas
such as education, basic health care, poverty
eradication, the rule of law, good governance and
respect for human rights is also paramount to
addressing
violence
against
children
more
comprehensively and effectively. At the end of the day,
we must take a more integrated, holistic approach to
the issue. Cooperation between United Nations
agencies and the Governments concerned should be
based on mutual respect and sincere dialogue in order
to facilitate the effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): The Republic of Hungary
fully aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the European Union. Let me
extend my gratitude to Ambassador Wittig for being a
driving force as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is indeed a great
pleasure for us to co-sponsor a resolution such as
resolution 1998 (2011), adopted this morning.
In our view, the Security Council, in adopting
today’s landmark resolution, will strengthen the United
Nations protection framework for children affected by
armed conflict. My country pays special attention to
preserving the cultural heritage of all nations, and to
preserving their identity and building on these things
both in peacetime and during conflict resolution. But
we are also convinced that no country’s culture and
heritage can endorse attacks on schools and hospitals.
We are convinced that the abduction of children from
such targets is a crime against the children, their
families and the communities concerned.
Hungary therefore welcomes the recommendation
to expand the triggers for listing to parties who attack

7

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

schools and hospitals. Only through an effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism can the
perpetrators be held accountable. It is of key
importance that perpetrators be held accountable for
violations and abuses for which they are responsible.
Hungary is of the firm opinion that grave violations
against children should be incorporated as criteria
meriting sanctions in the mandates of the Security
Council’s sanctions committees. We strongly believe
that the international community should spare no effort
in taking effective steps to respond and put an end to
attacks, abuses, assaults and any other kind of violence
aimed at children.
The Republic of Hungary strongly supports the
work of the Security Council. We would like to
reaffirm the importance of family, childhood, education
and mental and physical health in all people’s lives.
Hungary would also like to further encourage the
Council to maintain its campaign against the
recruitment and abuse of child soldiers.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): Thank you, Sir,
for giving the floor to the European Union and for
convening this important debate. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
Like other speakers, I thank Germany for its
strong commitment to advancing the approach of the
United Nations to the issue of children and armed
conflict and the hard work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict under the leadership of
Ambassador Wittig. I would also like to recognize
Secretary-General
Ban
Ki-moon’s
personal
commitment to this issue and to extend a warm
welcome to his Special Representative. The European
Union (EU) commends Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy’s
tireless efforts on behalf of the rights and well-being of
children facing armed conflict, and fully supports her
mandate and actions. Let me also express our

8

appreciation for UNICEF’s contribution to child
protection, which the EU supports.
The European Union greatly values the progress
made in recent years in creating a strong normative
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. We therefore welcome resolution
1998 (2011), adopted this morning, and the expansion
of the triggers for listing parties to attacks on schools
or hospitals, as well as to attacks or threats of attack
against protected persons connected to schools or
hospitals, including schoolchildren, patients and
education and medical personnel. We look forward to
comprehensive implementation of the resolution,
including through monitoring by country-level task
forces.
The European Union also joins in calls to
strengthen accountability and take further decisive
action against persistent perpetrators, including
through restrictive measures. When establishing or
reviewing the mandate of relevant sanctions
committees, the Security Council should include grave
violations against children as criteria meriting
sanctions. We also encourage the Security Council to
address accountability gaps where there are no
country-specific sanctions regimes, and to deal with
violations of applicable international law committed
against children in such cases.
The European Union also believes in the
importance of investigating, prosecuting and punishing
all those who commit grave violations against children.
We have stated on numerous occasions that every effort
must be made to end the culture of impunity, including
through the International Criminal Court and other
international criminal tribunals, which play a key role
in ensuring accountability in cases where a State is
unwilling or unable to fulfil its responsibilities. We
would like to recall here that children are specially
protected by the Rome Statute. We welcome the work
of the International Criminal Court in this field, of
which the ongoing trial of Thomas Lubanga for war
crimes is the first example.
Many in this Chamber today have highlighted the
crucial importance of decisive and comprehensive
implementation of our commitments. I would like to
use this occasion to update the Security Council on
recent steps taken by the European Union to enhance
its contribution to the work of protecting, rehabilitating
and empowering children — objectives that have been

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

high on its foreign policy, development and
humanitarian agenda for a number of years. I am happy
to report that, since December 2010, the European
Union has worked with a revised implementation
strategy for the EU guidelines on children and armed
conflict. European Union action in this area is firmly
based on Security Council resolutions and the Paris
Principles, and fully aligned with United Nations
priorities. In that context, I would like to highlight that
the EU guidelines pay particular attention to the
situation and specific needs of girls in and after armed
conflict.
The European Union has stepped up political
advocacy and public diplomacy. For instance, we
continue to support the universal ratification of the
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, as also promoted by the Special
Representative in cooperation with other partners.
On this year’s International Day against the Use
of Child Soldiers, the African Union and the European
Union have jointly called for the promotion of peace,
security and stability in Africa and Europe and for the
strengthening of efforts at all levels to prevent conflicts
and protect children from the effects of war, including
from being forced to serve as combatants, sex slaves or
servants.
The European Union has made further
improvements in mainstreaming. We now include new
standard language on human rights, gender and child
protection in all relevant mandates of European Union
special representatives. We have started to develop
training modules for our crisis management experts
and enhanced human rights training for European
Union diplomats, including for officials on postings in
EU delegations around the world, who should soon act
as children and armed conflict focal points.
Moreover, on the basis of its human rights
guidelines and as a measure of practical support to the
implementation of the country-specific conclusions and
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group, the European Union has funded numerous
projects to support protection and rehabilitation for
children in post-conflict situations.
The European Union has enhanced its practical
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative and with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in view of its crucial role in
mainstreaming protection issues within peacekeeping

11-41151

missions. We look forward to further intensifying our
collaboration with the United Nations to the benefit of
children affected by armed conflict, including with
United Nations country teams in the field.
In conclusion, my thanks go out to all who work
on this noble cause on a daily basis, often in difficult
situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very
important debate. We always say that, of course, but I
think that this issue does have special resonance.
Before I deliver my statement, I would like to say
that, as a member of the Group of Friends on Children
and Armed Conflict, we are very pleased to associate
ourselves with the statement delivered this morning by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group.
Australia welcomes the Security Council’s
demonstrated commitment to addressing grave
violations committed against children in situations of
armed conflict. That commitment has yielded notable
and tangible results. In that regard, we congratulate
Afghanistan for signing the comprehensive action plan
to halt child recruitment and other violations by the
Afghan National Security Forces, only 12 months after
the Afghan National Police was listed by the SecretaryGeneral on recruitment grounds. We also commend
progress in the Philippines towards the development of
an action plan with the National Democratic Front of
the Philippines to ensure that children will not be
recruited into the New People’s Army or involved in
the conflict there. We hope that the Government in
Myanmar will allow Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Commaraswamy to have access to
non-State armed groups so that action plans can be
negotiated, allowing some such groups in the country
to be delisted.
Despite those successes, in his latest report
(S/2011/250) the Secretary-General notes that attacks
and threats of attacks against educational and medical
facilities are a growing trend and are of significant
concern. We also note that such attacks are in
contravention of international law. Clearly, there is still
work to be done. Attacks on schools affect not only
children and youth but communities as a whole,
undermining efforts to reduce poverty. We therefore

9

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

welcome the resolution adopted today (resolution 1998
(2011)), which expands the listing criteria to include
the grave violations of attacks on schools and hospitals
and credible threats or attacks against school children
and educational and medical personnel. The inclusion
of both schools and hospitals reflects the relationship
between access to education and medical services and
the survival, development and well-being of children.
We encourage the Working Group to fully utilize
the toolkit available to it, including the use of
emergency or irregular briefings, in line with the
Group’s terms of reference, to enable it to respond to
surges in grave violations in a timely and flexible
manner, particularly when they occur outside of the
cycle of country reports and conclusions. The briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Working Group’s formal meeting in May is a
good example of how this could work in practice.
Australia firmly believes that Working Group field
trips, such as those recently undertaken in Nepal and
Afghanistan, are powerful tools for securing
commitments by listed parties. We hope that the
Working Group will undertake further field visits in
2011.
Like others, we would like to welcome the work
of Special Representative Coomaraswamy on the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict,
including through her field visits, which represent an
important
means
by
which
the
Council’s
recommendations are realized and acted upon at the
ground level.
We look forward to increasing consideration by
the Council sanctions committees of perpetrators of
grave violations against children. We note that in 2010,
for the first time, an individual in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was listed under the sanctions
regime on such grounds.
We are concerned that some persistent
perpetrators cannot be held accountable through
targeted measures, given the absence of designated
sanctions committees. We call on the Council to
address this accountability gap on an urgent basis.
In conclusion, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict have
made significant advances in ensuring the protection of
children in armed conflict. However, while we
celebrate our collective successes, we must also
recognize that challenges remain. We all share the

10

responsibility of ensuring that those who abuse
children in times of conflict do not go unpunished. We
look to the strength and the commitment of the
Security Council to lead us in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Nordic
countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden, which all sponsored resolution 1998
(2011), which the Council adopted this morning.
We are particularly pleased, Mr. President, with
your effective approach to turning country situation
reports into timely Security Council recommendations.
This is crucial for the recommendations to have real
impact. Good examples in that regard are the country
conclusions regarding Afghanistan and Chad, which
were approved in March and in April. As a positive
follow-up, in the past few months both countries
committed themselves to action programmes to end the
use of child soldiers. All in all, this shows that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism can be a powerful
tool for ensuring that all rights of all children are
respected. We should use it and related resolutions to
provide the widest possible protection to children
affected by armed conflicts.
In that regard, the increased attacks against
hospital and schools and their personnel are of extreme
concern to us. It is our view that both institutions
should be equally respected as humanitarian space,
including during conflict. This is a fundamental
prerequisite for fulfilling the right of all girls and boys
to education, as well as a basic requirement for
promoting schools and hospitals as zones of peace and
as vehicles for psycho-social support and recovery for
children in unstable situations.
Finally, access to health care and education,
especially for children, is a fundamental building block
of lasting peace and sustainable development. Attacks
on schools and hospitals, the denial of or restrictions
on safe access to those facilities by armed groups,
using them as shields, for military purposes or as
recruitment grounds, and other disruptions to
educational and medical facilities should trigger listing
in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports on
children and armed conflict.

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Relevant sanctions committees are increasingly
engaged in the agenda of children and armed conflict.
We commend the efforts of the Special Representative
in this regard. We urge the Council to continue to find
ways to hold perpetrators to account through existing
sanctions regimes and to explore new ways of ensuring
accountability for violations committed in conflicts.
In order to acquire the necessary information on
attacks and threats, the Security Council should ensure
that all relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations,
special
political
missions
and
peacebuilding missions include specific provisions on
monitoring and reporting violations by child protection
advisers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Thank you very
much, Sir, for convening this meeting and for
organizing the side event of 30 June as a very good
preparation for this open debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends on
Children and Armed Conflict and would like to add a
number of comments in our national capacity.
At the outset, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
her dedicated staff for their excellent work on this
topic.
We are alarmed by UNESCO’s report entitled
“Education under Attack”, which reports recurrent
attacks on students, teaching staff and institutions in
situations of armed conflict around the world. The
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2011/250)
also
documents increasing attacks on schools, which are
highlighted in 14 out of the 22 country situations
covered by the report and perpetrated by State and
non-State actors. In almost all circumstances, attacks
on schools violate international humanitarian law, and
they may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity as defined in customary international law.
According to the Rome Statute, intentionally
directing attacks against buildings dedicated to
education — provided they are not military
objectives — is a war crime. We are therefore deeply
concerned by reports of the widespread dual use of
school buildings as both teaching facilities and military

11-41151

sites and urge all parties to conflicts to refrain from
such use of these institutions.
Using school buildings for military purposes may
also violate children’s fundamental right to education,
a right that is enshrined in key international human
rights treaties and is non-derogable during times of
armed conflict. We commend the Council for taking
concrete action on this important issue through the
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today.
Parties to conflict that attack schools and
hospitals in contravention of applicable international
law will now also trigger the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. This is an important step in the right
direction. We also believe, however, that equal weight
must be given to all six grave violations of children’s
rights in various conflicts. Only with difficulty can
differential treatment be squared with the universality
and interdependence of human rights and the principles
of international humanitarian law.
We are deeply worried about reports of increased
recruitment and use of children in various armed
conflicts. To respond to such incidents in due time, the
Working Group should make better use of all its
available tools, including emergency meetings and
field visits. We welcome the initiative of your
delegation, Sir, as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, to conduct more frequent
field visits, and we are disappointed that other Council
members have shown little enthusiasm for this
approach. Field visits can send important signals to
affected populations and to political and military
leaders, and we hope that in the future the Working
Group will make more effective use of this important
tool.
Sixteen parties to conflicts have been listed in the
annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General for
more than five years for having committed serious
violations of the rights of children in armed conflict.
Those persistent violators must be subject to the
Council’s strong and urgent attention and action.
Measures taken by the Working Group should be
complemented by effective enforcement measures such
as sanctions, including arms embargos, bans on
military assistance and the imposition of travel
restrictions.
We thus call on the Security Council to consider
taking such measures when establishing or renewing
the mandate of relevant sanctions committees, as

11

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

agreed in the Council’s presidential statement of June
2010 (S/PRST/2010/10). Where no designated
sanctions committee is in place, the Council should
consider the use of a thematic sanctions committee.
Furthermore, it should bear in mind the option of
referring situations to relevant national and
international justice mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court, while considering the
option of having the financing of such decisions borne
by the United Nations budget.
Ultimately, the responsibility to respect the rights
of children in armed conflict rests with the parties
themselves. We call on all persistent violators to
develop and implement an action plan that may
eventually lead to their de-listing. To that end, the
States concerned should allow direct contacts between
the office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and relevant non-State actors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this important event,
which underscores once again the importance that the
Security Council and the entire international
community give to the protection of children who are
victims of armed conflict.
Belgium welcomes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/250) that Ms. Coomaraswamy
presented to us and the practical recommendations that
it contains. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her tireless
commitment.
We welcome with enthusiasm the establishment
of the fourth criterion for acknowledgement, namely
recurrent attacks against schools or hospitals. This
development is an important step in terms of
strengthening the normative framework regarding
children and armed conflicts. Moreover, I would like to
congratulate the German presidency of the Council and
you yourself, Sir, as well as the other members of the
Council for its important decisions. As you know,
Belgium was happy to co-sponsor this resolution.
I would like to illustrate the topic of this debate
with the case of children in the Central African
Republic, on the basis of my experience as Chairman
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Regarding the situation

12

throughout the Central African Republic, I would like
to very briefly make five points.
First, with respect to the LRA — the Lord’s
Resistance Army — it still runs rampant in the southeast of the country, where it is to this day recruiting
children as soldiers or sex slaves. Those who manage
to escape it are in urgent need of psycho-social
support. The communities who welcome them also
need humanitarian support, instruction and medical
care, and just as urgently. Above all, this problem
requires a regional response.
Secondly, in the north-west of the country, more
than 500 children have been demobilized from the
ranks of the Armée populaire pour la restauration de la
République et la démocratie, the APRD. Nonetheless,
there is still no assistance provided for these children
through a reintegration programme that would go
beyond, and last longer than, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. That is
my second point: the demobilization of child soldiers
must go hand-in-hand with reintegration programmes.
Thirdly, in the north-east of the country, on
12 June the Government concluded a ceasefire
agreement with the Convention des patriotes pour la
justice et la paix, the CPJP. Through that agreement,
which should facilitate humanitarian access, one of the
recommendations of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict in the Central
African Republic (S/2011/241) is taking effect. And
that is my third point: the reports of the Special
Representative are having tangible effects.
Fourthly, given the enormity of the challenges in
terms of protecting children, I noted, during my
numerous visits to Bangui, that the United Nations
system is lacking in resources and capabilities. While
the Council prepares to include attacks against schools
and hospitals as a criterion to be taken into account, it
must be remembered that strengthening the system at
the level of principle, an expansion of triggers, is not
sufficient. We should also ensure that those who work
to protect children have the necessary resources and
capabilities to carry out their duties. Without that, the
gap between the observed needs and the support
provided will only widen in countries such as the
Central African Republic, where attacks against
schools and hospitals are undeniably still being
perpetrated today.

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Fifthly and finally, I wish to underscore the
existence of two categories of child victims of armed
conflicts who do not receive the attention they deserve:
children born of rape, who are often treated as pariahs
by society, and those who witnessed the rapes of their
mothers, their sisters or other members of their family.
To date this is a forgotten matter in the Central African
Republic, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elsewhere.
I know that Ms. Coomeraswamy is aware of the
existence of these two categories, who have so far been
forgotten or neglected, and is determined to give them
all necessary attention.
I wish in particular to commend the decision of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Bangui to strengthen the work of the United Nations to
protect children as soon as she arrived a few weeks
ago. Her team has already made a very important
initial step by relaunching the work of the technicallevel inter-agency group on the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave child rights violations.
The mechanism is finally up and running in Bangui.
In conclusion, I wish to welcome the efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic to set
up a national council for the protection of children, and
I encourage it to implement the recommendations in
the first report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa (S/2009/66), especially in
the area of children and armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Mr. President, I would like
to congratulate you on your stewardship of the Security
Council this month and your able guidance of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Allow me to begin on a personal note. I speak
before this Council not only as the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel, but also as a
father. I am deeply proud that I raised my three
children — Lior, Tourer and Oren — in Jerusalem.
However, my children grew up in a reality where
abnormality had become the norm. From infancy, they
saw that every educational institution had to be
protected with an armed guard, from preschools to
kindergartens to high schools. The international
community cannot accept this abnormality as a normal

11-41151

way of life. No family, no child should live under those
circumstances.
Children are the primary victims in armed
conflict. They are its targets and, increasingly, its
instruments. Thousands have been subjected to sexual
exploitation, prostitution, rape and sexual violence.
More than a quarter of a million minors are currently
being exploited as child soldiers, recruited at such a
young age that they are robbed of their schooling and
their youth.
Israel assigns great importance to protecting
children in armed conflict and is a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. Israel is proud to have co-sponsored today’s
resolution and commends Germany for initiating it.
We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made on this issue, as is highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/250). Thousands of children
conscripted into armed groups have been released in
conflict zones around the world. To that effect, the
United Nations has signed new action plans over the
past year in the Philippines, Afghanistan and Chad. We
welcome those developments and call for the
agreements to be implemented without delay. However,
releasing those children is not enough. The
international community must make special efforts to
reintegrate them into society so that they can hope for a
future outside of combat.
I would like to extend Israel’s appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children
and
Armed
Conflict,
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her significant role in carrying out
these efforts. We sometimes find that her reports could
benefit from a wider range of resources. However, we
salute Special Representative Coomaraswamy’s
professionalism and dedication to protecting children
in conflict around the world.
My statement would not be complete without
reiterating the pressing need to protect children in the
face of terrorism and extremism. While this is a global
concern, the situation in our region provides a clear
picture of this multifaceted challenge.
In the Middle East, terrorists continue to single
out children in their attacks. My country was numb
with horror last March when Palestinian terrorists
brutally murdered five members of an Israeli family in

13

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Itamar as they slept in their home. The terrorists went
from room to room, using knives to carry out their
appalling crime. They killed both parents; they killed
their two children, ages 4 and 11; and, in an act of
unspeakable cruelty, they murdered the youngest
member of the family, a three-month old baby girl.
That is just one of many attacks that terrorists
have launched against Israeli children. Last April,
Hamas deliberately targeted a yellow school bus in
southern Israel. They struck the bus using an anti-tank
missile, completely destroying it and killing a 16-year
old boy. That attack underscores the daily reality facing
children throughout much of southern Israel, where the
threat of rocket fire is ever present. Since the
beginning of the year, some 290 rockets and mortars
have been fired into Israel — an average of nearly two
attacks every single day. This alters the fabric of life.
In the past six months, more than 100,000 Israeli
children have been kept out of school on numerous
occasions to avoid the danger of rockets.
There is no monopoly on the suffering caused by
terrorism. All children in our region suffer. Hamas and
other terrorist groups deploy minors as suicide
bombers and recruit them to carry out attacks against
Israeli civilians and soldiers. They use children as
human shields; they place children in harm’s way by
using schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as
a base for their activity.
The Council has a responsibility to address the
broader context in which children are used and abused
in armed conflict. In schools, camps and mosques and
through the media, generation after generation of
children across the Middle East have been taught to
hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and Jews. This
prevents them from becoming contributing members of
a global, tolerant society. For the sake of those children
and for the future of our region, the international
community has a duty to end this culture of incitement.
We need education that promotes peace instead of hate,
tolerance instead of violence and mutual understanding
instead of martyrdom.
The child victims of terrorism are real. Each one
has a name and a family; each one has their own
dreams and aspirations. The international community
cannot accept the perpetuation or justification of
terrorism in the Middle East or anywhere else. The
next generation of children in our region will deserve a

14

brighter future without conflict, without terror and
without hate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I take this
opportunity to congratulate the German delegation on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July, as well as to thank the delegation of
Gabon for its leadership of the Council during the
month of June.
We thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for convening this important thematic debate and for
your effective leadership on this issue. We also
acknowledge the fact that the Council has remained
seized of this important matter, especially through the
continued oversight and consistent support of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
strongly believe that it is important that the Council
remain seized of the matter.
Papua New Guinea, having ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, continues to
support its implementation, more specifically as it
relates to children in situations of armed conflict. We
also continue to support the four core principles of the
Convention, which are, first, non-discrimination;
secondly, devotion to the best interests of the child;
thirdly, the right to life, survival and development; and,
lastly, respect for the views of the child.
While the organization Security Council Report’s
recent fourth Cross-Cutting Report on Children and
Armed Conflict, dated 6 July, notes that much has been
achieved, much more remains to be done.
In that respect, we observe and express our deep
concern for the continued numerous violations
perpetrated against children around the world.
Furthermore, we would note the following six specific
grave violations against children of which, we believe,
the Council is aware and must continue to examine: the
killing and maiming of children; sexual violence
against children; the recruitment and use of children as
child soldiers; attacks on schools and hospitals; the
denial of humanitarian access to children; and
abductions of children. My country therefore supports
the Council’s resolutions that seek to protect children,
especially resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009).
The present debate is also about attacks on
schools and hospitals. My delegation underlines the

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

importance of schools and the right of children to
education. We therefore call for the creation of zones
of peace for schools and urge the Council to support
actions towards securing schools around the world.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its support
to, and commends the work of, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We
also commend the relevant United Nations agencies,
including UNICEF and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, for their commitment to
addressing this area of critical concern to the
international community. We pledge our support for
their work.
Finally, if the children of the world are to become
our future then surely we, the international community,
have an obligation to ensure a better future for them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating Germany on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and for organizing this open debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank the Foreign Minister of
Germany for presiding over this important meeting.
And I welcome the presence and statements of
Ministers here today as clear testimony to the issue’s
importance to all of us.
Allow me also to express my country’s sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake,
for their detailed briefings this morning.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his tenth report on the issue, as contained in document
S/2011/250. We believe that his recommendations
merit
careful
consideration
and
subsequent
implementation and compliance by Member States and
parties to armed conflict.
We commend the Security Council for its
continued efforts to end violations against children in
armed conflict. These include the Secretary-General’s
naming-and-shaming list, the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism, action plans, the
creation of a Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict through resolution 1612

11-41151

(2005), the application of sanctions and referrals to the
International Criminal Court.
Those initiatives have yielded significant and
tangible successes. As reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, last year, too, several listed parties to
armed conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans
to end their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The
United Nations system-wide response to this issue is
also laudable. In that connection, I take this
opportunity to thank UNICEF for its leadership role in
the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The Special
Representative and her team deserve our particular
praise for their dedicated efforts.
While addressing this matter, we must focus a bit
more on the supply side of the issue. The use of
children by non-State armed groups does not take place
in a vacuum. Conditions that might make children in
those settings vulnerable to recruitment include
poverty,
discrimination,
inequality,
exclusion,
hopelessness and desperate situations. They also
include a culture of political violence, tensions over
issues of religion and identity and a history of the use
of child soldiers, all of which combine to create a
situation where conflict is possible and where children
can be used or abused by armed groups. Success in
ending children’s involvement in armed conflict
therefore depends largely on addressing the root causes
of motivation as well as desperation and on building
societies where children’s rights and dignity and the
hope for a better future for all children are upheld.
Needless to say, there is still a long way to go.
While progress has been made through action plans to
release child soldiers in several situations of concern,
the overall situation of children in armed conflict
remains grave. There are 61 entities on the lists
contained in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report, 16 of which have been listed for at least five
years. Some kind of criteria should be contemplated to
enforce full compliance by parties listed in the
annexes, particularly persistent violators, with timebound action plans. However, a cautious approach is
necessary to ensure that such enforcement in no way
risks harming the very vulnerable group that we are
addressing here, namely, children.
The issue of child casualties in the course of
military operations needs to be appropriately
addressed. In line with paragraph 220 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, we hope that all parties in situations

15

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

of armed conflict will adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Apart from what I have referred to, in many
armed conflicts grave violations are committed against
children including, in particular the recruitment and
use of children, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children, attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict, in contravention of applicable
international law. In that regard, I particularly urge the
concerned parties to protect educational and health
institutions and related personnel from such attacks.
We also welcome the adoption today of resolution 1998
(2011) in this connection.
It has been more than nine years since the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict entered into force. Bangladesh signed and
ratified the Optional Protocol on 9 September 2000.
However, we note with sadness that a total of 50
Member States are still not party to it. We would like to
urge those States to become parties to the Protocol.
Children are the future of our world and they bear the
torch of the culture of peace. It is our solemn duty to
protect their physical safety and their right to live on
planet Earth with their minds free of fear and filled
with hopes and dreams.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s debate, which offers us all an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to ensuring the
protection of the security, rights and well-being of
children in armed conflicts. I also wish to extend my
appreciation to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, for
their remarks this morning.
The legacy of war and violence has had a
devastating impact on my country. Violence still takes
its toll on everyday life. It did so today in Kandahar. As
President Karzai stated after the loss of his brother,
Ahmed Wali Karzai, the head of Kandahar Provincial
Council, “This is the life of all Afghan people. I hope
the miseries that every Afghan family faces will one
day end.”

16

Sadly, such miseries are ongoing and include
children. Children continue to bear the brunt of conflict
in Afghanistan. They are among the growing number of
civilian casualties, and their ability to live safe, healthy
and prosperous lives remains in jeopardy. There is no
war zone in Afghanistan; there are no front lines.
Violent attacks take place in our villages, markets and
public streets, and put Afghan children at risk as they
attempt to live normal lives. Forty-four per cent of all
child casualties are caused by improvised explosive
devices and suicide attacks, which are increasingly
intended for soft targets such as civilian roads, schools
and health clinics. Children, women and other
vulnerable groups are the prime victims of such
attacks.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
fulfilling its responsibility to protect the rights of all
children and to addressing violations of children’s
rights. We have initiated a number of important steps,
including the launch of an inter-ministerial steering
committee mandated to develop and implement our
national action plan, which seeks to prevent the
recruitment and use of children in our national security
forces and to address all forms of violence against
children. Our efforts are geared towards meeting our
obligations in child protection.
We are working closely with the United Nations
country task force on monitoring and reporting and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to
protect children’s rights to security, education and
health care. I take this opportunity to welcome the
Working Group’s visit to Afghanistan, led by
Ambassador
Wittig,
during
which
important
discussions were held with relevant Government
entities to enhance progress in the lives of Afghan
children.
We all must address the disturbing rise in child
suicide bombers employed by extremist militant
groups. Recent reports of terrorist networks training
and selling children to militant groups for suicide
bombings reflect gross violations of children’s rights in
all countries. The vulnerability of a child who knows
nothing outside of a war-torn existence is not up for
exploitation in war; a child’s innocence is not fair
game as a fighting strategy; and most importantly, a
child’s body is not a weapon of war either under the
standards of the Constitution of Afghanistan or under
international law. The use of these children in suicide

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

attacks is a heinous crime that must be addressed with
firm conviction.
By the same token, we believe it essential to
avoid equating the Afghan Government with the
terrorists when considering the challenges facing
Afghan children. Attacks against children and
violations of their fundamental rights are the work of
those who are continuing their campaign against peace
and stability in Afghanistan.
Violence against children through sexual,
physical and domestic abuse is an abomination and
against national law. Sexual violence, including
pederasty in its local form, which is widely
sensationalized in media reports, is a crime that incurs
serious punishments under the Afghan legal system.
Though such problems are not unique to Afghanistan,
we are taking all necessary steps to stop this illegal,
un-Islamic and immoral practice.
The widespread poverty afflicting the country is
also a threat to the safety and security of Afghanistan’s
children. Over 7 million children are living under the
poverty line. Poverty plunges underage children into
the labour force both in Afghanistan’s cities and in the
countryside. Their struggle to be breadwinners
deprives many children of opportunities to pursue an
education and to build a brighter future.
In the face of these challenges, we should not
lose sight of the progress made thus far. To date, more
than 7 million boys and girls are enrolled in schools,
investing in their futures. We have constructed more
than 4,000 schools across the country; we predict
having nine million children enrolled in schools by
2020; and in a country where practically no girls
received education just 10 years ago, over 40 per cent
of these new students will be girls. Additionally, the
great majority of Afghanistan’s population has access
to basic health care, showing great improvement over
the past 10 years.
Nevertheless, we have yet to overcome our
challenges. We look forward to our continued
partnership with the international community to
improve security and ensure prosperity in the lives and
futures of Afghan children. Our international
partnerships will remain intact throughout the
transition as the Afghan Government begins to assume
its leadership role. Therefore, we are alone neither in
our successes, nor in our failures. We share
responsibility for the security of children in

11-41151

Afghanistan, who need and deserve an environment
free of indiscriminate violence to pursue their full
potential.
The President: In my national capacity, I offer
Germany’s condolences for the death of the brother of
President Karzai.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Han Thu (Myanmar): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express our gratitude to you, Sir,
for presiding over this important meeting. We also join
previous speakers in thanking Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their updated
information on the situation of the protection of
children in armed conflicts. It is most timely that the
Council is considering this important issue following
the release of the Secretary-General’s report on
children and armed conflict (S/2011/250).
Children are the most innocent and vulnerable
victims of armed conflicts. Most often in conflicts,
they are abused and deprived of their basic human
rights. Children are still being recruited as combatants,
maimed, killed and raped in various armed conflicts.
Crime against children is unforgivable. Despite the
measures prescribed in international humanitarian law
and Security Council mandates, children continue to
suffer in conflict situations around the world.
Ensuring national reconciliation, the rule of law,
the protection of human rights and the promotion of
sustainable development and poverty eradication are
the best approaches to preventing conflict and to
enhancing the protection of children on a long-term
basis. The international community and the United
Nations have a vital role to play in assisting States to
establish an environment in which children can best
enjoy their basic rights and be better protected.
We believe that the primary responsibility for
protecting children and promoting their welfare lies
with States. The Government of Myanmar has made a
commitment that no children under the age of 18 will
be recruited into military service. Our armed forces are
purely voluntary, and those entering military service do
so of their own free will. There is neither a draft
system nor forced conscription in our country.
Moreover, under the Myanmar Defence Services Act of
April 1974 and War Office regulation 13/73, a person

17

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

cannot be enlisted in the armed forces until he or she
has reached the age of 18. This regulation is strictly
enforced. The Government has also initiated an active
advocacy programme to prevent the recruitment of
under-age children into military service. We have strict
scrutiny and inspection procedures in place at the
recruitment stage. New recruits who do not meet the
minimum age requirement or other qualifications are
rejected or discharged from the armed forces.
The Judge Advocate-General’s Office of the
Ministry of Defence oversees strict adherence to
military recruitment orders, directives and regulations.
In that context, from January to April of this year a
total of 36 persons who failed to meet the recruitment
requirements were discharged from the military. Along
with discharging and reuniting under-age children with
their families, punitive actions were also taken against
one officer and 11 soldiers of other ranks for their
failure to abide by existing recruitment rules and
regulations.
We have made it crystal clear that the Myanmar
Government is eager for the name of our army,
Tatmadaw Kyi, to be de-listed from the annex of the
Secretary-General’s report. To reach that goal, we are
preparing a draft national plan of action that includes
the elements provided by UNICEF and samples of the
plans of action of three different countries, which we
received from the Special Representative’s Office. The
technical working group comprised of officials from
the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Social
Welfare, the Attorney-General’s office and the Chief
Justice’s office met with representatives from UNICEF
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) four times from September 2010 to March
2011.
With flexibility from both sides, we hope to
finalize our national plan of action. On our part,
Myanmar will continue to cooperate fully with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and
UNDP to conclude a national plan of action in the near
future. Our aspiration is for the name of our national
army to be de-listed from the annex to the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.

18

Mr. Ebner (Austria): At the outset, I would like
to thank the German presidency for convening this
debate and for its excellent work in the Security
Council in strengthening the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. I also wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Radhika Coomaraswamy and her Office for their
tireless efforts and important work. We appreciate the
close cooperation between Ms. Coomaraswamy and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström.
Austria aligns itself with the statements made by
the observer of the European Union, the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security
Network and the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Austria welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 1998 (2011), which will strengthen the
existing child protection framework by expanding the
triggers of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict. The increase in attacks on
schools and hospitals, including the specific targeting
of girls, are deeply worrying and need to be clearly
condemned. The further expansion of the triggers
requires an increased monitoring and reporting
capacity by the United Nations. Close cooperation
among all child protection actors becomes even more
important. We welcome the Council’s resolve, as
reaffirmed in today’s resolution, to take action against
those parties to conflict that persist in committing
violations and abuses against children, including by the
adoption of targeted measures.
Resolution 1998 (2011) provides a clear road map
to ensure respect for Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict. In that regard, we
welcome the Council’s intention to ensure that
provisions pertaining to violations of applicable
international law relating to the rights and protection of
children are included as listing criteria for its sanctions
regimes. The Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, provides a good
model in that regard. We highly appreciate the
exchange of information between the Committee and
the Special Representative, which entailed concrete
action.
We would like to encourage the Council to
consider using all tools at its disposal, including the

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

imposition of targeted measures, to take action against
persistent perpetrators in country situations where no
sanctions committee is in place. We agree with the
Secretary-General that direct contact between United
Nations country teams and non-State actors is
important in order to prepare and implement action
plans, and thereby ensure the effective protection of
children.
Finally, we encourage the Council to continue to
include child protection provisions in the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We would
like to highlight the importance of training for both
military and civilian peacekeeping personnel. In that
context, Austria warmly welcomes the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations training initiative to promote
child protection through comprehensive training,
including by reviewing existing training materials.
Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation
for the work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict under the German chairmanship.
Austria is pleased to hear about the Secretary-General’s
efforts to establish a working arrangement for the
Secretariat, and encourages continued support for the
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): While Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union, I would like to
commend Germany for its strong commitment to
advancing the children and armed conflict agenda, as
well as the intensive work done by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict under the leadership
of Ambassador Wittig. I would also like to recognize
the personal commitment to this issue on the part of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative Radhika Coomaraswamy.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on children and armed conflict (S/2011/250), as
it contains many valuable recommendations, including
those on measures that could be undertaken against
persistent violators. Important progress has been made
over the past year. We welcome the expansion of the
triggers for listing to include the killing and maiming
of children, rape and other sexual violence. We also
welcome the exchange of information among the
sanctions committees. We would like to encourage

11-41151

more such interaction between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the sanctions
committees, their expert groups and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Noting with concern the increased number of
attacks on educational facilities, we encourage the
Security Council to address this problem in its future
deliberations. We consider it important to thoroughly
investigate, prosecute and punish all those who commit
grave violations against children. Ukraine also
encourages the Security Council to include in sanctions
committee mandates, where appropriate, provisions
pertaining to violations of applicable international law
committed against children and of Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict.
We in Ukraine have made child welfare a
strategic national priority. Ukraine has undertaken
appropriate measures to protect the rights and dignity
of every child. We remain fully committed to the
proper implementation of the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Earlier this
year, the Committee on the Rights of the Child
considered Ukraine’s initial report under article 8 of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. The
Committee welcomed, among other things, Ukraine’s
endorsement of the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups, and of the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups. The Committee also welcomed
Ukraine’s mandatory training regarding children in
armed conflict, including on the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, which is organized for Ukrainian
military personnel who participate in international
peacekeeping operations.
We firmly support the Special Representative’s
campaign for universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
and stress the great importance of such legally binding
international instruments for protecting all children
worldwide, with no exceptions.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm Ukraine’s commitment — particularly as an
active participant in peacekeeping operations and a
member of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Executive Board of UN-Women — to applying all its
efforts to help assure children of healthy, appropriate

19

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

conditions in every situation of their lives. We believe
that resolution 1998 (2011), adopted today, can
contribute to children’s well-being. As one of the
resolution’s sponsors, Ukraine looks forward to its full
and successful implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
congratulates the German presidency on its decision to
make this important issue the subject of an open debate
in July. My delegation is grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive and interesting report
(S/2011/250). We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for the
valuable information she shared with us today, and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
his comprehensive briefing.
Chile associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which Chile is a
member.
The protection of children in general, and of
those living in areas of armed conflict in particular, is a
matter of special concern for my country, which is why
Chile is a sponsor of resolution 1998 (2011), adopted
by the Council today, and hopes to see it fully
implemented.
There is no doubt that the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflict has made progress since
the Security Council first included it on its agenda. The
Secretary-General’s decisive action in appointing a
Special Representative for this area, and the efforts of
that Special Representative, have contributed
effectively to this progress. Moreover, the increased
interaction between the latter and the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
should be emphasized, since they deal with two sides
of the same coin. I also stress the growth of
coordination with other United Nations agencies
devoted to the protection of children once they have
returned to society and have been reintegrated into the
educational system. Special attention should be paid to
the scars that the experience of violence has left them
with, and of course even more attention and care are
needed if they have been subject to sexual violence.

20

We share the concern, expressed in the Economic
and Social Council ministerial declaration adopted
yesterday
in
Geneva
on
implementing
the
internationally agreed goals and commitments in
regard to education that “a large number of the world’s
out-of-school children live in States affected by armed
conflict and natural disasters” (E/2011/L.28*, para. 30).
This is a clear warning that we must work to improve
access to education in a safe environment for children
living in armed-conflict or post-conflict situations.
Assistance in helping these children to recover must be
provided through the appropriate channels and reach
the families and communities, who are generally those
most directly involved in the recovery process.
Chile calls on those Governments suffering
through armed conflict to make every possible effort,
while taking necessary precautions, to establish
channels of communication with the other actors in the
conflict so as to keep children at a distance from the
hardships of conflict and prevent their direct
involvement in it. At the same time, justice must be
done when children are involved and abused. This goes
hand in hand with reparation, which could be provided
in special facilities for education, health and so forth,
including symbolic reparation as well.
My country shares the Secretary-General’s
concern about the increase in attacks on hospitals and
schools. In that regard, Chile calls on the parties to
conflict to refrain from using any people — much less
children — as human shields. Whatever the situation,
attacking schools and hospitals is to be especially
condemned.
Lastly, Chile joins in calling on those States that
have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express my country’s thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict, a subject that is undoubtedly of major
significance to my country and other Members of the
United Nations. We express our appreciation to the
Foreign Minister of the friendly State of Germany for
presiding over the debate, and thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, as well as the

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Executive Director of UNICEF, for their efforts and
briefings.

conflict. We have also established numerous guidelines
and published many manuals with regard to this issue.

The economic and political circumstances of
Yemen, currently and for the past few years, are well
known. My country believes, however, that children
are the future on whom we are relying to build a
modern State. The Republic of Yemen was therefore
among the first countries to accede to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, in May 1991, as well as its
two Optional Protocols. We provide periodic reports on
the implementation of those instruments. We have
taken steps to enact legislation to promote and protect
the rights of children — for example, law 45 of 2002,
on the rights of the child, and law 24 of 1992, on the
care of minors.

Fourth, the Government has been compelled to
shoulder its responsibility to combat the recent armed
rebellion in Sa´ada province. The State of Yemen
declared a ceasefire in February 2010, to which it has
been committed ever since.

The Republic of Yemen has not only signed
international instruments and enacted domestic
legislation to protect the rights of children, we have
also set up institutional mechanisms to translate them
into concrete actions. We have also established a
Ministry of Human Rights and a Supreme Council for
Motherhood and Childhood, as well as several national
committees and networks on the protection and
promotion of the rights of children. In particular, we
have put in place the High National Committee, which
is chaired by the Vice-President, similar other national
technical committees to protect human rights under the
auspices of the Ministry of Human Rights, as well as a
technical committee to fight child trafficking. We have
also forged a valuable partnership with UNICEF.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/250), with regard to which we wish to
state the following.
First, we reaffirm our absolute commitment to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children in
every respect.
Second, with regard to our commitment to
prohibiting the conscription of children in armed
conflict, all our national military legislation sets the
minimum age for mandatory conscription into the
armed forces at 18 years of age. Law 67 of 1991,
concerning military and security forces, law 23 of
1990, on public reserves, and law 22 of 1990 are all in
line with the Optional Protocol.
Third, we have cooperated with all international
and civil society organizations to prohibit the
conscription and involvement of children in armed

11-41151

Fifth, an amnesty has been declared in order to
pardon all detainees, including children who were
conscripted by the rebels and Al-Houthi groups.
Sixth, the Government has undertaken many
measures to provide assistance to all internally
displaced persons and refugees, especially children.
Seventh, we would like to stress that, in spite of
our country’s special circumstances, great progress has
been made since the listing of Yemen in last year’s
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181). We
therefore do not see any reason to include additional
categories in the report’s list.
Eighth, we would like to highlight the importance
of the need to gather precise information with regard to
the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
We would like to state that, in spite our country’s
special circumstances, we will make every effort to
implement our international obligations and promote
the rights of children. We hope that the international
community will support us in our endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on children and armed
conflict and for the submission of the concept paper
(S/2011/409) on this topic.
Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make a few additional remarks in our
national capacity.
We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
support the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms and other relevant international actors
aimed at ensuring more effective protection for the
rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. Azerbaijan’s

21

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

determination with regard to the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from our keen
interest to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
peace and development and from our practical
experience in addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians, including children.
The war unleashed against our country and the
military occupation of our territories have had a
considerable impact, inter alia on the humanitarian
aspect of the problem, and primarily affect the most
vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from
having one of the highest number of refugees and
displaced persons in the world, large numbers of whom
are children. The most serious crimes of international
concern have been committed during the conflict, and
even children have not been spared.
In its relevant resolutions adopted in 1993 in
response to the occupation of Azerbaijani territories,
the Security Council referred specifically to violations
of international humanitarian law, including the forced
displacement of large numbers of civilians in
Azerbaijan. The European Court of Human Rights later
arrived at an important conclusion, qualifying the
behaviour of those carrying out the incursion into the
territory of Azerbaijan as acts of particular gravity that
could amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity.
In spite a formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks by
the occupier against Azerbaijani civilians and civilian
objects, in contravention of applicable international
law, have become more frequent and violent over
recent years, resulting in the killing and maiming of
many inhabitants residing near the front lines,
including children.
The issue of children and armed conflict has been
inscribed firmly on the international agenda, and a
strong normative framework has been developed.
Important steps have been taken to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations.
However, serious challenges remain. More resolute and
targeted measures are required to protect children in
situations of armed conflict and to end impunity for
genocide, crimes against humanity and other egregious
crimes perpetrated against children. Furthermore,
particular consideration should be given to internally
displaced children in the context of ensuring their
inalienable right of return, and to the implications for

22

the protection of child rights of illegal policies and
practices in situations of foreign occupation.
Another challenging issue requiring urgent action
is that of children taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict.
Azerbaijan will continue to contribute to
identifying long-term and sustained solutions to this
problem and to focusing on the ways and means by
which the international community can address
existing challenges, including in particular violations
and abuses committed against children in situations of
armed conflict and measures aimed at bringing to
justice those responsible for such violations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. Kenya appreciates the global importance and
priority that the Security Council and the international
community continue to attach to the protection of
children affected by or involved in armed conflict.
My delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2011/250) — which
enumerates the grave violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, the progress made in the
release of children from armed groups and the
challenges faced in dealing with some of the parties to
conflicts — as well as for the recommendations it
contains. We also very much appreciate the statement
delivered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and by the Executive Director of UNICEF.
Child protection should be part and parcel of any
conflict management and prevention strategy. In that
regard, we appreciate the progress made through the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Kenya welcomes the attention that is being drawn
today to the issue of children and armed conflict,
especially as it relates to attacks on schools and
hospitals. But it is Kenya’s observation that, while
deplorable, attacks on schools and hospitals are
symptomatic of a deeper and more troublesome
situation of civil strife, abuse of human rights and
failure in governance, law and order. It is imperative
that the Security Council and the international

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

community at large address those fundamental causes
as well.
While Kenya recognizes the progress made over
the years, significant challenges remain. We recognize
the situation in countries listed in the Secretary
General’s report. For Kenya, the situation in Somalia
presents a clear, persistent and continuing threat to
national security and to our economy.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
report, engaging armed terrorist groups, for example
Al-Shabaab, for purposes of curbing the involvement
of children in armed conflict remains a formidable
challenge. The consequences of the involvement of
children in armed conflict are devastating, not only in
Somalia but also beyond that country.
In Kenya, the burden of more than 20 years of
conflict in Somalia and the continued flow of refugees
is enormous and harmful to our society and economy.
Kenya is host to the Dadaab refugee camp, which is the
world’s largest such camp. With more than half a
million refugees, the camp is stretched beyond its
capacity. As we speak, more than 1,000 new refugees,
consisting mainly of women and children, including
ex-soldiers and children who have been in armed
conflict, cross into Kenya every day. That is more
30,000 new refugees every month.
Following
terrorist
acts
committed
by
Al-Shabaab, the World Food Programme was forced
out of Somalia. This is a cause for grave concern, as
we know that the availability of food is a powerful
deterrent in the recruitment of child soldiers.
We therefore urge the Security Council to
redouble its efforts to help the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and neighbouring countries,
including ours, to put down these terrorist groups. We
must not attempt to placate or engage in dialogue with
terrorists. Only this will help to normalize the situation
in a country such as Somalia, bring an end to the
recruitment of children and facilitate the resumption of
emergency assistance to the Somali population.
Kenya recognizes the decades of civil war that
the new Republic of South Sudan has suffered, with
many children involved either as child soldiers or as
victims of the conflict. Kenya carried a heavy burden
with regard to those children during the years of the
civil war. There is an urgent need for heightened
support in dealing with post-conflict trauma for

11-41151

affected children and families, including in South
Sudan. As we join others in congratulating the
Republic of South Sudan on attaining its independence
and becoming the newest State, we encourage States
and other international actors to support the new
Government in promoting the physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of
children and families affected by the armed conflict.
The measures adopted should not only realize their
medium-term development but also their long-term
aspirations.
In conclusion, as a troop-contributing country,
Kenya welcomes the Secretary-General’s call for a
specific provision for children’s protection to continue
to be included in the mandate of all peacekeeping
operations, as well as for the inclusion of child
protection in pre-deployment training. That will no
doubt enhance the broad and effective protection of
children in armed conflict, including protecting those
in schools and hospitals.
Having said that, we should never loose sight of
the fact that the most effective way to protect children
is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts and to
prevent conflicts from escalating by addressing the
multiplicity of causes of conflicts, including climate
change, hunger, disease, exploitation and underdevelopment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this very
important debate. I also wish to congratulate the
delegation of Germany on its excellent conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council during this month
of July.
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the tenth annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(A/65/250).
We
also
thank
Ms.
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their comprehensive presentations.
Let
me
reaffirm
Kyrgyzstan’s
strong
commitment, as a member and Vice-President of the
Human Rights Council, to the promotion of human
rights and the safeguarding of international
humanitarian law.

23

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Kyrgyzstan appreciates the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report. We believe
that
the
strict
implementation
of
those
recommendations will greatly change the lives of many
children for the better. We consider it necessary to
adopt more stringent measures to bring to justice and
end impunity for criminal gangs and individuals who
have continuously committed serious violations against
children and have been listed in the report of the
Secretary-General for the past five years.
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the signing of the new
plans of action mentioned in the report. We join the
call of the Secretary-General to the parties involved in
the recruitment, use, killing and maiming of children,
as well as in committing sexual violence against them,
to finalize plans of actions as soon as possible, in close
cooperation with the relevant United Nations country
task forces.
The timely implementation of action plans and
the taking of appropriate measures in respect to those
parties not complying with those documents are crucial
to preventing criminal acts against children. We believe
that the Security Council should develop concrete
measures to track progress in the implementation of
such plans.
Kyrgyzstan fully shares the concern of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council with regard
to the growing trend in attacks against schools and
hospitals. We strongly condemn those acts and urge all
parties to respect international humanitarian law.
Kyrgyzstan believes that the issue of child
protection should be consistently reflected in peace
processes and peace agreements. The special needs of
children must be taken into account in post-conflict
planning and in the funding of peacebuilding activities.
Protecting children in armed conflict should
always be part of a wider conflict prevention strategy
and of response measures aimed at overcoming hunger
and
poverty
and
promoting
socio-economic
development. In this regard, we would like to
emphasize the pivotal role of the United Nations in
ensuring the successful implementation of such a
strategy. It is important to maintain a close and
effective cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as peacekeeping missions, political
missions, UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme and other agencies.

24

Since 1994, Kyrgyzstan has been a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, as well as other international legal
instruments aimed at protecting civilians in armed
conflict. I would like to confirm that Kyrgyzstan will
continue to strictly follow the commitments assumed
under these international instruments.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that
Kyrgyzstan supports resolution 1998 (2011), adopted
today by the Security Council, and believes that it will
make an effective contribution to the protection of
children in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like express my appreciation to you,
Sir, for organizing this meaningful open debate on
children and armed conflict. I would also like to
commend the work of the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to end
violations against children and to protect their rights.
My delegation would also like to applaud SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Special Representative
Radhika Coomaraswamy for working tirelessly to
lessen the plight of children in armed conflict around
the world. In this regard, we welcome the most recent
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2011/250).
Taking this opportunity, my delegation would like
to note the positive developments on this issue since
the historic adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) and the
expansion of the triggers. Specific achievements have
been realized in the key areas of recruitment, and an
expansion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes has been seen. The Republic
of Korea also welcomes the efforts of the Working
Group thus far in 2011, including its adoption of four
sets of conclusions on Afghanistan, Chad, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
connection, we urge the relevant Governments to
establish action plans to ban the recruitment of child
soldiers.
We are particularly pleased to note the increase in
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General in
2010 that contain information on the protection of
children, as recommended in resolution 1460 (2003).
This is a helpful step in the right direction but should
be scaled up even further, if possible, to include more

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

references to the protection of children in countryspecific reports with a view towards full compliance
with resolution 1460 (2003).
However, despite the aforementioned progress,
my delegation remains concerned by the perpetual
plight of children affected by armed conflict around the
world. There is still widespread impunity for grave
crimes perpetrated against children in many countries.
While we note some of the steps in the right
direction — including investigations, arrests, trials and
prosecutions that Governments have committed to
address — the issue of impunity continues to prevail in
too many conflict areas.
Indeed, the Council must stand resolute and apply
robust, targeted measures to confront these persistent
perpetrators. In this connection, my delegation
continues
to
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations that the Council consider including
child recruitment and use in the mandate of all of its
sanctions committees, including those that deal with
counter-terrorism. Incorporating more expertise in the
field of child protection on the Council’s sanction
committee expert groups, as well as scaling up
reporting on violations against children, would be steps
in the right direction.
Many persistent violators, in addition to child
recruitment, have been responsible for committing
other grave violations against children, such as rape
and sexual violence. In this connection, we continue to
support the annex listing of parties accused of rape and
sexual violence against children in the report of the
Secretary-General, pursuant to resolution 1882 (2009),
as well as the adoption of resolution 1960 (2010),
which specifically established a mechanism for
monitoring and reporting sexual violence in conflict
areas on the Council’s agenda. My delegation
encourages close consultations between the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict in this regard.
My delegation believes that the adoption of
resolution 1998 (2011) today is yet another milestone
in the Council’s work on the issue of children and
armed conflict, and we are confident that it will go a
long way towards further protecting children around
the world and send a strong message that such crimes
will not be tolerated.

11-41151

We hope that today’s open discussion will
continue to increase the Council’s consequential
deliberation on this critical issue. The Republic of
Korea will continue to stand with the international
community on this issue to ensure the protection of
children around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate and welcoming the presence of
Minister Westervelle and other honourable foreign
ministers earlier today, as well as the Executive
Director of UNICEF.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2011/250),
which focuses on the growing trend of attacks against
schools and hospitals, and his recommendation that the
Council expand the gateway to the annexes to include
parties that attack or threaten to attack schools and
hospitals. We welcome the recommendations and the
positive developments referred to in the report. The
report is a useful guide for coping with the continuing
challenges in the implementation of resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009) and other relevant documents
of the Council.
Conflicts have devastating consequences on
children, whose protection is of the utmost importance,
deserves the attention of the international community,
and should be a primary responsibility of all because it
is a serious humanitarian concern and a significant
security issue. The protection of children therefore
requires a multidimensional and comprehensive
approach.
For Armenia, a country hosting tens of thousands
of refugee children as a result of war and aggression
imposed on us, this debate is of particular importance.
In the early 1990s, innocent Armenian civilians, in
particular children, were subjected to a barrage of
heavy artillery, missile shelling and bombing. We
witnessed indiscriminate firing upon homes, schools,
kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances.
Armenia therefore believes that concerted actions
are necessary at the national, regional and international
levels to put an end to such brutal actions and policies.
At the same time, our efforts should complement each
other, with all stakeholders utilizing the comparative

25

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

advantages of
experiences.

their

respective

mandates

and

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my Government’s gratitude to the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
her tireless efforts to ensure that children can live and
grow in peace and dignity. Ms. Coomaraswamy’s role
has been growing in recent years, with her field
missions now serving multiple purposes, including the
dissemination of the recommendations of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. For its part,
the Working Group has showed renewed improvement
in its working methods and continues to play an active
role in mainstreaming the issue in the Council this
year.
It is unfortunate that, despite the legal safeguards
in place, horrendous violations of children’s rights,
such as the use of child soldiers and the killing,
maiming and rape of children still continue in many
parts of the world. Obviously, it would be naive to
expect that problems of such gravity could be resolved
by the mere provisions of relevant legal norms. After a
high-level debate on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention in September 2010 (see
S/PV.6389), the Council reaffirmed in its presidential
statement the conviction that the
“protection of civilians in armed conflict,
particularly women and children, should be an
important aspect of any comprehensive strategy
to resolve conflicts” (S/PRST/2010/18).
We share the view expressed in this Chamber that
the Council should also focus on the application of
targeted measures against persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children through the possible
imposition of sanctions. My delegation therefore fully
supports the adoption of today’s resolution, which,
inter alia, requests enhanced communication between
the Working Group and the relevant Security Council
sanctions Committees.
This debate represents an opportunity to become
engaged in a serious discussion on how to address
issues of cross-border violations against children,
reaching out to persistent violators. We believe that the
commitment from Governments in addressing the issue
of violations against children can also provide the
impetus needed to begin to seriously address this
matter.

26

Child protection is everyone’s responsibility, and
the future of children is dependent on the actions we
take today. The Government of Armenia is committed
to doing its utmost and to constructively contributing
to global efforts to promote this noble cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
country, the Republic of Benin, is pleased to see the
Federal Republic of Germany presiding over the
Security Council. My delegation noted with great
satisfaction the personal contribution of the SecretaryGeneral and of the many representatives of the
Governments of States members of the Council to the
open debate today.
This debate clearly touches on an extremely
sensitive subject in terms of the capacity of the United
Nations to fully and effectively shoulder its
responsibilities in the promotion of the ideals
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular in the area of international peace and
security and the protection of human rights.
I should like here to state that the Government of
Benin is very pleased with the ongoing commitment
and commendable dedication shown by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her team in terms of carrying out
their responsibilities with respect to the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. I
should like to commend in particular her bravery in
visiting dangerous conflict areas to obtain the release
of children recruited into and used in armed conflicts.
Benin would also like to encourage the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to work with resolve in cooperation with the
United Nations agencies and international civil society
actors that are working to protect children and young
people in armed conflict.
Benin would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Qatar for its leadership in the context of
United Nations efforts to ensure the protection of the
right to education in emergency situations.
The adoption in 2010 by the General Assembly of
resolution
64/290
represented
a
significant
development in fighting international human rights
violations affecting children. It offers hope for the
effective achievement of the Millennium Development

11-41151

S/PV.6581 (Resumption 1)

Goals, in particular in the area of education. In that
resolution, the General Assembly unequivocally
condemned attacks deliberately targeting civilians in
armed conflict, including schoolchildren, students and
teachers, as well as attacks against civilian objects, in
violation of international law. It also declared that such
acts may constitute grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and, for States parties, war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The same is true of attacks against schools and
hospitals which should, during times of conflict, be
considered as safe havens to ensure their inviolability.
The initiative taken by the Security Council to
expand the mandate of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict to include
attacks against schools and hospitals and protected
persons working there demonstrates that the Council is
addressing the concerns clearly expressed by the
General Assembly in resolution 64/290 and by the
Secretary-General in his latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2011/250). We congratulate the
Council for having responded to the call by the
Secretary-General that it make greater efforts to ensure
that such facilities remain protected, in particular by
appealing to all parties to the conflict to respect those
essential institutions and their staff and to take all
possible measures to protect them and ensure that they
can function.
Guaranteeing humanitarian access remains a
crucial question. Benin, as the main negotiator of
resolution 1612 (2005) and having set up the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, welcomes the
expansion of its remit to encompass other atrocities
affecting children. Benin urges the Security Council to

11-41151

make full use of the instruments available to it so as to
ensure the respect of the rights of children caught up in
armed conflict or in humanitarian crises.
It is important to step up international
cooperation in order to guarantee access by children
and young people to the basic services that are key to
their well-being by establishing appropriate partnership
and assistance programmes at the global, national and
local levels. That is why Benin has been actively
involved in preparing for the United Nations Highlevel Meeting on Youth, set to take place here in New
York in several days to consider the situation of young
people and children.
In conclusion, Benin is proud to be a sponsor of
the new resolution on children and armed conflict. It
supports the measures authorized by the resolution and,
over and above that, all efforts undertaken at various
levels to bring added pressure to bear on those who
remorselessly trample on the rights of children caught
up in armed conflict and in political or humanitarian
crises.
Benin reiterates its urgent appeal to the
international community to work with greater
determination to put an end to all conflicts in the
world, regardless of their intensity, to promote
reconciliation and peacebuilding in the countries
affected.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

27
