S/PV.8797

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8797th meeting

Tuesday, 15 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-15265 (E)
*2115265*

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Najiba Al Naggar, founding
member and Programs Manager of SOS Center for
Youth Capabilities Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I want to thank you, Mr. President,
and all the members of the Security Council for the
privilege that I have had serving as the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Yemen over the past three
years. This will be my last briefing to the Council in this
capacity. I would like to add that I am also particularly
grateful to President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour
for placing his trust in me in this assignment.
The United Nations has long characterized Yemen
as the world’s worst man-made humanitarian crisis,
as we have so vividly heard from Mark Lowcock over
these many months. I want to underline the “manmade” part of that statement. Ending a war is a choice.
Yemeni men, women and children are suffering every
day because people with power have missed the
opportunities presented to them to make the necessary
concessions to end the war. As a result, Yemenis are
obliged to live under violence, insecurity and fear, with
limits to their freedom of movement and freedom of
expression. Perhaps most tragically, we are witness
to the hopes and aspirations of a generation of young
Yemenis for a peaceful future being dashed.
No amount of humanitarian assistance can
compensate for the prospect of a brighter future.
Only a negotiated political settlement can truly turn
2/22

15/06/2021

the tide in Yemen. A political settlement that ends
the war and ushers in a just and sustainable peace is
what is needed. The parties to the conflict need to be
courageous enough and willing to choose that path over
the continuation of the conflict. Over the past three
years of my assignment in Yemen, we have put many
opportunities to the parties, but in vain. A mediator is
not responsible for the war or for the peace. His, or her,
privilege is not to have the power to end the war, despite
a common assumption to the contrary. The mediator’s
privilege is to present to the parties the ways the war
can end — and again, in this case, so far, in vain.
I want to thank the members of the Council — united
in the purpose they have displayed on Yemen — and in
particular the United States as well as the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman and others, for
their tireless diplomatic support and the considerable
diplomatic firepower that is engaged in support of our
efforts in this latest round of mediation. There has been
no lack of will or effort.
In that context, allow me to turn to the current
negotiations. As members know, for the past year and a
half, I have conducted rounds of shuttle diplomacy with
the parties on issues that I have often described to the
Council and need not repeat here today. It is with deep
regret that today I report that, as of now, the parties
have not overcome their differences. Let me clearly
reiterate to the members of the Council the positions of
the parties, as I understand them, for the benefit of the
historical record, if nothing else.
Ansar Allah is insisting on a stand-alone agreement
on the Al-Hudaydah ports and Sana’a airport as a
condition precedent for the ceasefire and the launch of
the political process. Indeed, in my recent and useful
meeting with Ansar Allah leader Abdelmalik Al-Houthi
in Sana’a, he said to me that only after an agreement on
ports and the airport were implemented would Ansar
Allah begin negotiations on the ceasefire. That was not
enough. The Government of Yemen, on the other hand,
as we know well, insisted that all those issues — the
ports, the airport, the ceasefire and the launching of
the political process — be agreed to and implemented
as a package, in particular with a focus on getting the
ceasefire started. We have offered different solutions to
bridge those positions. Unfortunately, as of now, none
of those suggestions have been accepted. I very much
hope, as I am sure we all do, that the efforts undertaken
by the Sultanate of Oman in particular, as well as
others, following my own visits to Sana’a and Riyadh
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8797

will bear fruit and that we will soon see a different turn
of fate for Yemen.

colleagues in the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement.

I want to stress — as if it needed to be
stressed — that a nationwide ceasefire would have
undeniable humanitarian value: it is a humanitarian
act to agree to start a ceasefire. It would allow for the
silencing of guns, the opening of vital roads, including
in Ma’rib, in Taiz and elsewhere, and a return to some
sense of security for the people of Yemen, especially for
civilians living near the multiple front lines in Yemen.
Ma’rib, I should add, is just one of many fronts, but the
loss of young lives there this past year is unconscionable.
Let me also be clear that the continued closure of Sana’a
airport, as well as the extensive restrictions on fuel
through the ports of Al-Hudaydah, are unjustifiable and
must be addressed urgently. We are already very late to
do so, as Mr. Lowcock has reminded us time and again.

The war has also exacerbated divisions in the
southern governorates. The situation there has come
perilously close on several occasions to all-out conflict.
For the sake of the peace process that we discuss here
during these monthly briefings and in hope of longerterm stability, the partnership established between the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council — thanks to the exceptional and continuing
efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia — absolutely
must continue to hold. Of course, mistrust runs deep,
and there are major differences of opinion on how the
future of Yemen should look. But the only way out of
this quagmire is for the leadership of the Government
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to
commit — as they did in the Riyadh agreement — to
resolve their differences through dialogue now, and
through political negotiations in the longer term.

In Taiz, a great city in the heart of Yemen, people
have experienced six gruelling years of war, and we
have seen many courageous accounts of the situation
there from journalists. The sniping of children is one of
the images that brings it home to me, and I am sure that
it is shocking to all of us. These people have suffered
regular shelling of their homes and schools. Schools are
already difficult to access owing to landmines, which
obstruct the roads that lead to schools and places of
worship. There are also extraordinary impediments to
get to work in order to provide a basic livelihood for
families. Nobody should have to live like that, and it is
a shame on all of us that agreements made in Stockholm
on Taiz have yielded no results whatsoever.
The Stockholm Agreement included the landmark
Hodeidah Agreement, which established a ceasefire
in that strategically located coastal governorate. It
allowed for the distribution of vital goods, including
food, arriving through the Red Sea ports, which had
previously been disrupted by volatile front lines. The
Hodeidah Agreement, sealed in late 2018, also resulted
in a dramatic reduction in civilian deaths and injuries
by as much as 80 per cent. That is not to say that stark
challenges do not persist in Al-Hudaydah. As we will
hear from Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha later,
ceasefire violations are a daily occurrence. In addition,
not enough progress has been achieved on reactivating
the joint Redeployment Coordination Committee, a
critical component of ensuring the ceasefire since the
suspension of the committee in March 2020, despite
the tireless efforts of Lieutenant General Guha and his

I know that I am painting a bleak picture, but I also
want to emphasize, in contrast, the achievements of
Yemenis who — as we all know and as I am sure we
will hear from our briefer — work every day to open
roads and release prisoners, irrespective of the status
of diplomatic mediation between their leaders. Yemenis
have formed alliances and carried out initiatives
that span from non-partisan media platforms to
mobilization, organization and activism of civil society
and community safety networks. Those courageous
efforts are the hope and future of this wonderful and,
currently, tragic country. It is our obligation to support
them, listen to them and understand their leaders.
I want to take a step back to focus the remainder of
my remarks today on what I am trying to learn from the
past three years of my assignment.
Yemen is a tale of missed, and then lost,
opportunities. That is not because the opportunities to
escape from conflict are not frequent or evident. But I
want to be clear — these are difficult decisions. Ending
a war is a difficult decision requiring a confident
leadership prepared to make concessions, which is
always an essential part of decisions to be made to move
from war to peace. This is a heavy responsibility. In a
lifetime of involvement in conflicts of this sort, I have
learned that, while opportunities to end war and move
towards peace are often present, the courage needed to
avail themselves of such opportunities is much rarer.

21-152653/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

15/06/2021

Yemen is no different. At times — and we have
watched it together — leaders have come close to making
that crucial choice of peace over war — to silence the
guns, to start dialogue. We have seen moments of
compromise and opportunity, whether in Stockholm
two years ago, in prisoner exchanges — often more
effective when carried out by the people themselves
without our involvement — or in the de-escalation
that happened from time to time on the many fronts
of Yemen. But time and time again, when one side is
ready to compromise, the other is not. Meanwhile, the
polemics from social media and commentary in Yemen
and from Yemen, raging against the enemy, the other,
drown out the voices of those women, men and children
who — as we all would — choose peace daily.

Time is not on Yemen’s side. Over the course of
the conflict, armed and political actors have multiplied
and fragmented. Foreign interference has grown, not
diminished. What was possible in terms of conflict
resolution years ago is not possible today, and what is
possible today may not be possible in future. I believe
that it is possible that an international conversation or
process may need to restate the realistic goals for a
negotiation process.

What has been most frustrating during my time as
Special Envoy has been the absence of comprehensive
peace talks. Of course, I have emphasized time and
again the primacy and importance of a political process
to negotiate the core political and security issues
needed to end the war and ensure peace. I am reminded
this week, having visited Kuwait a few days ago, that
the last time the parties sat down to discuss these issues
was in Kuwait in 2016, five years ago. This is, of course,
deeply shocking.

My worry is not so much about the ceasefire
as about the future. Let me be clear: Yemen needs a
pluralistic political future, and our political process
must reflect that in the most robust and inclusive way.

Yemen needs an inclusive political process, and
indeed a settlement, if we are to move away from
the cycles of violence and conflict that preceded this
five-year war. The dialogue, which we hope will
start soon, may take a long time. It will be complex
and multilayered. It should help Yemenis identify
the elements of a peaceful settlement. The guiding
principles for that vision, as we have discussed here in
the Chamber, are already clear: political partnership,
accountable governance, sovereignty, economic and
social justice and equal citizenship.
A political settlement will need to reflect the
interests of diverse conflict parties. It must guarantee
the interests and rights of those most affected by the
conflict and not only those who perpetuate and lead the
conflict. My engagements with Yemeni civil society,
women, local leaders and movements and youth over
the past several years — almost certainly not as
frequent as they should have been — are of the utmost
importance to me and my colleagues. Those actors and
champions for peace are the integral partners that we
need to define that road map to peace in Yemen.
4/22

Finally, for most of my time in office, I have been
asking the parties to at least provide for the humanitarian
needs of their people. But real leadership goes beyond
looking to the immediate welfare of the people parties
lead and represent to securing the rights and the future
of their people. That is the real battle, and it lies ahead.

We know very well what the people of Yemen
want. There is no secret in this. It is precisely what the
Security Council has always said it also wants: stability
based on rights and freedom. For its survival and the
welfare of its citizens, Yemen needs a Government
that is accountable to its people and united in support
of fundamental rights, and it needs an open and
prosperous economy linked to the region and beyond.
Every day of this war — every day that we do not get
that ceasefire — the future is increasingly threatened.
Let us, for the sake of Yemen, hope to end this war
without delay so that we can begin the real and final
battle, which is of course the battle for peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Several weeks after starting this
job, in October 2017, I went to Yemen again because
I wanted to see for myself what was going on there
and what the world might help. When I came back, I
described, including here in the Security Council,
what I saw: bombed out buildings, children starving
to death, families crowded into tents, surging disease
and a collapsing economy. The only way to stop all that
suffering, I said, was to end the war. In the meantime,
I noted, the world could also do other things that would
help right away: better protection for civilians, more
access for aid workers, more money for aid agencies
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

and more support for the Yemeni economy. Those five
points will sound familiar. Nearly four years later, they
are still the things we ask for every month.
But I believed then, as I do now, that by acting
on all five of those issues, the world could make a
difference. And over the years, we have seen some
important achievements. In 2018 and 2019, for example,
we stopped a major famine. There are some early signs
that — perhaps — we will manage to stop a big famine
again this year as well, although I should emphasize
that it is still too early to be sure, and a lot depends on
what happens in the next three months.
But two brushes with mass famine in three years
is not a success, even if the worst was avoided. It is a
failure. Millions of Yemenis can attest to that. Their
lives have just kept getting worse.
There is broad agreement on what to do, including in
the Security Council. We need to translate that agreement
into action. That means everyone — especially the
parties to the conflict — must act on all five of those
points that we have been discussing in the Security
Council for years.
Let us start with the protection of civilians. On
average, at least five civilians are now being killed or
injured by hostilities in Yemen every single day. May
was the deadliest month so far this year, with more
than 60 civilians killed across the country. On 10 June,
a missile and drone attack, apparently launched by
Ansar Allah forces, struck Ma’rib city, causing dozens
of civilian casualties. The explosions also damaged
a nearby residence for aid workers. The Ansar Allah
offensive in Ma’rib continues to pose a direct threat
to millions of people, including more than 1 million
Yemenis who fled their homes and are sheltering in and
around the city. Air strikes, shelling, clashes and other
incidents have continued in other parts of Yemen over
the past month as well, causing civilian casualties in
Sa’ada, Taiz, Al-Hudaydah and elsewhere.
At all times, the parties must take constant care to
spare civilians and civilian objects throughout military
operations. There must also be accountability for
serious violations. And, as I have been saying since
2017, Yemen needs a nationwide ceasefire, as Martin
Griffiths referred to in his briefing.
I would also like to draw attention once again to the
plight of migrants and refugees, because yesterday a
boat carrying more than 150 migrants sank off Yemen’s

S/PV. 8797

southern coast. Local reports indicate that 25 bodies
have already washed up onshore; dozens of people are
still missing. Migrants and refugees in Yemen face
some of the most dangerous conditions in the world,
and they need more support.
The next point is access for aid workers. Aid
agencies are now helping more than 10 million people
every month in Yemen, but they still face too many
obstacles. Most, but not all, of the problems are in areas
controlled by Ansar Allah. Senior donor and agency
officials discussed all this in an important meeting
on 1 June. They welcomed progress over the past year
on such issues as assessments, project approvals and
biometrics. But they were also clear that much more was
needed, particularly to facilitate future assessments,
allow aid workers to travel without undue restrictions,
and agree standard operating procedures to fast-track
project approvals, visas and other routine processes.
Where humanitarian agencies cannot do what they
are supposed to do, we can expect funding to decline
and aid to decrease. The parties — especially Ansar
Allah — need to do more to facilitate the work of
humanitarian agencies; that will help convince donors
to sustain funding throughout the year.
My next point relates to funding for the humanitarian
operations. Since the pledging event on 1 March, the
response plan has moved from about 15 per cent funded
to 43 per cent funded today. That is substantial progress,
and I want to thank the United States, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Germany, the
European Union and those others that have stepped up.
As of today, the wider aid operation is on better
financial footing. Starting this month, the World Food
Programme is resuming full rations for 6 million
hungry people whose aid had previously been cut. But
the money will soon start running out again. In August,
UNICEF will cut fuel support for water and sanitation
systems serving 3.4 million people. In September, the
World Health Organization will stop providing the
minimum-service package that enables health care for
6 million people. The cuts will intensify from there. The
dangers of famine, disease, including the coronavirus
disease, and displacement have not gone away, and if
more money does not come in, more people will die.
I therefore call once again on all donors to pay
outstanding pledges right away. More than $200 million
in promises from the March event have still not been
paid, including from some of Yemen’s biggest donors. I

21-152655/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

am also calling on donors to increase their support and
ensure funds are distributed in a balanced way across
all the sectors where we need activities to be financed.
In September, Sweden and Switzerland will
co-host a humanitarian event on Yemen on the margins
of the General Assembly. That meeting is intended to
follow up on the pledging conference of 1 March, and
it is really important that donors use the opportunity to
increase their support and announce it that day.
My next point relates to Yemen’s economy, which
has collapsed as a result of the conflict. It is that
economic collapse that is driving many of the most
severe needs, including the risk of famine.
As I have often said before, the two fastest ways
to help the economy are to free up commercial imports
and to bolster the exchange rate. For years, the Security
Council has agreed that commercial imports must be
able to enter all ports in adequate quantities. But that is
still not happening.
Fuel imports into Al-Hudaydah from January to
May were one fifth the level — 20 per cent — of those
during the equivalent period last year. As a result, fuel
prices are going up, which is in turn making food,
water and everything else more expensive, too, as well
as forcing cuts in essential services.
Increased fuel imports through Aden have not
offset the price increases. The Government recently
authorized four fuel vessels to enter Al-Hudaydah.
All had been previously cleared by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism. One had
been waiting more than six months for Government
permission to proceed.
This cycle of shortages and partial relief, a
stranglehold being enforced then gradually released, has
been going on for a year due to a dispute over revenue.
The parties really have to find a solution to that dispute.
Mr. Griffiths has offered countless ideas to do that; they
need to be taken up. Lifting restrictions on commercial
imports, as well as refraining from interference in the
domestic market, would help millions of people.
The second measure is strengthening the exchange
rate, as this is a key determinant of what people can
afford. The rial is now trading around 940 to the
United States dollar in Government-held areas — a
record low. And in May, food-basket prices exceeded
55,000 rials — a record high. And those two things are
linked. The more the exchange rate collapses, the more
6/22

15/06/2021

expensive food becomes, and so what is needed is what
has worked previously: foreign exchange injections
into the banking system would help stabilize the rial
and bring down prices. And I really hope that Yemen’s
partners will work closely with the Government to
achieve that.
Lastly, I turn to the question of progress towards
peace. I strongly support everything Mr. Griffiths
just told the Council. There has been no shortage of
opportunities to stop the war. But the parties have failed
to take those opportunities. As I said at the beginning,
I have been calling for a nationwide ceasefire since late
2017. It would give Yemenis a break from the violence
and create space for more political engagement. There
should be no preconditions. War has solved nothing. I
appeal to the parties to try something different and give
peace a chance.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al Naggar.
Ms. Al Naggar (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on Yemen. I do so today on behalf
of the SOS Center for Youth Capabilities Development,
which is a non-governmental organization that works
on governance, peacebuilding, development and
human rights.
I am one of the millions of Yemeni women who
have suffered the scourge of war. In late March 2015,
as mortars and missiles began to fall around us in
Aden, my family and I fled to Taiz, in search of shelter.
But Taiz was no different: at every sunset, we could
hear the rumble of tanks as they passed through our
neighbourhood before firing on the city below. We
fled again, this time to Sana’a, but unfortunately there
too the sound of aerial bombing followed us. I cannot
describe to Council members the terror that haunts me
and so many other Yemenis like me who have endured
untold suffering throughout almost seven years of war.
Yemen today faces multiple crises. With the recent
escalation on the frontlines and the challenges in
implementing a de-escalation agreement, the country
is far from achieving any political, economic or social
stability in the near future.
Even prior to the outbreak of war, Yemen was
the poorest country in the region, and, to date, the
country has lost $90 billion in economic output. The
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

alarming decline of the economy and currency since
the outbreak of the war, in addition to the devastating
impact of the coronavirus disease, have made the lives
of millions of ordinary Yemenis more bitter as they
face severe shortages of fuel, exorbitant increases in
the costs of the necessities of life and no access to the
most basic services, such as electricity, water or health
care especially for women, who have been considerably
affected. To survive, many women reduce how much
they eat so that they can give more food to their children.
They cut down on the number of meals they take, and
they borrow food from friends or relatives. Families
are going into debt to meet their most basic needs, and
women are under increasingly greater pressure as the
number of households headed by women grows.
With regard to Yemeni women’s leadership,
humanitarian relief and peacebuilding, our resilience is
close to a breaking point. The conflict has put immense
strain on the social fabric of our society. Tensions
are high since the outbreak of violent local disputes.
Gender-based violence is increasing, and it often goes
unreported owing to survivors’ fear of being killed,
detained or exposed to further violence. Survivors are
also silent because of stigma and a lack of security and
the rule of law.
Despite
this
challenging
situation,
the
overwhelming majority — 80 per cent of humanitarian
first responders — are women. Yemeni women have
been providing life-saving humanitarian assistance,
even when the international community has been
unable to reach communities desperately in need.
When cities were under siege or roads had become
unsafe for the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
Yemeni women stepped in to negotiate local ceasefires
and successfully called on warring parties to open up
humanitarian corridors.
In my work, I support the inspiring efforts of
young women and men to mediate, resolve conflict
and build peace. While the conflict rages at the
national level — with women and young people largely
marginalized by the parties to the conflict and the
United Nations — women are leading the peace agenda
in our communities. Women have played an important
role in addressing tribal tensions and community strife
because they know their own communities; they best
understand their needs, as well as the factors that
trigger tension and conflict.

S/PV. 8797

Women are doing all that against the odds,
challenging gender norms and with far too little
backing and resources from national and international
actors. Increasingly in the past year, women in the north
faced an additional hurdle in their efforts: authorities
have imposed mahram, whereby women must be
accompanied by a male relative when travelling.
Despite the critical role that Yemeni women have
played in humanitarian action and peacebuilding, they
have been excluded from formal and meaningful roles
in the United Nations-led peace process, and, for the
first time in two decades, they have been completely
excluded from the new Yemeni Government. The
United Nations and Yemeni authorities must do more
to ensure women’s formal and direct participation as
stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000). In addition, as
the Security Council itself has recognized, politically
active women and women human rights defenders face
threats, intimidation and attacks for speaking out about
violations in their communities. To ensure that Yemeni
women can continue to play active roles in public life, it
is critical that they can do so without fear of retaliation.
The Yemeni people feel disappointment and
abandoned by the international community. We need
help from the Security Council, and we need it now. We
therefore urge the Council to do the following.
First, the Security Council must redouble efforts
to engage conflict parties and their backers to secure
a sustainable, inclusive and nationwide ceasefire, in
line with resolution 2532 (2020), that would support
viable conditions for protecting civilians, including
women, and lead to a resumption of peace negotiations.
That goes hand in hand with fully enforcing the
Riyadh agreement as a steppingstone for achieving
stability and safety for the communities living in the
southern governorates.
Secondly, the Security Council must undertake
more coordination and mobilization with Member
States, especially those with influence on the conflict
parties, to expedite an inclusive, transparent and
accountable peace process, and ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women, youth and civil
society of all political backgrounds from all regions of
Yemen, including the south, in all diplomatic tracks and
stages of the peace process, while ensuring a minimum
30 per cent quota for women as a matter of urgency.
Thirdly, the Security Council must call on the
leadership of the United Nations Mission to Support the

21-152657/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

Hodeidah Agreement and the international community
to significantly increase support for local and national
Yemeni women-led and women’s rights organizations,
especially core, flexible and long-term funding, and
publicly underscore the crucial and legitimate efforts
of women peacebuilders and humanitarians.
Fourthly, the Security Council must initiate and
coordinate with Member States the provision of an
effective and sustainable economic rescue package
for Yemen. The package should include effective and
sustainable measures to help stabilize the economy
and strengthen the financial system to prevent further
increases in food prices and enhance living conditions.
The President: I thank Ms. Al Naggar for her
briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in the Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
May I start by thanking our briefers for their briefings
today, but in particular for their work over the past
few years and months. I would also like to thank Mark
Lowcock as outgoing Under-Secretary-General, and I
look forward to continuing our cooperation with Martin
Griffiths in his new role.
Mr. Griffiths recent visit to Sana’a is welcome, but
also sadly underlines that the Houthis waited until the
last days of his tenure to invite him back to Sana’a for
the first time in over a year. I think it is clear that the
Houthis do not have the courage to embrace a ceasefire.
Instead, last week, they again targeted civilian sites in
Ma’rib indiscriminately with ballistic missiles, killing
10 civilians, and, on Sunday, a Houthi attack hit a
Saudi school. I strongly condemn those acts as well as
the Houthis’ continued crackdown on the rights and
freedoms of Yemeni women as well as religious and
ethnic minorities.
I welcome Ms. Al Naggar’s briefing today and
clearly hear her call for a ceasefire backed up by the
resources and support for women-led organizations for
inclusive path to peace. I, and I am sure others, will
encourage the new Special Envoy to consider how they
8/22

15/06/2021

may work closely with you to make the process more
inclusive and ensure that the positions of women, youth
and minorities are genuinely represented going forward.
I would also like to thank Mr. Lowcock for his
tireless efforts. In the past years as conflict has ravaged
Yemen, but his and the United Nations efforts have
helped support those in most need and save lives.
But the world’s worst man-made humanitarian
crisis continues. Severe fuel shortages continue to
blight Yemen, meaning that the fuel imported into
Al-Hudaydah is only one third of what would normally
be expected. The United Kingdom calls on the parties to
find a permanent solution to that issue. The Houthis must
ensure that fuel imports are distributed transparently,
and the Government of Yemen must ensure a reliable
and sustained flow of fuel into northern Yemen.
Earlier this month the Security Council (see
S/PV.8786) met to discuss the perilous situation of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker — a year after the Council first
held a dedicated discussion on the FSO SAFER (see
S/2020/721). Yet the tanker is no closer to being made
safe. This issue is in the gift of the Houthis to deliver.
We have heard the devastating toll that a worst-case
scenario could put 670,000 lives at risk and take decades
to clear. Rather than hiding being endless bureaucratic
hurdles, the Houthis must engage substantively to avoid
a potential disaster.
Finally, as Mr. Griffiths said, Yemeni people
have been paying a high price of lost and missed
opportunities over six years. As we heard, a nationwide
ceasefire would be a first critical step on the path to a
future of stability, rights and freedom.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Al Naggar for their briefings
this morning.
The escalating level of violence in Yemen amid all
the de-escalation efforts is unsettling. Kenya strongly
condemns the two separate incidents of missile attacks
launched in Ma’rib in the past 10 days, resulting in
the loss of lives of innocent civilians. We convey our
condolences to the affected families, the Government
and the people of Yemen for the lives lost in those horrific
and despicable attacks. No effort should be spared in
bringing to justice the perpetrators of those abhorrent
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The recent explosion in Abyan that claimed six
troops belonging to the Southern Transitional Council
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

is a stark warning of a possible surge in terrorism. We
must remain acutely alert to these emerging threats and
undertake pre-emptive measures. Otherwise, Yemen
could become a net exporter of terrorism and violent
extremism to the region and across the Gulf of Aden, to
the Horn of Africa and beyond.
It is disappointing that some parties are capitalizing
on the intensive diplomatic engagements to scale-up
their military interventions with a view to shifting
the trajectory of negotiations. We therefore urge all
the parties to display sincere and genuine political
commitment through the cessation of violence, at the
minimum. Kenya hopes that the ongoing diplomatic
process will result in an inclusive settlement that takes
into consideration the needs of the population.
We strongly recommend that the peace resolution
and recovery process incorporate disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plus, conducted in a
fashion that ensures that reintegrated former fighters
do not relapse to armed conflict or become radicalized
by terrorist groups.
Peace efforts must also recognize that a generation
of Yemeni youth have been denied access to education
by virtue of the protracted conflict. The international
community must therefore deliberately invest in the
young population through capacity-building in order to
equip them with skills that would enable them to make
a decent living and contribute to national development.
With regard to the dire humanitarian situation,
Kenya welcomes the steps taken by donor countries
to increase their funding for humanitarian relief
efforts. We encourage them to honour and sustain
their commitments. On that note, and in line with the
Hodeidah Agreement, we urge the relevant authorities
to ease the restrictions imposed on fuel imports, which
create an additional burden due to their impact on the
price of basic commodities, humanitarian operations
and essential public services.
Kenya welcomes the discussions between the
United Nations Office for Project Services and the
Houthi technical team on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We
hope the talks will lead to the rapid deployment of the
inspection team so as to avert a looming environmental
catastrophe that would have a devastating impact on
Yemen and the surrounding region.
I reiterate that the security of the Red Sea, the Gulf
of Aden and the Indian Ocean is vital to international

S/PV. 8797

trade and commerce and should not be put in jeopardy.
In that regard, the world must speak in one voice and
take collective action against all threats to the security
and commercial viability of those maritime domains.
In conclusion, we would like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock
for their hard work and commitment to Yemen. We look
forward to working closely with Mr. Griffiths in his
new capacity and wish Mr. Lowcock all the best in his
future endeavours.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his
overview of the situation in Yemen and the steps he
has taken to revive the comprehensive negotiation
process under the auspices of the United Nations. We
also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his assessment of the
humanitarian situation in the country, and we listened
very carefully to Ms. Najiba Al Naggar.
The Russian Federation is closely following the
situation in Yemen, which is in its seventh year of
acute military and political crisis. We have consistently
advocated for the parties in Yemen to end the violence
as soon as possible and move towards a peaceful
resolution of their differences. There is no alternative
to inter-Yemeni talks that take into account the interests
and concerns of all.
In that regard, we reaffirm our support for the
relevant United Nations efforts on this issue. We are
grateful to Mr. Griffiths for his work in Yemen over the
years and for his attempts to find solutions and launch
negotiations between the parties. It has always been a
difficult task, and there is still too much work to be
done to bring about peace. We are concerned about the
ongoing violence in various parts of the country. At the
same time, we see a common goal — a comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the many problems besetting
Yemen, its people and, to a large extent, its neighbours
in the region.
Finding a solution to the Yemeni crisis was
discussed in detail during talks held in Sochi on
26 May between Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and
Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of Yemen, who was in Russia on a working
visit. We will continue to actively encourage the official
Yemeni authorities, the Ansar Allah movement and
other Yemeni forces to adopt a constructive approach
and be ready to compromise when considering their

21-152659/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

differences. We welcome the constructive role of
regional States in mediation efforts.
We are convinced that the cessation of
hostilities should be accompanied by a series of
confidence-building measures in the political, military
and socioeconomic spheres, which would help to
alleviate the dire situation of the Yemeni people,
which the United Nations characterizes as the greatest
humanitarian crisis in the world.
In that connection, we call on donors to provide
the necessary financial support for United Nations
humanitarian assistance. We also stress the need to
fully lift the naval, land and air blockade of Yemen and
the restrictions on the delivery of food, medicine, fuel
and other essential goods. We recall that the assistance
provided must not be biased or discriminatory.
We are convinced that a mutually acceptable
solution, free from hidden political agendas, can also be
found to the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We call
on the parties concerned, including the United Nations
Office for Project Services, to take constructive action.
In conclusion, I would like to once again call on
our colleagues to cooperate in the common interest of
general de-escalation in the region, including on the
basis of relevant resolution 598 (1987), as well as the
Russian concept for collective security in the Persian
Gulf region.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): First, I would like to
thank Ms. Najiba Al Naggar for her frank and very
inspiring words this morning. Listening to her reminds
us clearly why a solution is urgently needed to the
conflict in Yemen. After six years of war, the people of
her country deserve a peaceful and prosperous future.
That is what we keep saying when we meet here. All
Yemenis, regardless of gender or age, must be afforded
every opportunity to play a substantial role in shaping
that future.
I would like to tell Ms. Al Naggar that Yemen needs
women like her at the table, both in the peace talks and
in the Government. We truly regret the exclusion of
women from the current Government. The full, equal
and meaningful participation of women can unlock
inclusive paths to building peace for ordinary Yemenis
and for their children, rebuilding infrastructure and
institutions, and, as Ms. Al Naggar said this morning,
working at the community level to defuse tensions and,
against the odds, build the peace that we keep talking
10/22

15/06/2021

about. Evidence shows us that women at the peace table
can at least help to produce a more sustainable peace.
That has been our experience on the island of Ireland in
the last 20 years.
To the parties in Yemen, I would like to say that
women’s direct representation is not optional; it is
actually their right. The Security Council has been
united in calling for this.
Grass-roots peacebuilders like Ms. Al Naggar and
civil society organizations can have a powerful impact
in sustaining ceasefire implementation and building
lasting peace.
Here is a striking figure: young people represent
70 per cent of the population. They also deserve their
place in this discussion; they should be at the table when
it comes to issues that critically affect their futures. We
are relying on them, of course, to carry forward today’s
peacebuilding work into their future.
I want to salute Ms. Al Naggar’s courage and the
honesty of the message she brought to us. We know that
much clearly remains to be done, but her very forward
and concrete ideas this morning can one day become
a reality. All of us at this table today must finish that
work so that the Yemeni people can have an opportunity
for real peace.
I want to sincerely thank Martin Griffiths, who,
as he told us, is concluding his service as Special
Envoy after three challenging years. We very much
look forward to working with him in his new role as
Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs.
We know that he will bring to that role and its new
responsibilities the same energy and dedication he
brought to the post he is leaving. Despite the overall
rather “bleak picture” that Mr. Griffiths painted for us
this morning, we were nonetheless encouraged by his
visit to Sana’a for the first time in a year and by the
sustained diplomatic momentum generated by efforts
of regional and international actors to bring an end to
this conflict.
However difficult the decisions may be, moving
from war to peace remains the only option, as
Mr. Griffiths put it. We cannot escape the simple reality
that what is needed now is decisive political will among
the parties to the conflict and that they once and for
all put the Yemeni people first and bring a conclusive
end to the unconscionable violence on the basis of an
inclusive political dialogue for the future of the country.
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate our call for a nationwide ceasefire,
and in particular we call on the Houthis to immediately
halt the deadly offensive on Ma’rib, which continues
to cause, as we have heard, widespread suffering,
especially for those in informal camp settings.
We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks
earlier this month on Ma’rib city, whose victims
included children. We call on all parties to adhere to
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
and human rights law in terms of protecting civilians.
Ireland fully supports the work of the Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen and calls for enabling full and
unfettered access for the Group to carry out its work.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for his briefing today and for his outstanding
and dedicated service at the United Nations. We know
that this morning’s meeting is his final appearance
before the Council to discuss the situation in Yemen.
During his tenure, he has shone a much-needed spotlight
on this tragic humanitarian crisis. We all owe him a
debt of appreciation for paying attention to this tragedy.
Regrettably, as we heard this morning, food
insecurity persists at crisis levels throughout the
country. The economic impact of the conflict continues
to bring about dire humanitarian consequences. It
is shocking to hear that the cost of food has reached
record highs. Basic food items are out of reach for
millions living with chronic and acute hunger. There
should be no better incentive for stopping the war than
ending this indefensible suffering.
Finally, earlier this month, the Council discussed
the decaying FSO SAFER tanker, which poses an
undeniable humanitarian and environmental threat.
Ireland welcomes renewed efforts to reach agreement
on access for a United Nations inspection team. We
once again reiterate our call on the Houthis and the
United Nations to reach an agreement on that issue as
soon as possible.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Al Naggar
for their detailed briefings. We also wish to convey
Mexico’s greetings to the Yemeni delegation.
My country, Mexico, notes with great concern the
significant rise in humanitarian needs, in contrast with
the limited resources available for a comprehensive
response.

S/PV. 8797

The disproportionate impact of the conflict in
Yemen on vulnerable groups, particularly women
and children, makes it essential to break the cycle of
conflict and food insecurity. Some 12 million people are
already in a state of dire need, 16 million are dependent
on humanitarian assistance for their livelihoods, and
these numbers continue to rise. Another example of
this vicious cycle is the growing number of internally
displaced persons as a result of the Houthi offensive in
Ma’rib.
Mexico strongly condemns the attacks on a gas
station and a residential neighbourhood in Ma’rib
and on the Thabit Brothers industrial compound in
Al-Hudaydah, as well as the attack on an ambulance
and humanitarian personnel. We deplore any action
that results in fatalities and injuries, especially those
that hinder the laudable work of the medical corps.
Mexico also condemns the orchestrated attacks against
Saudi targets.
We call on the Houthi militias to cease hostilities
immediately. Attacks against civilian targets are a
serious violation of international humanitarian law,
which, in addition to causing unnecessary death and
injury, inhibit peace efforts and affect the stability
of the region. We urgently call for these attacks to be
investigated and for the perpetrators to be identified
and brought to justice. We also call for the cessation of
all arms transfers to parties to the conflict.
We welcome the hosting of the third Humanitarian
Senior Officials Meeting by Sweden and the European
Commission on 1 June. In this regard, I am pleased to
announce that the Government of Mexico will contribute
$50,000 to the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for
COVID-19 for Yemen. We also reiterate our call on
donors to continue to meet their obligations.
We note with concern the obstacles to the
authorization of humanitarian operations, and we call
on both Ansar Allah and the Government of Yemen to
facilitate unrestricted access and expedite permits for
humanitarian programmes.
Mexico supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
aimed at promoting a ceasefire, the opening of ports
and airports and, eventually, a political transition.
We recall that a cessation of violence and freedom of
movement are essential for humanitarian operations.
We appreciate hearing the details of the Special Envoy’s
discussions with the Houthi leadership, as well as the

21-1526511/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

results of his recent meetings in Riyadh and Tehran to
make progress on the ceasefire and the political process.
We also reiterate our support for the work of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement. We recognize that the Mission’s
performance is essential to the full implementation of
the Agreement, which is a cornerstone for the stability
of the city and port operations. We urge the parties, and
in particular Ansar Allah, to maintain close cooperation
with the Mission and ensure its free movement.
We also welcome the Special Envoy’s recent
meetings with representatives of civil society. The full,
equal and substantive participation of women has proved
crucial, for example, in the release of detainees. We
therefore underscore that broad social participation is
indispensable for the success of the political transition.
Before concluding, we would once again like to
express our concern about the threat posed by the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We regret the fact that, in spite of
the Security Council’s call, Ansar Allah has still not
authorized its inspection by the United Nations. We
reiterate that any accident will significantly affect
civilians, including the Houthis themselves.
(spoke in English)
Last but certainly not least, allow me to express
my recognition of Mr. Griffiths’ tireless efforts as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. On
behalf of my delegation, I wish him great success in
his new role and look forward to continuing to work
with him in that capacity. I would also like to thank
Mr. Lowcock for his tireless efforts, his dedication and
his sense of responsibility. I wish him every success in
the future.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We
also thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for
their briefings. We very much welcome the insightful
remarks of Ms. Najiba Al Naggar. Her activism is
indispensable to achieving lasting peace in Yemen.
The conflict in Yemen is a multidimensional
and toxic mix of continued fighting, a catastrophic
humanitarian situation and economic collapse, all
existing simultaneously against the backdrop of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We condemn the
unabated fighting that has resulted in May being one
of the deadliest months for civilians in the conflict for
2021. Also unacceptable is the impact of the fighting on
the region, as recently exemplified by the drone attack
12/22

15/06/2021

against a school in the region of Asir, Saudi Arabia.
Those continued attacks, which constitute a violation
of international law, have denied more than 2 million
children access to education. We strongly urge the
parties to work with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
establish an action plan to end and prevent the grave
violations of children’s rights.
The recent announcement by the Saudi Arabialed coalition to end attacks is a much-welcomed
initiative, which is necessary to create an environment
conducive to the peace process. Without a nationwide
ceasefire and a resumption of political talks, civilians
in Yemen will continue to carry the burden of that
conflict. It is therefore critical that the parties honour
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
which demands the rapid and unimpeded passage of
impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need. In
a country where malnutrition rates among women and
children remain the highest in the world, humanitarian
assistance is the difference between life and death.
To that end, while we welcome the improved
operating environment, the increase in funding for
the humanitarian response plan and the World Food
Programme’s announcement to resume monthly
distributions to approximately 6 million people in areas
with the highest rates of food insecurity, the situation
remains so dire that we must collectively redouble our
efforts. We must also pay close attention to the plight
of the migrants and refugees living in Yemen or using
it as a transit point.
While the humanitarian situation needs our
attention, another issue is the economy. The decreased
purchasing power of Yemeni households makes
basic goods and services inaccessible to many. We
echo Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s appeals
for support to the economy and call for a lifting of
restrictions on civilian commercial imports.
The only way to achieve durable peace in Yemen
is to resume political negotiations. For that to be
successful, certain prerequisites are needed.
First, the political process must be inclusive of
all groups within Yemen, including women and civil
society organizations, who play a critical role in local
mediation and peacebuilding.
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, discussions must account for, and
sufficiently reflect, the plurality of voices that exist
within Yemen.
Thirdly the process must be Yemeni-led and
Yemeni-owned. An absence of political will would
render all efforts to achieve peace futile.
Ms. Al Naggar underscored that Yemen is at
a breaking point. She also emphasized that the
Yemeni people feel abandoned by the international
community. We must be mindful of that. We therefore
echo Mr. Griffith’s assessment that time is not on
Yemen’s side.
Before concluding, we turn our attention to the issue
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Our appeals for concrete
progress on that issue and for the parties and relevant
stakeholders to avoid its politicization must not become
mere platitudes. We must continue to exert pressure
on the parties, both bilaterally and multilaterally, until
there is an adequate resolution. The potential impact of
a spill or explosion is far too grave for us to relent.
In conclusion, we commend the diplomatic
engagement and the commitment displayed by the
international community and various humanitarian
organizations to the people of Yemen. I have no doubt
that this commitment, coupled with political will
from the parties, will result in a political solution that
limits the multigenerational impact of the conflict and
results in a stable, peaceful and prosperous Yemen. As
Mr. Lowcock so aptly concluded earlier, war has solved
nothing. It is indeed time to give peace a chance.
I cannot cede the floor before conveying our
heartfelt gratitude to Mr. Griffiths for his dedication to
this file and to the people of Yemen. His will leave big
shoes to fill, for he has poured his heart and soul into
finding a solution. We will miss him, and we wish him
well in his next assignment. We also thank Mr. Lowcock
for his unwavering efforts, dedication and service and
wish him all the best as he moves on. I wish them both
profound peace.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their comprehensive briefings. I also
thank Ms. Najiba Al Naggar for sharing her views. I
welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to
our meeting today.
There have been no significant changes in Yemen’s
peace process despite the tireless and resilient efforts

S/PV. 8797

of the regional and international communities. In
recent months, the military escalation in many parts of
Yemen has continued, especially in Ma’rib, Taiz and
Al-Hudaydah. People continue to be killed every day.
We share the view expressed by other Member
States that there is no military solution to the conflict
in Yemen. The only way out is for all parties to cease
military hostilities and spare no effort to work with the
Special Envoys, regional partners and the international
community to secure the acceptance of the United
Nations-led peace proposal for Yemen.
On the humanitarian issue, we welcome the
improvement of humanitarian work in comparison with
the same period last year. Thanks to recent funding
from donors, the World Food Programme has resumed
its monthly distributions to 6 million Yemenis in the
areas with the highest rates of food insecurity. However,
more funding and progress are required to ensure the
smooth operation and stability of aid activities in the
remaining months of this year.
Furthermore, increased hostilities and subsequent
displacement, economic crisis, fuel shortages, food
insecurity, starvation and the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic remain grave concerns.
More than 20 million people rely on life-saving
programmes, and at least 3 million people, including
1.58 million children, have been internally displaced.
In addition, the education of about 1.4 million children
has been disrupted owing to school closures in 2020
and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Against that backdrop, we would like to reiterate our
call for prompt, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
to Yemenis in need, especially in the north. In addition,
we stress the urgency of further lifting the sea blockade
to ensure predictable food and fuel supplies. All parties
must also comply with international humanitarian law
and implement resolution 2573 (2021), including the
protection of civilian infrastructure, which is critical
to the delivery of humanitarian aid. Moreover, it is
crucial to ensure the provision of education and related
services for children.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue, we reiterate
our deep concern over the grave threat the tanker poses
to the environment, the economy and the people in the
region. There is an urgent need to turn commitments
into actions. The United Nations technical team
should be allowed to perform its tasks and conduct the
necessary repairs to the tanker without further delay.

21-1526513/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

Last but not least, we reiterate our support for the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and
the Riyadh agreement.
As today is the last briefing by Special Envoy
Griffiths, I would like to thank him for his tireless
efforts and contributions to the promotion of peace,
security and stability in Yemen and the region. I wish
him all the best in his future endeavours.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their valuable briefings on the situation developments
in Yemen. I also welcome the participation in the
meeting of Ms. Najiba Al Naggar and took careful note
of her briefing.
Diplomatic efforts have continued to convince
the parties to the conflict to agree on a ceasefire and
resume the peace process. There is no alternative to
an inclusive negotiated solution that takes into account
the interests of all Yemenis, without any exception,
exclusion or marginalization.
The conflict has lasted too long. The events and
tragedies that have afflicted the Yemeni people have
shown that military approaches to impose a fait accompli
by force have resulted in more victims, destruction,
displacement and threats to millions of people and
have undermined opportunities for peace. We believe
that this situation is unacceptable, especially given
the grave deterioration in the humanitarian situation.
Tunisia therefore supports once again the efforts of the
United Nations and the contributions of the international
community to end the conflict and resume the political
process with the aim of achieving a peaceful solution
that puts an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people,
preserves the sovereignty, independence and unity of
Yemen and restores its security and stability.
In that context, we call on the parties to the conflict
to effectively engage in the political process, declare a
comprehensive ceasefire and uphold the best interests
of Yemen and its people. We also commend the efforts
of Mr. Griffiths to build trust between the parties to
the conflict and facilitate communication with a view
to launching the peace process and enhancing women’s
participation in it.
14/22

15/06/2021

We condemn the continued attack on Ma’rib, which
further complicates the situation and undermines efforts
to end the crisis and exacerbates the humanitarian
crisis. We once again reiterate the need for the parties
to the conflict to commit themselves to saving civilians
and civilian facilities and respecting international law
and international human rights law. In that context,
my country’s delegation reiterates its condemnation
of the continuing attacks against the territory of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the targeting of civilians
in that country. We call on the Houthis to put an end to
such actions.
Yemen is facing the gravest humanitarian crisis in
the world, which has been exacerbated by continuous
military operations, the deterioration of economic and
living conditions and a lack of relief assistance, as well
as the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
According to international reports, millions of people
are threatened by famine and 54 per cent of Yemenis
require food assistance.
In that regard, we renew our call to facilitate the
provision of unhindered humanitarian and medical
assistance to those in need, lift port restrictions and
open airports. Sufficient financing for humanitarian
operations must be provided in order to allow
humanitarian assistance for the Yemeni people to
continue and their urgent needs to be met.
At the beginning of this month, the Security Council
devoted an entire meeting to the issue of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker (see S/PV.8786), which seriously threatens to
bring about an unprecedented environmental, economic
and humanitarian catastrophe that could paralyse the
movement of more than 20,000 ships in the Red Sea,
one of the busiest shipping channels in the world. We
therefore reiterate our call for the necessary measures to
be concluded to allow United Nations experts to access
the tanker and carry out the much-needed maintenance
as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I once again express my thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Griffiths for his efforts during his
time in office as Special Envoy at the helm of the United
Nations Office in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Lowcock for
his valuable efforts in the humanitarian field, which
unfortunately has become the most prominent feature
of most crises in the world. I wish them both every
success in their future endeavours.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to start this month with a special thank you
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to our briefers. I thank Special Envoy Griffiths for his
work to end the war in Yemen. He has spent more than
three years working to bring the parties together to end
this conflict and improve the humanitarian situation.
The United States appreciates its close cooperation
with Mr. Griffiths. We look forward to continuing that
cooperation as he takes up his new role.
As this is also Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s
last scheduled briefing to the Security Council, we
wish to offer our most sincere thanks to him for shining
a light on the world’s most difficult, challenging
corners. On Yemen and beyond, over the past three and
half years he has stood up for humanity, given voice to
those most in need and spurred the Security Council to
action. We wish him the very best in his next chapter.
We thank our civil society briefer, Ms. Najiba
Al Naggar, for her work advocating for women
and young people’s meaningful participation in
peacebuilding efforts.
Over the past year, Special Envoy Griffiths has
negotiated a proposal that would ease restrictions at
Al-Hudaydah port and Sana’a airport — a key Houthi
demand — establish a ceasefire and begin inclusive
political talks. The Saudi and Yemeni Governments
have expressed their willingness to commit to that
proposal. By contrast, the Houthis have refused to
engage meaningfully on a ceasefire or take steps to
resolve the nearly seven-year-long conflict. They refuse
to even discuss the question of a ceasefire with Special
Envoy Griffiths. Instead, the Houthis proceed with
their devastating offensive on Ma’rib.
On 6 June, the Houthis callously struck a gasoline
station, killing 21 Yemenis, including a young girl
who was burned beyond recognition. We condemn
these and other egregious actions by the Houthis, who
continue to inflict lasting and irreversible damage on
the Yemeni people. Each day that the Houthis keep up
their offensive in Ma’rib, they ignore the Council’s calls
for them to stop the violence and enter negotiations.
Houthi intransigence is not the only impediment
to lasting peace in Yemen. We call on the Yemeni
Government and the Southern Transitional Council to
put the interests of the Yemeni people first and resolve
their differences. Time is of the essence. The people
of Yemen need a unified Government that can provide
services and exert leadership through this time of crisis.
The Government and the Southern Transitional Council
are restarting negotiations on implementing the Riyadh

S/PV. 8797

Agreement, and we hope those negotiations will bear
fruit. We wish to thank the Saudi Government for its
continued facilitation of those discussions.
Meanwhile, Yemen remains one of the world’s
largest humanitarian emergencies, with an estimated
20.7 million people — 66 per cent of the population — in
need of humanitarian assistance this year. There is only
one way to permanently address the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen — a lasting ceasefire and an inclusive political
solution. Until then, the international community,
especially our partners in the Gulf, must step up to fund
the humanitarian response without delay. We urge all
parties to permit the free flow of both commercial and
humanitarian commodities through the Red Sea ports.
Otherwise, conditions for the 70 per cent of the Yemeni
population living in Houthi-controlled areas are certain
to deteriorate.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. As we heard earlier this month (see
S/PV.8786), the risks of a catastrophic spill or explosion
grow daily. Yet there has been no significant progress
since the Council’s previous meeting dedicated to the
issue (see S/2020/721), almost a year ago. The Houthis
have ignored the Council’s renewed call for action
earlier this month and continue to obstruct a United
Nations assessment while lives and livelihoods hang in
the balance. We call on the Houthis to allow the United
Nations unconditional and safe access to conduct
the assessment and initial repair mission without
further delay. The responsibility for this impending
humanitarian, economic and environment disaster lies
with the Houthis — and the Houthis alone.
Turning to the upcoming mandate renewal for
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA), I want to note the Mission’s
important role in monitoring the implementation of
the governorate-wide ceasefire agreed to in Stockholm
in December 2018. Despite the significant challenges
over the past year, the ceasefire and UNMHA have
contributed to an overall reduction in violence across
the governorate and the safety and partial functioning
of the Red Sea ports, thus enabling the receiving and
offloading of vessels and conditions that permit some
economic activity and humanitarian access. We look
forward to UNMHA’s renewal.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
briefings and for their strenuous efforts over the past

21-1526515/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

few years. Since it is Mr. Griffiths’ last briefing, let
me thank him wholeheartedly for doing an impressive
job under extremely difficult circumstances and
welcome him to his new position at the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I also extend a
warm and special welcome to Ms. Najiba Al Naggar
and thank her for joining us today and sharing her
important perspectives. She demonstrates how ensuring
the meaningful participation of civil society groups is
not just the right thing to do, but the smart thing to do.
We stand at a crossroads. Negotiations on the
four-point plan have been going on for more than a
year. Regrettably, the Houthis have signalled that
they would like to limit the deal to humanitarian
measures — opening the airport in Sana’a and the
port of Al-Hudaydah — before any negotiations on
the ceasefire. We stress, however, that a nationwide
ceasefire is indeed a humanitarian measure. This
is a man-made crisis caused by the armed conflict.
According to the World Food Programme, 400,000
children in Yemen under the age of 5 are likely to die of
starvation in 2021, an unthinkable tragedy. The Houthis
will carry a very heavy responsibility if they continue to
reject a nationwide ceasefire deal and ignore parties that
are ready for peace. That opportunity might not come
again. We call on all parties to engage in unconditional
talks to end the suffering of the Yemeni people.
We all heard from Ms. Al Naggar the importance of
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
As we have done several times in the Security Council,
Norway will continue to advocate for an inclusive
political process. Women and civil society groups in
Yemen have considerable experience in brokering
local truces, reopening roads and freeing prisoners.
Nevertheless, they still face significant barriers to
meaningful engagement in peace and security processes
and are subject to harassment and intimidation. We
must empower those most affected by conflict to be
at the centre of shaping solutions. Participation should
not be limited to those who resort to violence. There
are other groups with important influence in Yemen,
including political parties, tribes and local authorities.
Negotiations will also need to address the root causes
of conflict. The process must be Yemeni-owned and
Yemeni-led, and regional actors must play an important
role. With that in mind, we are deeply concerned about
signs of increasing unrest and destabilization in the
south. We urge regional actors with influence over the
parties to use it towards a solution.
16/22

15/06/2021

Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the
growing Houthi demands, it is clearly unrealistic to
repair the ship and make it operational again due to its
dilapidated condition. Even if the United Nations were
to repair the ship, it would first have to be inspected
to assess its needs and condition, and then a mutual
agreement would have to be reached. As Council
members, we should call on the Houthi leaders to act
responsibly and reach an agreement. It is unacceptable
to put the blame on the United Nations. Given the
urgency of the matter, the United Nations needs to
focus on sustainable contingency planning and other
possible solutions as soon as possible.
Alarmingly, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate. The number of deaths due to the
coronavirus disease are clearly underreported, and
more vaccines are urgently needed in the north. In
addition, the shortage of fuel continues to impact the
situation. Reports of serious violations of humanitarian
law, particularly in Ma’rib, also continue. We are
particularly appalled by reports that the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict is openly taking
place. Norway would welcome a detailed analysis
on this in the Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict. Echoing others, we are deeply
concerned about reports of recent attacks in Ma’rib,
causing civilian casualties, including children.
As I noted earlier, we stand at a crossroads for the
people of Yemen, and we have heard voices calling for
peace — as we did this morning. We hope the Council
will also add its voice.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his efforts for
more than three years to secure peace in Yemen. We
look forward to working with him in his new role as
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and
his service as head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and wish him the best in
his future endeavours. I also thank Ms. Najiba Al
Naggar for her briefing and for bringing a civil society
perspective to today’s meeting.
The ongoing fighting in several parts of Yemen,
including the continued attacks in Ma’rib by Ansar
Allah, has undermined the prospects for peace in the
country. Despite intense regional and international
diplomatic efforts, including by the United Nations, a
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

breakthrough to end hostilities has unfortunately not
yet been achieved. With every passing day, the human
toll of the conflict is increasing, especially among
Yemeni children, as witnessed recently during the
attacks in Ma’rib city.
We call on all parties to the conflict in Yemen to
take concrete steps towards de-escalation in order to
avoid further suffering for the Yemeni people. It is clear
that there cannot be a military solution to the conflict.
Prolonging the hostilities will not benefit anyone
except terrorist groups like Al-Qaida, who will exploit
the situation for their own benefit, thereby further
aggravating the humanitarian and security situation.
We are also witnessing the resumption of attacks
arising out of Yemen on commercial ships navigating
the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. India is deeply
worried by this trend, which threatens not only the
safe passage of commercial vessels but also maritime
security in the region as a whole. We also condemn
the cross-border attacks on critical civilian and energy
infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, which threaten regional
security and stability. Strict implementation of the arms
embargo envisaged in resolution 2216 (2015) and its
effective monitoring are necessary to the elimination
of such threats in future.
There is no long-term solution to the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen without ending the conflict. A
nationwide ceasefire is the starting point for a full
cessation of hostilities, and India strongly supports all
efforts to achieve such a ceasefire.
Restrictions on the flow of essential commodities
into Yemen and impediments to internal movement of
humanitarian aid are also exacerbating the humanitarian
crisis. We appreciate the recent clearances for entry
into Al-Hudaydah port issued to fuel ships by the
Government of Yemen, which will ease the pressure on
fuel availability in the country. A sustainable solution
to this issue that also addresses the proper handling of
oil-related revenues is an urgent requirement.
The 2021 humanitarian response plan for Yemen
is only 43 per cent funded. The lack of funding for
humanitarian agencies will soon result in a scaling
down or termination of aid operations. We commend
the emergency-funding response of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to fill in the
gaps in delivery of critical aid, particularly to those
displaced in Ma’rib and Al Jawf. However, a more
durable solution through sustained donor funding

S/PV. 8797

is required in order to enable the continuation of
life-saving humanitarian operations.
The FSO SAFER tanker issue remains unresolved,
and we urge Ansar Allah to provide early access and
facilitation to the United Nations team to inspect
the vessel and conduct any essential repairs without
further delay.
A peaceful resolution of the conflict in Yemen
depends on the political will of the conflicting
parties themselves. The countries in the region have
a major role to play in influencing Yemeni parties to
stop the fighting and pursue initiatives for peace and
reconciliation. The full implementation of the Riyadh
and Stockholm agreements will also contribute to
stability and peace in Yemen.
The Security Council should send a strong and clear
signal on the need to cease violence and commence
political negotiations. India fully supports a Yemeniled and Yemeni-owned political process that includes
the meaningful participation of women with the goal
of achieving an inclusive and peacefully negotiated
settlement to the conflict.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like, through you, to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on the situation in Yemen. My thanks also go
to Ms. Najiba Al Naggar for her poignant testimony.
Her struggle, like that of her compatriot Shaikha
Saida, is part of the rich history of the struggle being
led by Yemeni women. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi at today’s meeting.
Over the six years of conflict in Yemen, we have
had moments of hope, but, unfortunately, they have
often been short-lived. The signing of the Stockholm
agreement, the Riyadh agreement and the exchange of
prisoners in October 2020 gave us hope that the Yemeni
parties would take a patriotic step forward in the
political process to end the conflict. Alas, these signs of
hope quickly faded with the resumption of hostilities,
demonstrating that the parties believe in military
victory rather than a negotiated political solution.
While the coalition’s outstretched hand and the
strong diplomatic involvement at the regional and
international levels are real reasons to continue to
believe that the peace talks can be revitalized, the
recent ballistic-missile and drone-bomb attacks that
targeted a gas station in Ma’rib are very regrettable.

21-1526517/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

The Niger condemns these attacks in the strongest
terms. They have caused the tragic death of more
than a dozen people, including a young girl, and left
many injured. The Niger further condemns all the
heinous crimes perpetrated in Yemen against the
civilian population. This violence is unacceptable and
contrary to international humanitarian law; it seriously
undermines efforts to restart the political process in the
country, and it must stop immediately.
We call on the Houthis to end their offensive on
Ma’rib and comply with the coalition’s ceasefire
proposals. My delegation remains convinced that a
final and lasting solution to the crisis in Yemen can be
found only through dialogue. We call on the Houthis
and the Government to follow up on the proposals of
Special Envoy Griffiths.
Further, we call on the international community,
actors from the region and members of the Security
Council to continue to exert the pressure needed to
bring the ceasefire talks that will put an end to the longstanding tragedy in Yemen to a successful conclusion as
soon as possible. It is equally crucial to continue to work
for the lifting of the blockades that are contributing to
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
Yemeni people’s already difficult living conditions.
While the war goes on, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen continues to deteriorate today as it reaches
unsustainable dimensions for the population, as a result
of the coronavirus pandemic, the lack of funding for
assistance programmes, the ongoing fighting in the
country, and food insecurity. Today, more than 50,000
people are living in near-starvation conditions, and
5 million people are still at risk. The food rations
that are sustaining thousands of Yemenis cannot be
maintained at a steady pace without sustainable and
predictable funding. The removal of obstructions to the
flow of humanitarian aid into the country, particularly
through the port of Al-Hudaydah and the airport in
Sana’a, remains crucial to prevent Yemen from falling
into large-scale famine.
With regard to the situation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, my delegation regrets that the United Nations
team has still not obtained the necessary security
guarantees for access to the tanker. The lack of response
from the Houthis to the many requests from the United
Nations is delaying the start of the inspection of the
vessel and bringing us inexorably closer to the scenario
of an oil spill or an explosion of the vessel. The current
18/22

15/06/2021

state of the FSO SAFER and the serious risks involved
require urgent measures to prevent such a catastrophe.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark
Lowcock as they prepare to leave their posts. May
they be assured that their efforts will have contributed
greatly to the cause of peace in Yemen.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the briefers for their briefings. The
war in Yemen has been raging for six years. According
to World Bank estimates, the many years of war
have severely damaged infrastructure in major cities
in Yemen, causing losses between $6.9 billion and
$8.5 billion and making Yemen the country with the
world’s fourth largest population of displaced persons.
Yemen is a major birthplace of the Arabic and
Islamic civilizations. Seeing it suffer such trauma
from the conflict is truly harrowing. Taking into
consideration the earlier briefings, I would like to make
the following points.
Hostilities must stop immediately, and secure
conditions for the peace process in Yemen created. The
offensive on Ma’rib city has led to a large number of
civilian casualties and displacement. In Al-Hudaydah
and Al-Jawf governorates, the recent escalation of
hostilities between the two parties has become an issue
of great concern.
The conflict situation on the ground clearly shows
that neither party to the conflict could succeed with
a winner-takes-all posture, and the persistence of the
conflict leads only to more civilian casualties in the
respective ethnic groups. China calls on the parties to the
conflict in Yemen to heed the appeal of the international
community to immediately stop hostilities and violence
in order to avoid further harming innocent civilians.
China condemns any attacks on civilians or civilian
infrastructure, including fuel stations, residential areas
and mosques. We strongly call on all parties to the
conflict to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and protect civilians, in particular
women, children and other vulnerable groups, as well
as to mobilize all stakeholders to promote peace and
dialogue and facilitate the parties in Yemen launching
political negotiations.
Special Envoy Griffiths made frequent visits
recently to Riyadh, Muscat, Sana’a and Tehran and
consulted with relevant parties on the Yemeni peace
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

initiative. China commends the Special Envoy’s
efforts. The countries of the region, including Oman
and Kuwait, have maintained engagement with parties
in Yemen. The meeting of the Ministerial Council of
the Gulf Cooperation Council being held this week
will focus its deliberations on Yemen. China supports
the efforts of countries in the Gulf region to ease
regional tension and hopes that such efforts will create
a positive momentum for the political settlement of the
issue of Yemen. Parties to the conflict in Yemen should
respond to the efforts of the countries of the region
and the international community and resume political
negotiations at an early date.
In that regard, China welcomes the political will
demonstrated by the Yemeni Government, upholds
a people-centred approach and makes every effort to
mitigate the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. The people
of Yemen are experiencing multiple crises of hunger, a
pandemic, fuel shortages and currency devaluation. The
international community has the obligation to provide
assistance and save lives. Recently, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization and the
World Bank increased their humanitarian assistance
to Yemen. We hope those emergency actions will help
alleviate the suffering of the people in the country.
China welcomes the approval by the Yemeni
Government granting access to the port of Al-Hudaydah
for several commercial oil tankers and the provision
to Yemen of petroleum products by Saudi Arabia.
China will also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance based on the needs of the Yemeni people.
We urge the parties to the conflict to guarantee safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access and unrestricted
commercial imports.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, the
Security Council held a briefing dedicated to that issue
earlier this month (see S/PV.8786) and issued a press
release. China once again urges the Houthis to allow
access to the United Nations technical team as soon as
possible to avoid a catastrophe and maintain regional
and environmental safety and the safety of international
shipping lanes.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Special
Envoy Griffiths on his appointment as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. We look forward to working with
him in his new role on humanitarian issues, including

S/PV. 8797

the issue of Yemen. I would also like to thank and
commend Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
great efforts and contribution over the years to the
mitigation of the global humanitarian situation and his
significant achievements. We wish him all the best.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. I would also like to thank Mr. Griffiths
and Mr. Lowcock for their tireless efforts on this
issue throughout their terms of office and wish them
every success.
The Houthis must make peace in Yemen. We
welcome the recent statements by the coalition
Government, as well as the peace initiative for Yemen
presented by Saudi Arabia in March. We also welcome
the efforts of the Special Envoy and those of the United
States and Oman to achieve a political solution.
The Houthis must renounce the military option,
which only exacerbates the suffering of the Yemeni
people. It is civilians, including children, who are paying
the price, especially in Ma’rib. That must cease. The
Houthis must also stop their attacks on Saudi territory.
In that regard, I would like to once again call
for the full implementation of the conclusions of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Yemeni children have been subjected for years to the
six grave violations defined by the Security Council.
They represent a quarter of the civilian casualties in
the country in the past three years. That is inhumane.
We condemn the widespread recruitment and use of
children by the Houthis in Ma’rib, and we call on the
Houthis to put an end to that.
We also ask them to give the United Nations
immediate and unconditional access to the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, which represents a major ecological,
economic and humanitarian risk for the country and the
entire region.
We ask them to choose the path of negotiation,
without which the Council will have to consider
the necessary measures. They must continue their
exchanges with Oman and engage in a constructive
dialogue with the Special Envoy with a view to reaching
an agreement, the parameters of which are known full
well: the conclusion of, and respect for, a countrywide
ceasefire throughout the country. That ceasefire
should happen at the same time as the reopening of

21-1526519/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

the Al-Hudaydah port and the Sana’a airport and the
resumption of discussions on the outlines of a political
solution. That solution must include the various Yemeni
parties and allow for the significant participation of
Yemeni women and youth. Only that political solution
will sustainably bring the conflict to an end.
We must also do everything possible to alleviate the
suffering of the Yemeni population in the immediate
future, in particular for the more than 4 million
displaced persons. The risk of large-scale famine is
growing every day. We have a collective responsibility
and moral duty to avoid such humanitarian tragedy.
Every effort must also be made to accelerate the
coronavirus disease vaccination campaign and provide
equitable access to this vaccine.
It is more crucial than ever to ensure rapid, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in
need, in particular in areas controlled by the Houthis.
We can never repeat enough: the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel,
must remain an absolute imperative. In that regard,
violations of international humanitarian law will not
go unpunished.
Peace in Yemen is possible. The Houthis must
seize the opportunity to stop being the problem and
become part of the solution. They must finally act as
a responsible actor for a people who have suffered too
much. France will remain fully committed to putting
an end to that suffering and in favour of dialogue and
de-escalation in the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock and Ms. Al Naggar for their
briefings. I would like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Griffiths for his tireless efforts and dedication to
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict in Yemen.
I wish him every success in his new posting. I also
acknowledge the efforts of Mr. Lowcock in support of
the humanitarian situation in Yemen, as this is the last
time for him to brief the Security Council on this item
in his current role.
Although there has been a relative decrease in the
intensity of fighting, it is deplorable that the hostilities
and civilian casualties continue, especially when taking
into account all the efforts made to establish a ceasefire,
which several international and regional stakeholders
20/22

15/06/2021

have supported. We repeat our call upon all parties
to immediately put an end to hostilities, including
the Houthis’ assault on Ma’rib and the cross-border
attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia. The parties
must show willingness to compromise and agree to a
sustainable and nationwide ceasefire in order to move
forward with an inclusive political process. We look
forward to the continuation of regional efforts in close
cooperation with the new Special Envoy, whenever he
or she takes office.
We have taken careful note of the points made
by Ms. Al Naggar. We consider the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, without fear of
violence and reprisals, in the peace efforts, as well as
the role of women in the humanitarian response, to
be essential.
More attention should be paid to the vulnerability
of women and children to the protection risks related
to worsening economic and humanitarian conditions.
It is also worrisome that children continue to pay a
particularly heavy price owing to the hostilities, as
over the past three years almost one in four civilian
casualties in Yemen have been children.
We remind all parties of their duty to abide by
their obligations under international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We also call for accountability for alleged violations.
We call on the Government of Yemen and the Houthis to
allow the Group of Eminent Experts access to Yemen.
In conclusion, we welcome the third meeting of
leaders held on 1 June, which has drawn attention to
the increasing humanitarian challenges that Yemenis
are facing. We fully support the calls for unimpeded
access for humanitarian actors as well as the need to
find a long-term agreement on the import of fuel and
commercial inputs through the port of Al-Hudaydah.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing and wish him every
success in his new endeavours. I also thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths for his briefing. Since he is leaving us, I
would like to express my thanks and appreciation for
all his efforts. We look forward to working with him in
his new tasks and wish him every success. I also thank
my dear sister, Ms. Najiba Al Naggar, for her briefing.
21-15265

15/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We were hoping that she would mention the violations
against Yemeni women living in areas under the control
of Houthi militias, who are subjected to sexual violence,
arbitrary detention and torture. She mentioned only the
mahram issue.
For more than six years, our Yemeni people have
suffered from the Houthi coup against the State, the
legitimate authorities and the aspirations and choices
of our people. The conflict has taken a heavy toll on
our nation and the Yemeni community as a whole. The
human suffering of Yemenis is the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world. It has painfully affected the
economic, social and living conditions of the people,
who must suffer the repercussions of this crisis caused
by the unjust war waged by those militias.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its full support
for the current initiative to end the conflict and its
support for all the efforts of the United Nations through
Special Envoy Griffiths and the efforts of the United
States Administration through its Special Envoy,
Mr. Tim Lenderking We also welcome the recent
initiative by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to
end the Yemeni crisis.
We further value the role of the sisterly Sultanate of
Oman, which is based on a comprehensive ceasefire as
the key humanitarian step to address all humanitarian
and economic issues, including the reopening of Sana’a
airport, facilitating access to oil derivatives through the
ports of Al-Hudaydah under the Stockholm Agreement
and the resumption of the peace process to end the war.
The Government has also positively engaged with
those proposals and with all diplomatic and political
efforts. We have demonstrated great flexibility and
offered compromises, one after another, in order to save
Yemeni blood and end the suffering of the Yemenis
with a view to achieving a comprehensive and lasting
peace based on the parameters of the political solution,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
Comprehensive National Dialogue and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
While the Yemeni Government has welcomed
and supported those efforts in order to achieve a
comprehensive and inclusive peace and national
reconciliation, the Houthi militias have responded to
that positive engagement with further escalation and
brutal attacks on the city of Ma’rib, which now hosts
the largest concentration of displaced persons and

S/PV. 8797

continues to suffer attacks with ballistic missiles,
drones and other forms of heavy weaponry.
In addition, civilian targets in the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia have been targeted. The Houthis have
refused to accept a comprehensive ceasefire, as called
for by the Secretary-General and welcomed by the
Yemeni Government and the coalition. This escalation
reflects the criminal, terrorist behaviour of these
militias and their allegiance to the Iranian regime,
which aims to create chaos, wars and crises. Their
actions demonstrate their determination to sabotage the
efforts of the international community and the Security
Council in recent months that seek to end the war and
the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The Yemeni Government holds the Houthis fully
responsible for obstructing those efforts for peace and
for continuing this meaningless war. However, we
will continue to extend our hand in peace because we
believe that the great Yemeni people deserve to live in
security, peace, stability and prosperity.
Now I think of the charred corpse of the 5-year-old
girl who fell victim to the ballistic missiles launched
by the Houthis at a fuel station in Ma’rib while dozens
of cars were waiting for fuel — an attack that claimed
the lives of 21 civilians, including children and women.
I apologize for showing the charred corpse of the
innocent girl killed in this attack.
These crimes testify to the brutal atrocities of the
Houthi militias and are an extension of their intentional
attacks against residential neighbourhoods and
internally displaced persons’ camps in Ma’rib. They are
seeking to kill as many civilians as possible, in a clear
response to sabotage all efforts to end the war.
The Houthi attack against Ma’rib must not obscure
the atrocious situation in other Yemeni cities, including
Taiz and Al-Hudaydah, which were both included in the
2018 Stockholm Agreement. Taiz has endured more than
six years of Houthi siege, and its inhabitants are unable
to move around freely and struggle to meet their basic
needs. In Al-Hudaydah, the port receives about 80 per
cent of humanitarian assistance, and the humanitarian
situation there is worse than it was before the adoption
of the Stockholm Agreement. The security and military
situation has deteriorated significantly, and the Houthis
are exploiting the city to manufacture mines and launch
drones and boats loaded with bombs in order to extend
the war and threaten the security and stability of Yemen
and the region and of maritime navigation.

21-1526521/22

S/PV.8797

The situation in the Middle East

The militias have also abused the Agreement to
reinforce their forces and attack Ma’rib and Al-Jawf
governorates and to impose restrictions on the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). The Yemeni Government reiterates once
again the need for UNMHA to move to an area outside
Houthi control in order to discharge its mandate,
including by investigating the killing of Colonel
Mohammed Slahi of the Government team.
The Yemeni Government is addressing all the
challenges and difficulties that have arisen from this
war, which was not of our choosing. We appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations and international partners
to mitigate the suffering of Yemen despite the lack of
funding for the humanitarian response plan.
We call on the international community to continue
its generous support in order to address the humanitarian
and economic challenges in Yemen by supporting the
plans and programmes of the Government with a view to
providing the basic needs of citizens and implementing
development projects. There is also a need to establish
a mechanism to manage donor funds for relief efforts in
Yemen through the Yemeni Central Bank. That would
help to stabilize the value of the national currency and
support the national economy.
The Houthi militias continue to recruit thousands
of children in the areas under their control. They force
them out of their homes and schools and send them to a
deadly fate at various front lines. They have established
so-called summer camps to instil in thousands of
children a culture of hatred and terrorism. We call on
the international community to stop being silent and
comprehend the magnitude of the crisis and the crimes
that threaten the present and future fate of Yemeni
children living in areas under the Houthis control. We
call on it to put an end to this unprecedented grave
violation of all laws and international conventions
related to the rights of children.

22/22

15/06/2021

Past experience and discussions with the Houthi
militias confirm that they fail to understand the language
of dialogue and do not care about the international
community and the Security Council’s appeals. They
continue to ignore the environmental, economic and
humanitarian catastrophe waiting to happen should the
FSO SAFER oil tanker explode, sink or leak. Over the
past years and months, those militias have sabotaged
every effort by the United Nations to allow access for
an inspection team to assess the damage, repair the
tanker and empty it. They have repeatedly reneged on
their commitments. They continue to use the issue as a
means of bargaining and blackmailing.
The Security Council plays an important role
and shoulders great responsibility in preventing
the impending disaster, which would damage the
ecosystems in the Red Sea, lead to a collapse in the
fishing sector, pollute groundwater and affect global
shipping and economy. We once again call on the
Council to exert maximum pressure on the Houthis to
prevent a catastrophe that would be the worst of its kind
in history and affect millions of people. Yemen, the
region and the world would pay the price for generations
to come.
In conclusion, it is time to silence the guns and
ring the bells of peace, and for the Houthi militias to
take advantage of the opportunity to bring about peace
and engage with international, United Nations and
regional initiatives to end the war. They must come to
the negotiation table and prioritize the interests of the
Yemeni people and end this conflict.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

21-15265
