S/2002/1271

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 21 November 2002 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that, following informal consultations, and
taking into account the views of your Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Michael Steiner, the
members of the Security Council have agreed to dispatch a mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, from 13 to 17 December 2002. The terms
of reference for the mission are attached (see annex). The composition of the
mission, which will be led by Ole Peter Kolby (Norway), will be forwarded to you
shortly.
I should be grateful if you could have the Secretariat make all the necessary
arrangements to facilitate the work of the mission.
(Signed) Wang Yingfan
President of the Security Council

02-70486 (E)

211102

*0270486*

S/2002/1271

Annex
Terms of reference for the mission to Kosovo and Belgrade,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
1.
At the invitation of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, Michael Steiner, the Security Council decides to send a mission there. The
visit will take place from 13 to 17 December 2002. The Mission will visit both
Pristina and Belgrade.
2.

The Mission has the following objectives:

(a) To find ways to enhance support for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to this end;
(b) In this context, to observe the operations of UNMIK and the situation on
the ground, and specifically to obtain an update on Mr. Steiner’s benchmarks,
including the rule of law, the rate of sustainable return and the privatization agenda;
in addition, to discuss the challenges faced by UNMIK, particularly the follow-up to
the local elections, decentralization and the situation in Mitrovica; and report its
conclusions to the Security Council;
(c) To convey a strong message to the provisional institutions for selfgovernment, local leaders, the newly elected municipal officials and all others
concerned, about the need to:
(i) Use the opportunity created by the local elections to move forward with
the decentralization process and to further develop democratic institutions;
(ii)

Promote inter-ethnic reconciliation and inclusion;

(iii) Reject all violence, condemn extremist and terrorist activities;
(iv) Ensure public safety and order, promote stability and security;
(v) Support the full and effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and fully cooperate with UNMIK and the international
security presence to these ends;
(d) To explore ways to enhance cooperation between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the basis of the UNMIKFederal Republic of Yugoslavia Common Document of 5 November 2001, and the
opportunities for increased cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade;
(e)

2

To look at the impact of the regional situation on the work of UNMIK.
