S/PV.7900

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7900th meeting

Thursday, 16 March 2017, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06758 (E)
*1706758*

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz,
Permanent Representative of Bolivia, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Llorentty Solíz.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting.
As this is the first time that I have had the privilege
of addressing the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I should like to say how
honoured I am to have assumed my tenure of the
Committee in January.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the work of the 1540 Committee in
its task of overseeing the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Flowing from the outcome of the 2016 comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
of the previous five years, resolution 2325 (2016) was
adopted on 15 December 2016. The Committee intends
to build on the momentum imparted by this reinforcing
resolution through the Committee’s programme of
work agreed for the period from 1 January 2017 through
31 January 2018. In that programme, the Committee
agreed that it should continue to intensify its efforts
to promote the full implementation by al States of
resolution 1540 (2004). A programme of work for
2017 has been agreed upon by the Committee and will
enable significant progress towards a more effective
implementation of the obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).
2/15

16/03/2017

In this effort, the Committee considers that a clear
understanding of the challenges faced by States in the
effective implementation of the resolution is needed in
accordance with operative paragraph 11 of resolution
2325 (2016). There is also a need to develop an approach
to implementation and reporting that takes into account
the specificities of States, inter alia with respect to their
ability to manufacture and export related materials,
with a view to prioritizing efforts and resources where
they are most needed without affecting the need for a
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
This point is a key element in the effort to seek more
effective implementation if it is to have any chance of
success. The Committee’s next direct interaction with
a State will take place next week. A 1540 Committee
delegation will visit El Salvador to support the
development of a voluntary national implementation
action plan.
The programme of work for 2017 stipulates, inter
alia, the following elements on the implementation of the
resolution by the States: with the objective of achieving
universal reporting as soon as possible, continue to
strengthen efforts to encourage the remaining 16
Member States that have not yet submitted their first
report to do so, including by engaging in dialogue
with those States; continue to encourage Member
States to submit additional information regarding
implementation; encourage the expansion and
undertake initiatives to us strengthen the capacity of
national points of contact; continue to encourage States
to identify and voluntarily report effective national
practices in implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and continue the practice of sharing compilations of
effective best practices periodically; and encourage
States to prepare, on a voluntary basis, national
implementation action plans, as appropriate, mapping
out their priorities and plans for implementing the key
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).
As Council members are aware, there are means to
request assistance formally through the Committee to
help build capacity where needed for implementation.
This assistance can be provided by States with the
ability to do so and by the relevant international
organizations. As mentioned in the final document
of the 2016 comprehensive review, since 2004 56
States and two regional organizations have requested
assistance through the Committee. Of these requests,
17 came from African States, 22 from States in the
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7900

Asia-Pacific region, six from Eastern Europe and 11
from Latin America and the Caribbean.

assistance. I hope that this will continue in other regions
this year and next.

The Committee recognizes that the system for
the provision of assistance to those in need requires
improvement. According to its seventeenth programme
of work, the Committee will engage its working group
on assistance in improving the assistance mechanism.
One focus is the ongoing revision of its assistance
template, which will be finalized by the end of March
2017, in order to better support States in developing
more detailed and effective assistance requests.
According to its programme of work, the Committee
will also consider ways to better provide assistance,
especially as a real-time response to requests made
during dialogue with States, such as through securing
and using additional resources, including, potentially,
the use of the Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities.

As I mentioned earlier, cooperation among States is
a key element in promoting effective implementation.
In this regard, I would like to point to valuable
elements, including the national 1540 points of contact.
In those States where they have been designated, not
only do they play an important role internally as a focal
point for national stakeholders in the implementation
of the resolution, they are also valuable in promoting
cooperation among States and interaction with the
Committee. Today, 99 States submitted their 1540 points
of contact to the Committee. Since the last briefing,
Algeria, the Bahamas, Costa Rica and Mauritania were
added. Some countries updated.

The Committee also plans on reviewing all requests,
offers and related assistance programmes, with, inter
alia, a view to developing more effective matching
strategies. As another part of this effort, I ask those
Council members that have made offers of assistance
to take a lead in reviewing them, as it is clear from the
offers currently published that some need updating.
I pay tribute to those States that have responded to
requests for assistance and encourage others with the
capacity to do so to do likewise. The record shows that,
generally, the most relevant international organizations
have responded well to requests for assistance. I
should mention in particular the International Atomic
Energy Agency, INTERPOL, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Organization for
Animal Health and the World Customs Organization.
Regional organizations have also played their
part. I should mention in particular the African Union,
which hosted an event in 2016 dedicated to matching
assistance providers directly with those requesting
assistance. This was the first time that States that
had requested assistance were brought together with
potential providers, thereby facilitating a genuine
“matchmaking” platform. Of the 16 African States
that had requested assistance, 12 participated in the
conference. This effort showed practical results and
proved the value of the Committee’s 2016 commitment
to adopting a regional approach to the provision of

The Committee supports the initiatives taken by
some States to host training courses for national 1540
points of contact. Indeed, resolution 2325 (2016), in its
operative paragraph 6,
“urges the Committee to continue to undertake
initiatives to strengthen the capacity of such
Points of Contact to assist on the implementation
of the resolution, upon request of States, including
through the continuation on a regional basis of the
Committee’s Point of Contact Training Programme”.
Furthermore, I understand that Morocco is
planning to host a training course for French-speaking
African States later this year. At the same time, I must
also acknowledge the important contribution that
international organizations have made by providing
instructors for these kinds of training courses. The
Committee finds this direct and practical support
for enhancing implementation of the resolution
most encouraging.
States are making important contributions in other
ways too. For example, a regional 1540 seminar was
conducted over the past two days, hosted by Pakistan in
Islamabad. Representatives from 15 States of Central,
East and South Asia, along with representatives from
the four international organizations most relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), participated.
I salute Pakistan’s initiative in proposing and hosting
this conference and in setting a good example by
covering the in-country costs.
The seminar was an opportunity to promote
awareness of resolution 1540 (2004) among the
policymakers. It also highlighted the national efforts

17-067583/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

made by participating States and identified challenges
and opportunities in relation to regional conditions.
It contributed also to identifying opportunities
for collaboration in terms of implementation, law
enforcement, export controls and related matters and
matching assistance needs with offers. In order to
demonstrate its interest in this important event, the
Committee decided to second two members of its
Group of Experts.
My own country, Bolivia, will host a regional
conference on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in October for Latin American and
Caribbean countries.
In this context, on behalf of the Committee, I
sincerely thank those States that have made substantial
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities directly in
support of the implementation of the resolution. Without
these contributions, the Committee would be severely
hampered in fulfilling its mandate of overseeing the
implementation of the resolution and, in particular, in
facilitating capacity-building where it is most needed.
Canada, Germany, Japan, Spain and Sweden have joined
the list of contributors. The contributions from these
and other countries are essential to the Committee’s
being able to fulfil its programme of work.
The Committee, with the support of its Group
of Experts and the Office for Disarmament Affairs,
stands ready to cooperate with and, as requested, to
facilitate assistance to States with their implementation
efforts, which will contribute to achieving our common
objective to prevent the catastrophic use of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I thank the Committee
Chair, Ambassador Llorenty Solíz of Bolivia, for his
briefing on the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which covers an
area of priority for Japan.
Japan once again welcomes the completion of
the comprehensive review process and the adoption
of resolution 2325 (2016). Japan commends Spain’s
leadership in this regard. We look forward to working
with the new Committee Chair, Ambassador Llorenty
Solíz, and will promote further implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) as the new Working Group I
4/15

16/03/2017

coordinator for monitoring and national implementation.
I am also pleased to announce that Japan will make a
contribution of approximately $1 million to the Trust
Fund to support the work of the 1540 Committee.
We must recognize that the danger of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
has not subsided despite the many efforts of the
international committee. Nuclear and ballistic-missile
development by North Korea is the most striking
example. This is a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions and represents a clear challenge
to the global non-proliferation regime. It is simply not
acceptable. Japan strongly urges North Korea to refrain
from further provocations and violations and to comply
fully and faithfully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2321 (2016) and 2270
(2016), as well as its other commitments.
The use of chemical weapons in Syria also
demonstrates the dangers of the proliferation of WMD.
This is not a hypothetical threat. Malicious actors are
benefiting from rapid advances in science, technology
and international commerce for proliferation purposes.
Moreover, individuals and entities can unwittingly
become complicit in proliferation activities. Therefore,
every effort needs to be made to prevent proliferation
activities whenever and wherever they are undertaken.
For this reason, Japan strongly believes that
enhancing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is imperative, especially the implementation
of obligations related to domestic and export control.
Let me reiterate that resolution 2325 (2016) calls upon
those States that have not done so to start developing
effective national controls.
For further implementation, capacity-building
for all States is key. Proliferation can occur at the
weakest link. The 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts can help States wishing to strengthen their
domestic non-proliferation systems by, for example,
sharing expertise to formulate national implementation
action plans and clarifying actual assistance needs.
Facilitating direct interactions between Member States
and the Committee will without a doubt bolster the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A significant
part of Japan’s contribution will be used to finance
these direct interactions between Member States and
the Committee. Japan encourages interested States to
contact the Committee. As the Coordinator of Working
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Group I, my delegation would be happy to relay any
message to the Committee.
In conclusion, given today’s security environment,
it is an ongoing and urgent task for all of us to strengthen
the non-proliferation regime at the global, regional and
national levels. Japan will continue to actively support
that endeavour.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ambassador Llorentty Solíz, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. China attaches great importance
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
1540 Committee has been conducting its work recently
in an orderly manner in line with its programme of
work. China commends Ambassador Llorentty Solíz
and his team for their efforts.
Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery has a bearing
on international peace, security and stability. It
constitutes the common challenge and major task
facing the international community. Furthermore, it is
importantly part and parcel of global governance.
During his visit to international organizations in
Switzerland earlier this year, the President of China,
Xi Jinping, delivered a speech at the United Nations
Office in Geneva, entitled “Working together to build
a community of a shared future for humankind”. In his
speech, which took a historical perspective, President
Xi elaborated on the basic principles underlining
international relations, which include, inter alia,
sovereignty,
equality,
peaceful
reconciliation,
justice, the rule of law, openness, inclusiveness and
humanitarianism. It laid down the basic outlines for
building a shared future for humankind.
Moreover, in the light of the current major
challenges throughout the world and from a practical
perspective, he advocated building a world of enduring
peace, universal security, shared prosperity, openness,
inclusiveness and a world that is clean and beautiful. He
chartered the way forward by outlining specific targets.
That proposal has lent impetus to the transformation
and improvement of the international system and global
governance. It also constitutes the fundamental point
of departure for China’s engagement in international
affairs, especially global governance in the field of
non-proliferation.

S/PV.7900

In recent years, thanks to the concerted efforts
of the international community, international
non-proliferation has forged ahead in greater depth and
with concrete results. Nevertheless, grave challenges
remain. A number of issues continue to defy our
efforts to find solutions. Technological advances have
lowered proliferation thresholds. Non-State actors
and terrorists, in particular, are more likely to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and related materials
and technologies. In that regard, the international
community should unite to bolster global governance
in the area of non-proliferation.
First, we need to foster innovation in the area of
security and build an enabling security environment.
The issue of non-proliferation is highly complex. Its
complex and difficult nature is further compounded
by a range of factors, including historical disputes,
regional conflicts, security concerns and terrorism. The
fundamental way forward lies in discarding Cold-War
mentalities, shaping a security architecture conceived
for and by all on the basis of justice, and promoting
a concept of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, thereby building an international
and regional environment featuring universal security,
enhancing the sense of security for all countries, and
eliminating the hotbeds of terrorism, extremism and
the drivers of their proliferation, so as to generate an
environment conducive to non-proliferation.
Secondly, we must uphold the rule of law
and consolidate and develop the international
non-proliferation regime. Through years of tireless
efforts, the international community has put in place
an international non-proliferation regime guided by the
Charter of the United Nations and legally anchored in
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, supplemented by the relevant
non-proliferation mechanisms. Efforts should be made
to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
international non-proliferation regime, formulate and
improve relevant international norms, and effectively
prevent non-State actors, not least terrorists, from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction and related
materials and technologies.
Thirdly, we must remain committed to
multilateralism and to dealing with hotspot issues
related to proliferation through political and diplomatic
means. Any action that might cause further tensions
can only lead to the escalation and spill-over of

17-067585/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

conflicts, which, in turn, would heighten the risk of
proliferation. All parties should remain committed to
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula so as to
maintain peace and stability in that region and to the
settlement of differences through dialogue. The top
priority for the parties concerned is to cease and desist
from provocative actions and diffuse tensions on the
peninsula. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
regarding the Iran nuclear issue did not come about
easily. All parties need to embrace political mutual
trust, completely fulfil their commitments and push
for steady progress in their implementation, so as to
achieve a far-reaching impact.
Fourthly, we must take a multipronged approach
to enhancing the comprehensive and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Last year,
the 1540 Committee took stock of the implementation
of that resolution by various parties and all aspects
of the Committee’s work over the previous five years
and came up with a comprehensive review and report
followed up by the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). The Committee should strictly adhere
to the mandate derived from its programme of work
and resolution 2325 (2016), maintain the leading role
of Member States in non-proliferation and refrain
from setting up new mechanisms. Priority should be
given to meeting the needs of developing countries
for assistance and intensifying the capacity-building
efforts of countries that are working to implement
the resolution.
Working with the international community
China will continue to contribute to improving the
international non-proliferation regime, strengthening
global governance in the area of non-proliferation and
safeguarding world peace and security.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Bolivia, Mr. Sacha Llorentty Solíz, for his briefing
on the work of THE Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We thank the Ambassador
and his entire team for their successful leadership of
that subsidiary body of the Council and their flexibility
and skill in incorporating various points of view in
the preparation of the Committee’s documents and
draft decisions.
Combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is one of the Russian Federation’s
primary military and political priorities. As is the
6/15

16/03/2017

case with any critical issue, joint coordinated efforts
are required in this instance. We are interested in
developing common positions with our partners so
as to quickly advance the non-proliferation agenda,
especially since the issues pertaining to that area have
become more acute.
Resolution 1540 (2004) occupies a special place
in the international non-proliferation architecture. It
focuses on establishing a sound legal and enforcement
barrier so as to prevent WMDs from finding their way
into the hands of non-State actors, including terrorists.
The main outcome of the comprehensive review
completed in 2016 reaffirmed the continued relevance of
all the guidelines formulated by the Security Council in
resolution 1540 (2004). It also confirmed the preventive
nature of the resolution and its inherent philosophy of
cooperation. Another important outcome is the need
to maintain positive momentum in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and the need for an overall
approach aimed at a long-term, thorough and, most
importantly, joint work, while taking into account
the long-term nature of the process. The institutional
framework of the resolution fully corresponds to the
tasks that have been defined, especially after resolution
2325 (2016).
We are convinced that, in assessing the work of this
subsidiary body of the Council and the Panel of Experts,
we need to be very careful and restrained. Establishing
additional bureaucratic structures pertaining to the
issues of the 1540 Committee, setting limits on the
duration of the contracts of experts or artificially
promoting radical or insufficiently developed proposals
could lead to the generation of additional obstacles
rather than enhancing the work of the Committee.
Therefore, we should be guided by the principle of “do
no harm”.
In light of the ongoing terrorist activities in Syria
and Iraq of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other terrorist groups, which have mastered the
technology of chemical weapons production and have
been actively using it, collective efforts to prevent
this horrific phenomenon are becoming increasingly
important, and we must act quickly. Reports of non-State
actors gaining access to chemical weapons require a
quick response by the Security Council and a thorough
investigation. This can and should be handled by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

We believe that the quarterly briefings by the
Chair of the Committee to the Council should contain
information on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by Member States, as well as
information on the work of thematic working groups,
the renewal of matrices, cooperation with national focal
points and updates of lists of donors and beneficiaries.
The specific issues of States should also be taken into
account in implementing the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) and in preparing reports.
We are convinced that Ambassador Llorentty
Solíz will organize the work of the Committee in strict
respect for the sovereignty of the States that cooperate
with it.
We are interested in strengthening the
non-proliferation regime with regard to weapons of mass
destruction, including in the framework of implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We are ready to constructively
cooperate with the new Chair of the Committee and our
partners. We fully support the programme of joint work
in the area of non-proliferation, which has just been
outlined by the Permanent Representative of China.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me convey my
appreciation for the work done by Ambassador Sacha
Llorentty Solíz as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and commend him
for his comprehensive briefing today. I also take the
opportunity to pay tribute to the work done by his
predecessor, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain,
who successfully concluded the second comprehensive
review of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). That resolution remains a crucial instrument
in the effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery, as well as
their potential acquisition by non-State actors.
Italy welcomes resolution 2325 (2016) and in
particular its call for greater capacity-building
assistance and for more intense cooperation among all
stakeholders, including civil society and academia.
On 10 February, we adopted our programme of
work. It is time now to achieve meaningful results
through the proactive implementation of resolution
2325 (2016). The increasing risk that non-State actors,
particularly terrorists, acquire chemical, biological,
radiological or fissile materials represents a new critical
dimension. Terrorist groups and non-State actors have
indeed demonstrated the intent and capacity to develop
and access these harmful tools. As the report of the

S/PV.7900

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism clearly
demonstates, this has already been the case in Syria,
where the use of chemical weapons was attributed to
Da’esh in one case, while the use of a toxic chemical as
a weapon was attributed to the Syrian armed forces in
three cases.
Rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce create not only huge benefits
for humankind, but also the potential for misue. We
are concerned that the abuse of emerging scientific
innovations could facilitate illicit proliferation
activities, in particular through the illegal transfer of
sensitive technology and illicit financial transactions.
Reinforcing international cooperation to tackle
this phenomenon is crucial. We stress the importance
of the 1540 Committee and the discharge of its mandate
for capacity-building assistance and encouragement to
all States to work towards the full implementation of
relevant resolutions. It is essential that the political
will to comply with international obligations be
combined for every State with the actual ability to
do it. Technical assistance is essential to this end. As
Chair of the Global Partnership Against the Spread
of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, we
invited the 1540 Committee to present its activities, in
particular with regard to Africa, in order to highlight
current needs and increase opportunities for donors to
cooperate with potential recipients, as well as with the
Committee itself.
Considering the tools currently available in
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, we think that particular attention should
be paid to the field of biological weapons. Similarly, the
enhanced protection of critical infrastructure relevant
to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
from the increasing risk of cyberattacks is much needed
today. The full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that requires continuous
effort at the national, regional and international levels;
the sustained and intensified support of the Security
Council; and direct interaction with States and
relevant organizations. Close cooperation among all
stakeholders , especially at the regional level, is needed
to coordinate activities so as to avoid duplication and to
focus on the most important areas.
We are deeply concerned about proliferation
activity by the Democratic People’s Republic of

17-067587/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Korea, as clearly highlighted in the last report of the
Panel of Experts. This adds to the inherent threats
to international peace and security, as well as direct
dangers to the non-proliferation regime, posed by the
North Korean nuclear programme and these types
of programmes.
Reporting on compliance is crucial. From this
point of view, resolution 2321 (2016) notes the
complementarity of that obligation with those of
resolution 1540 (2004). In adopting resoltuion 2325
(2016), the Council calls on all States to strengthen
national non-proliferation regimes in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and to submit timely reports on
their efforts. Accurate and timely reporting is crucial
for long-term results. Capacity-building aimed at
improving reporting is essential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and for his positive
remarks regarding African Union Member States with
respect to the matchmaking platform they were part of,
which he said is a genuine platform.
I would also like to thank his team and the United
Kingdom for the work they have done in finalizing
the sixteenth programme of work of the Committee
for the coming year. We believe that the programme
of work will be instrumental in ensuring the full
implementation of resoltuion 2325 (2016) and serve as
a basis for the work of the Committee in the upcoming
comprehensive review.
We trust that the outreach activities planned in
the programme of work will contribute to the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
encouraging Member States that have not presented
their initial report to do so. Moreover, we welcome the
integration of a regional dimension into the programme
of work, as it would enable regional organizations,
such as the African Union, to contribute to the work
of the Committee and its broad objective of preventing
the proliferation of nuclear chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery. No doubt this
would also ensure the continued engagement of the
African Union and its member States in addressing the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
8/15

16/03/2017

by terrorist groups, including in areas affected by
armed conflicts.
We hope that the Committee will continue to
enhance its cooperation with the African Union in
relation to the African nuclear-weapon-free zone and
thereby contribute to further strengthening the regional
non-proliferation framework. Ethiopia also welcomes
planned activities aimed at further strengthening the
assistance framework, as they would help in improving
the matching strategy, that is, the provision of effective
and targeted assistance aimed at responding to the
proper request. We are hopeful that the assistance
template would be finalized and become operational
within the time frame and would help enhance the
effectiveness of future regional assistance conferences,
similar to the one held in Addis Ababa last year.
Finally, I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to working cooperatively with the Chair
and the other members of the Council to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the related resolutions that have been adopted since,
including resolution 2325 (2016), in the programme of
work. We are also committed to engaging constructively
in considering the efficiency and effectiveness
of the Special Political Mission that supports the
1540 Committee.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. I would also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the work of his predecessor
at the helm of the Committee, the Ambassador of
Spain, who contributed a great deal to the progress
that has been made in the past two years. We wish
Ambassador Llorentty Solíz every success in chairing
this important body.
Last year marked a significant stage in fostering
the regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs). We join others in reaffirming our
support for the comprehensive review process, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). The conclusions and recommendations of
the 2016 comprehensive review, properly implemented,
should significantly reinforce and even re-energize
resolution 1540 (2004). The report on the review (see
S/2016/1038), while clearly outlining the different
progress of the implementation both for types of
WMDs and the various obligations in resolution 1540
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7900

(2004), helps to define specific areas for each party
concerned where national and regional efforts should
be intensified.

comprehensive review will bear fruit and help to further
strengthen the global non-proliferation architecture for
weapons of mass destruction.

The potential use of weapons of mass destruction is
a clear and ever present danger to humankind. The risk
of the most dangerous materials in the world falling
into the wrong hands, whether intentionally or as a
result of neglect or oversight, remains high. Resolutions
1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) complement the existing
international non-proliferation regimes for nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and the means of
their delivery by preventing the illegal trafficking of
relevant materials and prohibiting their acquisition by
non-State actors. However, despite all the measures
that Member States have taken to reduce the risk of
proliferation, the world is witnessing growing and
ever-more sophisticated threats in the area, owing not
only to gaps in national legislation but also to the rapid
development of science, technology and e-commerce,
accompanied by a lack of awareness of such threats in
academia, industry and civil society.

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Ambassador Sacha Llorentty
Solíz for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
which contributes to ensuring transparency in the
Committee’s work. We are also pleased that a Latin
American country is currently chairing the Committee.

Strengthening cooperation in preventing the
proliferation of WMDs and their components, as well
as building synergies among all stakeholders, including
the relevant international, regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations, is an urgent task.
In that regard, the 1540 Committee should also help
to promote such cooperation, in accordance with the
recommendations of the comprehensive review and the
provisions of resolution 2325 (2016). We believe that
the recently adopted programme of work will guide the
Committee and its Working Groups on how to continue
to build on the comprehensive review process and not
lose what has already been achieved during it.
In the past decade, chemical and biological materials
have frequently been cited as potential weapons for
terrorists, non-State actors and rogue States, and it
would seem that this assumption is true. In particular,
cases of the use of chemical weapons, from chlorine to
VX toxin, have been confirmed. Ukraine’s position in
that regard is very clear. Any use of weapons of mass
destruction, under any circumstances, must be met with
a strong response from the international community in
which all the perpetrators are held accountable.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s
intention to be engaged constructively, both within the
1540 Committee and with the broader United Nations
membership, in order to ensure that the outcomes of the

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and the increasing risk that they may fall into the hands
of non-State actors are issues of major concern. The
growing threat of terrorism and the possibility that
non-State actors could acquire, develop, use or traffic
in nuclear, chemical or biological weapons could have
unpredictable and devastating consequences — hence
the need to design early-warning systems for threats to
international peace and security.
The principal legally binding instrument currently
available to us to combat that threat is resolution 1540
(2004), adopted unanimously more than a decade ago.
The resolution’s preventive role and the Committee’s
efforts in the four areas of its work — implementation,
assistance,
cooperation,
transparency
and
dissemination — are fundamental. My delegation can
testify to the 1540 Committee’s intense efforts last
year during the comprehensive review process and the
subsequent negotiation and unanimous adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016), which was sponsored by a very
large number of States.
We were pleased that the Chair of the 1540
Committee reported today on the Committee’s current
activities and proposed schedule for the next few
months, demonstrating its commitment to strengthening
and improving the resolution’s implementation. In
that regard, we encourage it to continue promoting
opportunities for dialogue and activities involving the
participation of all Member States.
My delegation would also like to reiterate that it is
essential to improve assistance to States and cooperation
among them if we are to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to increase
the coordination of national, subregional, regional
and international efforts, as appropriate, in order to
strengthen our response to this serious challenge.
It is also incumbent on all States to take appropriate
measures that accord with national and international

17-067589/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

law, and to scrupulously respect their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Lastly, as we pointed out in December, Uruguay
is continuing its work on developing a national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
and in that regard we are currently preparing for the
visit to Montevideo by the Committee’s experts in the
next few months.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to commend the British presidency for
organizing today’s meeting, and to thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Solíz for his briefing and his leadership.
In these times the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which is to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their acquisition by non-State actors, is crucial, for
current events have shown us that with the threat of
terrorism, the risks of seeing non-State actors acquire
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons are very real.
That is why my delegation welcomed the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2016) conducted in 2016,
which is a significant element in our collective efforts to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The review provided an opportunity to focus on the
strategic choices of Member States and regional and
international organizations, as well as encouraging
civil society to take a more comprehensive, coordinated
and coherent approach to dealing with challenges to
international peace and security.
It is therefore important to monitor the implementation
by Member States of the concrete, practical and
appropriate steps in the light of the recommendations
resulting from the revision process and the new
resolution 2325 (2016). In this regard, strengthening
cooperation and the exchange of experience in the
areas of border control, surveillance of financial
flows and Internet networks, and legal assistance is
more important than ever. The same applies to the
development of an appropriate strategy to prevent and
combat the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the wrong hands.
As far as Africa is concerned, the African Union
is to be commended for its political commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by the
African States, as can be seen in its efforts to organize
several meetings on this topic. At the level of African
States themselves, the development of appropriate
10/15

16/03/2017

legislation and the submission of implementation
reports are clearly continuing, but more needs to
be done, including the adoption of national legal
frameworks with respect to biological weapons and
effective internal control mechanisms in relation to
sensitive materials and technologies.
However, the already fruitful cooperation that exists
between the 1540 Committee and the African countries,
most of which have benefited from the Committee’s
support in the implementation of the resolution, is to be
welcomed. It would therefore be useful to maintain this
cooperation in order to improve assistance procedures,
identify and analyse assistance needs, and pursue
dialogue on assistance with international, regional,
subregional organizations and, where appropriate, with
non-governmental organizations. It is also important
to encourage the training of national focal points.
Accordingly, my delegation invites Member States
with the resources to do so to provide all necessary
assistance to those countries that need it.
My delegation is of the view that for there to be
greater efficiency and synergies in our efforts, it is
important to set up a sustainable mechanism to ensure
better interaction and coordination between donors of
assistance and beneficiaries in order to avoid overlap
and duplication and identify the best practices in this
field in order to take advantage of them. The immediate
challenge is to better coordinate existing tools in order
to limit the possibility of non-State actors engaging in
proliferation, as the Chair of the Committee has rightly
pointed out. We also commend the important role of
civil society, academics and all those involved in the
fight against proliferation.
In conclusion, I reiterate the readiness and
unwavering commitment of Senegal to spare no effort
in the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and, to this end, we are ready to cooperate
fully with the 1540 Committee and its Chairman,
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz, to whom we
renew our wishes for complete success in his important
work at the head of the Committee.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz and welcome
him as the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I wish him every
success in fulfilling this important responsibility.
We appreciate his informative briefing and commend
him on the immense progress that has been achieved
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7900

already. At the same time, we should acknowledge that
many strides still need to be made. I make the following
observations for the Security Council’s consideration.

and inform them of all our achievements. We therefore
consider it very useful to conduct regular meetings open
to all Member States on the Committee’s activities.

As we know, this is a most crucial period for the
Committee, which, after having covered much ground
over the past five years, is now moving to a completely
new level. A new expanded mandate with wider
functions, as well as new challenges and threats, present
a vast new areas of work and great responsibility, not
only for the Committee and its new Chair but also for
all Member States.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors, especially destructive
terrorist organizations, has significantly increased. In
this regard, correctly assessing the evolving nature of
the risk of proliferation and rapid advances in science
and technology as well as responding in a timely manner
with proactive measures should become our main tasks.

Kazakhstan is a strong supporter of strengthening the
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) non-proliferation
regime. We are committed to these efforts and strictly
comply with all the requirements of resolution 1540
(2004). We are also firmly committed to our fulfilling
our obligations under the new resolution 2325 (2016).
My country is a member of the Group of Friends of
Resolution 1540, and we are among the 77 Member
States that sponsored resolution 2325 (2016). On
11 and 12 March 2014, Astana hosted a seminar on the
contribution of resolution 1540 (2004) in regional and
global disarmament and non-proliferation dedicated to
the tenth anniversary of the resolution in the Central
Asia + format. The event was jointly organized by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
1540 Committee.
I would like to note that the Committee’s sixteenth
programme of work, for 2017, is the most comprehensive
of its kind. It requires all of us to redouble our efforts
to press our collective action to strengthen the WMD
non-proliferation regime in the most effective manner
possible. As we heard in the Chair’s briefing, some
of the provisions of the programme are already being
implemented. I fully agree with the Chair that there
cannot be a common approach for all and that the
specificity of States needs to be taken into account.
I am confident that individual interactions with each
country, visits to States, increased outreach activities
and sufficient financial resources will contribute
significantly to advancing our actions to counter
contemporary threats and challenges.
In the Committee’s work programme, we also
consider the tasks of continuing to institute transparency
measures and to set up outreach activities to be of
great importance. These tasks could enable effective
interaction among States Members of the United Nations

Paragraph 27 of resolution 2325 (2016) reiterates
the need to enhance ongoing cooperation among the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004), 1267 (1999), 2253 (2015), on Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida, and 1373
(2001), on the Counter-Terrorism Committee. As the
Chair of the Sanctions Committee on ISIL, Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, Kazakhstan is ready for cooperation within
our respective mandates.
Given the importance of capacity-building,
Kazakhstan is considering making a voluntary
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities in order
to assist States in implementing their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, we call for greater multilateral
confidence and trust to be achieved so that the
powerful global anti-nuclear movement may prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
need to rise above our national interests when it comes
to the common good for people and the planet.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Solíz of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for his
interesting briefing and his ongoing efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the adoption of the programme of
work of the 1540 Committee for 2017, in accordance
with resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted by
the Security Council late last year with respect to the
comprehensive review of the resolution 1540 (2004)
regime. It is clear from that process that the international
community considers it still to be necessary to prevent
non-State actors, especially terrorist groups, from
manufacturing, acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction. This is a threat that Egypt and the States
of the Middle East had to cope with last year. Indeed,

17-0675811/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Da’esh resorted to the use of chemical weapons several
times, both inside Syria and elsewhere.
Our collective efforts, within the framework of the
joint programme, have focused on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Indeed, the Committee has
pursued the submission of comprehensive reports on
implementation and has sought to do so without any
appearance of interference.
It is essential to respect the sovereignty of Member
States, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is also very important to provide
adequate technical assistance to States that require
it, and as quickly as possible. Cooperation with the
various international and regional organizations and
subregional entities must also be promoted, and we
must seek to raise awareness and ensure transparency
through broad international participation.
Our goal in the framework of the new programme
of work is to improve the means for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) at all levels, primarily through
key practical recommendations and efforts within its
four main working groups — in coordination with the
Expert Group of the Committee, which is carrying
out concrete and skilful work with the Secretariat, the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and other Departments.
Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for his briefing
today and for the presentation of the programme of work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
Almost three months after the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
today’s meeting is an opportunity to come together
to discuss non-proliferation challenges and our joint
efforts to address them. The situation has not changed.
The proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons and their delivery systems and their risk of use
by States or terrorist groups remain very real dangers.
In North Korea and Syria, the non-proliferation
standard that is at the heart of our collective security
is regularly, and even openly, being flouted. The rapid
development of North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic
programmes is cause for great concern, as is the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. I note that the responsibility
for those ghastly actions has already been attributed
to the Syrian Army and Da’esh in four cases, and the
12/15

16/03/2017

possibility of there being additional such weapons in
Syria increases the risk of the spread of those toxic
chemical substances.
In the face of such extremely serious challenges,
we must, more than ever, be mobilized for action. The
1540 Committee will guide the actions of all States, so
as to pool efforts to combat proliferation in a tangible
way. I would also like to thank the Expert Group of
the Committee for their crucial analysis and awarenessraising, which is indispensable to the action of the
Committee. The 2016 comprehensive review confirmed
measurable progress, both nationally and regionally,
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions. Nevertheless, despite the
progress achieved in the past 12 years, much work still
lies ahead.
We welcome the work carried out last year under the
leadership of Spain, which enabled us to strengthen the
means at our disposal through the adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). This year’s promising programme of work
of the 1540 Committee, which has just been presented to
us, also seems well-conceived and allows us understand
the path ahead.
I would like to stress the importance of the
cooperation, assistance and interaction that must
accompany our efforts. We must all prevent and curb
the financing of weapons of mass destruction, do our
best to secure our sensitive assets and materials and
tighten controls over our exports in order to reduce the
risk of their being misused in emerging technologies.
However, we should not act alone. When it comes to
cooperation and assistance, I pledge the commitment
of my delegation, which has assumed responsibility for
the coordination of the working group on assistance
in order to improve the effectiveness of the assistance
mechanism, along the lines already mentioned.
France attaches particular importance to
strengthening the regional dimension of assistance
and consistency in meeting assistance needs. In that
regard, the 2016 African Union Review and Assistance
Conference on the Implementation of Resolution 1540
(2004) in Africa was a success and can serve as a tool
and inspiration for future action. We welcome efforts
undertaken by other stakeholders, as was noted by other
speakers. I also note the role of the European Union,
which, thanks to its ongoing dynamism and awarenessraising, does its part to promote cooperation.
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7900

Finally, if we are to succeed, we must enhance
synergies with organizations outside the United Nations
that face the same challenges, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and the various export control regimes,
as well as with entities within the United Nations
such as the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. We must strengthen the links among
those organizations.

Moreover, we have real concerns about the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as a proliferation
risk, as they could try to sell material or technology
to bad actors in order to try to finance their own
programmes. Against that backdrop, we believe that it
is ever more urgent for the Committee to redouble its
efforts to assist Member States in preventing the transfer
of WMD-related material, expertise and technology to
terrorists. For example, assistance among States is an
essential part of resolution 1540 (2004), but States need
to improve their communication and coordination with
the Committee so as to ensure that the limited resources
are being used effectively.

We once again thank Bolivia for its leadership and
commitment at the helm of the Committee and pledge
our full support.

Last year’s comprehensive review found that
regional assistance efforts have been particularly
effective. To that end, the United States contribution
to the 1540 United Nations Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities is funding a 1540
Regional Coordinator position in the Organization of
American States. We expect that official to be hired
and working soon.

Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for his report and his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We have a lot to guide us
in our work this year. In addition to the report of the
second comprehensive review, we also have resolution
2325 (2016), which the Security Council unanimously
adopted last December.
Today, I am going to touch briefly on the challenges
that we continue to face, the importance of international
cooperation and our particular emphasis in the United
States on outreach and transparency. We are pleased
with the momentum that was built last year, and the
United States still sees the 1540 Committee as a crucial
foundation for combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
Resolution 2325 (2016) was positive. It provided
the Committee with new tools for accomplishing our
non-proliferation goals. Nonetheless, we still have a long
way to go before we can say that the obligations of the
Committee are being fully met. In that context, there are
a number of recent, alarming developments, including
the use of chemical weapons in Iraq, the alleged use
of VX nerve agent in Malaysia and the confirmed use
of chemical weapons by State and non-State actors in
Syria. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
arsenal of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
its series of ballistic missile tests, all in violation of
Council resolutions, along with its defiant threats to use
weapons of mass destruction, make clear the great risk
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea poses
to international peace and security.

The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
will also continue to play a crucial role in monitoring
and promoting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Six of the nine experts are, however, scheduled
to depart this year. We hope that the incoming experts
will bring expertise and backgrounds in fields such
as outreach, monitoring and evaluation, which are
essential skills that the Committee needs.
That leads me to my final point, which is on
outreach and transparency. My delegation places a
particular emphasis on outreach and transparency as
vital tools for strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In fact, as Chair of Working
Group IV, on transparency and media outreach, the
United States helped to sponsor a student essay contest
with the Stimson Centre, which is a non-profit research
institution that focuses on international peace and
security. There were over 150 essay submissions from
undergraduate and graduate students in 44 countries
around the world. Later this month, we expect to be
ready to launch a fully updated version of the 1540
Committee’s website, which will make it easier to
navigate and allow visitors to the site to quickly learn
about the Committee and its many available resources.
In conclusion, the United States looks forward to
hearing Council members’ ideas on how we can work
together to achieve full implementation of resolution of

17-0675813/15

S/PV.7900

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

2325 (2016), and we look forward to cooperating with
all Council members to that end.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to begin by
congratulating Bolivia and Ambassador Sacha
Lllorentty Solíz on taking up the role of Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for the recent adoption of the programme of
work. We are very pleased to have assumed our role as
Vice-Chair and look forward to working together over
the next year.
Last year the Committee made much progress in
its work under the chairmanship of Spain. I would like
to compliment Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi on his
effective and ambitious leadership of the Committee last
year. Progress included the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which represented a significant step forward for
efforts to prevent non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction. It is important that
we now build upon that momentum.
The threat from non-State actors is real. We are
still facing the risk of the trade in and proliferation of
sensitive technology and materials. At the same time,
we are highly concerned with the continuing use of
weapons of mass destruction in the form of chemical
weapons, including by non-State actors, in places
such as Syria, Iraq and elsewhere. We must do our
part to prevent such disregard for the international
non-proliferation regime by urgently supporting the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
successor resolutions.
We should not limit our vigilance to items and
materials. Knowledge and information also represent
important factors in the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction. For that reason, we are particularly pleased
that this issue, often called “intangible transfers of
technology” (ITT) is reflected in resolution 2325 (2016)
and in the programme of work of the Committee. We
welcome the expert meeting on ITT planned for later
this year. We also commend the work of the Group
of Experts, not least its outreach-related efforts at the
regional and subregional levels, and we encourage
efforts to improve matchmaking and the clarity of
assistance requests.
Finally, Sweden remains strongly committed to
the objective of resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery by non-State
actors. In order to pursue that objective, we have
14/15

16/03/2017

contributed some $60,000 to the 1540 trust fund in
order to facilitate the implementation of our programme
of work.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I begin by welcoming Sacha Llorentty Solíz to the
Council for the first time in his role as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) , and I join others in thanking him for his briefing.
I would also like to thank all Council members for
their remarks today. Today, I think they have all shown
that the Council is united and determined to prevent
biological, chemical and nuclear material from falling
into the hand of terrorists or other non-State actors.
Sadly, on the Council we know only too well
that is no longer a hypothetical threat. The nightmare
scenario has been seen in too many places: in Iraq,
where we have seen worrying, persistent reports of
terrorists using chemical weapons; in Syria, where the
United Nations-mandated investigation has proven that
chemical weapons have been used both by Da’esh and
by the Al-Assad regime; and now in Malaysia, where
we were all shocked by reports that VX was used to kill
Kim Jong Nam.
As those events prove, proliferation threats do not
stand still. They are constantly evolving, and we must
remain alert to new trends. We will have to be adaptable
and nimble to keep our citizens safe. Ensuring that
States have the means and resources at their disposal
to deal with those threats is the foundation of resolution
1540 (2004). It sets out how we can make ourselves more
secure by ensuring that our legislation limits the ability
to develop such weapons, by having the right controls
in place to safeguard potentially hazardous material
and by hardening our borders to stop their spread.
This is collective security. One State’s resilience can
prevent the spread of a threat to others, but just as one
State can help our collective security so, too, can one
State undermine it. The current implementation rate
of 1540 measures worldwide is 48 per cent. We must
continue to work towards the full, universal fulfilment
of those obligations.
In 2017, we should maintain the momentum and
energy from the comprehensive review and ensure
that we effectively implement the taskings from
resolution 2235 (2016). We should stay abreast of
advances in science and technology that may increase
the proliferation risk, but may also present us with
17-06758

16/03/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

opportunities to tackle the threat better, for instance
through advances in cyber, three-dimensional printing
and drones.
The Council broke new ground last year by
calling on States to adopt effective national control
lists for sensitive materials — a vital step in an
effective non-proliferation regime. We should work
collaboratively with those who have already developed
effective national control lists and support those who
are just starting out. We should continue to offer
assistance and technical support to those who need
it to implement resolution 1540 (2004) fully. Better
matching of requests for assistance to those who require
it should follow a more regional approach, as agreed by
the Council last year.
But in truth such preventative measures will count
for little if there is continued impunity for those who use
biological, chemical or nuclear material as weapons. It
is not enough just to condemn; we have to take action
whenever a weapon of mass destruction is used and we

S/PV.7900

must ensure that there are meaningful consequences
for State actors and non-State actors alike. Last month,
in response to the findings of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, I regret that a minority
of Council members blocked a draft resolution that
would have imposed measures responding to atrocities
committed in Syria. We must draw on the unity we
show on the 1540 Committee to find the consensus
needed to act against the use of such weapons.
In conclusion, it is clear that the 1540 Committee
has a huge task ahead, and Sacha Llorentty Solíz has
the full support of the United Kingdom in making as
much progress as he can.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-0675815/15
