THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

12 APRIL

1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2002)

Adoption

of the agenda

Page
1
. ., , , _ . .. . . . . .. . . . , . . .. .. .. . .

. , , .. ,, ., .. . , . . .. . . . . ,. .. .. . . .. . .. . .. ,

1

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/ 12294 and Add. 1) I . . . . .

1

S/PV.2002

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiorzs and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2002ND

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. Sim6n Albert0 CONSALW

12 April

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

that letters have beenreceived from the representativesof
Cuba, Egypt, the Lao People’sDemocratic Republic and
Somalia,in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussionof the question on the Council’s agenda.
ConsequentlyI propose, in accordancewith past practice
and with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representativesto participate in the discussion,without the
right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

(Venezuela).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2002)

3. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite those representativesto take the
placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber,
on
the understanding that they will be invited to take
placesat the Council table wheneverthey wish to speak.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/ 12294 and Add. 1)

At the invitation of the President,Mr. L. Gdrnez Anzardo
(Cuba), Mr, A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Y: Sourinho
(Lao People’sRemocratic Republic) and Mr. A. H. Hussen
(Somalia) took the placesreservedfor them at the sideof
the Council chamber.

1;IZemeeting was called to order at II, 05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish]: Before
calling on the first speakeron the list, I wish to draw to the
attention of membersof the Council document S/12319/
Add. 1, entitled “Report on the imperialist armedaggression
committed on Sunday, 16 January 1977, against the
People’s Republic of Benin”, transmitted by the Charge
d’affairesa.i. of the Permanent Mission of Benin to the
United Nations. I wish also to draw the Council’s attention
to a new document which contains the text of a letter
dated 8 April 1977 addressedto the President of the
Councilby the representativeof the Ivory Coast[S/12320].

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Benin
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolutiou
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.1)”
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisions previously taken by the
Council, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana,
Gabon, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, Madagascar, Mauritania,
, Morocco, Niger, Saudi Arabia, Senegal and Togo to take the
places reserved for them at the.side of the Council chamber.

5. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): ‘Mr. President,
on behalf of my delegation I should like to extend a
welcome to you in your capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of April. Tcongratulateyou
on your assumptionof your high position, especiallyat a
time when the Council is concerned with suchimportant
and vital issues.I am confident that you will conduct our
work with the dignity and skill exemplified by your
extensive experience in public life and diplomacy. Your
distinguishedpersonalqualities are the best guaranteeof an
outstanding presidency during this month of April. I
promiseyou the full co-operation of my delegation.

At the invitation of the fiesident, Mr. F. K. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. M. Modisi (Botswana), Mr. L. N’Dong
(Gabon), Mr. M. S. Camara (Guinea), Mr. S. Akd (Ivory
Bust), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. M. Kane
(Mauritania), Mr. A. Bengelloun (Morocco), Mr. J. Poisson
(Niger), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. M. Fall
(Senegal) and Mr. A. A. Kodjovi (Togo) took the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.

6. It also givesme specialpleasureto welcome in you the
representative of a free country of Latin America with
which we have historical and deep, fruitful relations. I
welcomean eminent son of a country that is a founder and
fellow member of OPEC [Organization of Petroleum

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
Spanish): In
addition I should like to inform membersof the Council
* Subsequently
issued
as Official Records of the Security Council,
ThirtY-second
Year, Special Supplement No. 3 (S/12294/Rev.l).

1

-

Exprting Countries]. In this respect, Venezuela and Libya
face identical problems and challenges, and share common
privileges and responsibilities. In particular, we are concerned with the effective use of resources for the benefit of
our peoples in the interests of the human community and
in the framework of international co-operation and solidarity. We are also bound together to face, side by side, the
mounting pressures and unjust campaign directed against us
by certain avaricious forces and financial circles. Those
macabre forces of exploitation unjustly decry US as international troublemakers responsible for world-wide inflation
and the devastation of the economies of non-OPEC
countries. In short, they falsely accuse us of intending to
“strangle world growth”. In this respect, I should like to
hail the positive and dynamic role of your Country,
Venezuela, and its effective solidarity with other OPEC
nations.
7. So that the Council may appreciate the role of your
country in the third world, I should like to quote none
other than President Carter. In his letter dated 22 February
1977 addressed to President Carlos Andres PBrez, President
of Venezuela, the President of the United States of America
expressed his personal regrets and those of the United
States Government concerning certain slanderous campaigns carried out against Venezuela by the biased
American mass media. President Carter said:
“You, Mr. President, an independent and vigorous
defender of Venezuela’s interests, of the nations of Latin
America, of OPEC and of the third world, are one of the
most respected and formidable leaders in the world
today.”
8. Mr. President, permit me also to express the appreciation of my delegation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Young, representative of the United States, for the great
ability he demonstrated during the month of March as
President of the Security Council. When he came to the
United Nations, Ambassador Young was preceded by his
reputation as a civil-rights fighter and a respected political
leader of his country. We welcome the opportunity we have
been given to come to know him on a personal basis
through our close contacts as colleagues around this tabie.
We are grateful because we follow what is happening in the
United States and have acquired a lot of information on
Ambassador Young as a political leader, a civil-rights fighter
and a Congressman, and we realize that information
disseminated through the mass media does not do the same
justice as does direct contact and honest dialogue. We also
know that, in the representation of countries and policies, a
change of persons, style or approach in dealing with
international problems does not necessarily change the basis
of the policies of our respective countries. In fact, we have
always hoped for a dramatic change in American policy
towards the African atid Arab communities-namely,
towards reducing, limiting or abandoning the strong and
sometimes unlimited American support for the minority
racist r&&es in southern Africa and occupied Palestine.
9. However, we cannot deny the important role of the
representative of the United States and his contribution in
creating new conditions to pave the way towards new lines
of conduct in this respect, taking into account, first, the

eminent position occuDied bv the Permanent Reoresentative bf the United’ States-of America to the United
Nations inside the American political structure, since he has
cabinet status, and, secondly, the declaration of the new
policy of the United States pledging support to this
international body. That is why we took the nomination of
Ambassador Young as a sign of change, since the choice of
the man could give a hint of the policy intended to be
executed and implemented by him,,
10. However, I cannot conceal the fact that this optimistic
note was clouded by doubts which provoked our estrangement and dismay when we read peculiar statements
attributed to Ambassador Young. In those statements,
Ambassador Young equated at least one third of the
African population with the Ku Klux Klan, accusing them
of racism and hate and asserting that the United States
would help one African country against its so-called
militant neighbour. We really wonder how a declared friend
of Africa, a declared champion of African liberation, can
reconcile those statements with the principles he has
declared in the United Nations. It brings to mind the
impetuous and inciting episode of Professor Pat Moynihan
and his infamous speech two years ago at San Francisco,
where he insulted the whole of Africa. We must, however,
render justice to Professor Moynihan. He was neither a
friend of Africa nor a sympathizer with the third world. He
would use the Same aggressive and contemptuous language
inside the United Nations and outside the United Nations.
But at least we must admit that he was consistent. I still
hope that some misunderstandings or misinformation were
reflected in the Jewish Telegraphic Agency’s Daily News
Bzdletin of 31 March, in fie New York Post of 30 March
and in The Washington Post of 8 April whenthey reported
AmbassadorYoung’s statements.I hope we shallreceivean
explanation so that we can set the record straight from the
outset and so that we may better understand the real
intentions behind the declarednew policy of the United
States.We believe that the vjorst offence of all is to create
falsehopesin order to defusethe African liberation struggle
and to divert the favourable momentum in Africa, in the
Arab-African community and in the rest of the third world.
11. Now I should like to come to the substanceof the
issueunder discussionin the Council today. I shallbe very
brief, sincemy country is one of the three membersof the
SpecialMission mandatedby the Council to investigatethe
events of 16 January 1977 at Cotonou. The voluminous
documentation presented by the Mission and by the
Government of Benin constitutesan important andimpressive dossierworthy of the interest and deepconsideration
of the Council. The statementsdeliveredbefore the Council
by my colleagueswho preceded me have enriched the
dossieron this extraordinarily important issueand, after
the appropriate and excellentintroduction of the report by
the Chairman of the Mission, Ambassadorlllueca of
Panama[ZOOOth meetiMg1, I shall confine myself to the
following points.
12. First, I shouldlike to expressthe sincerethanks of my
Government, and alsomy personalthanks, to the President
of the Council during the month of February, Ambassador
Murray of the United Kingdom, and to the other membersf
of the Council for the trust they demonstratedin my
-

country by unanimously appointing it, along with India and
Panama, as a member of the fact-finding Mission to Benin.

18. The attacking forces used such weaponsasmachineguns,mortars and bazookas,causinga substantialamount
of damageto a number of public and private buildings,
including the premisesof somediplomatic missionsand
even a hospital.

13. Secondly, I should like to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Illueca and to my colleague Mr. Ramesh Mulye, representative of India. I salute their dedication, devotion,
objectivity and total integrity. It was indeed both a pleasure
and an honour to work with Ramesh Mulye under the
respectable and intelligent leadership of Ambassador
Illueca.

19. There is no doubt whatsoever that the primary
objective of the onslaughtwas to overthrow the Government of Benin. It is clear that Benin was subjectedto
aggression;its sovereignty and territorial integrity were
unquestionablyviolated, by an invadingforce from outside
the country. It is evident also that the majority of the
invading force were white mercenaries
whose participation
was for pecuniary interests. It is clear, too, that similar
operations could be conducted elsewhereagainstsmall,
defenceless
countries.

14. Thirdly, I should like to reiterate that our Mission
executed its mandate with complete devotion and total
objectivity. Therefore, any insinuations or innuendos made
in the media or inside the Council are both unjust and
irrelevant. The Mission registered all relevant information
gathered from testimony and from the available documentation, and subsequently reported back to the Council.
The Mission did not condemn, accuse or incriminate any
party in particular. It did not judge the activities of any
country or any authority. We merely reported back to the
Council the plain and simple facts, and it is now up to the
Council to draw its own conclusions. Quite frankly, I do
not know what else was expected from the Mission. We
were not appointed to make accusations, nor were we
appointed to cover up for any party or parties involved in
the aggression.

20. Those are the paramountfacts, which remainuncontested.
21. It is apparent that the terms of the mandateof the
Mission did not allow it to investigateand verify all the
documentsand testimony examinedby it. It will be more
constructive now for the participantsin the debate,andthe
interested or concerned parties in general,to concentrate
on appropriateaction, seekingwaysandmeansto follow up
and investigate further, in the hope of sheddingmorelight
on this despicableaggression.
It is not sufficient just to say
that the documents and testimony in question are fabrications. I think it would requirea geniusto fabricateall the
documentsand, in any event, the statementthat all are
fabricated is incredible. Onecould possiblyfabricate a few
general documents such as the plan of action or the
declaration. But what about the large quantities of individual documents and the different piecesleft behindby
the mercenaries,suchas bank accountstatements,identity
cards, drivers’ licences, international health certificates,
airline tickets, personalletters and namesand addresses
in
variouscountries?

15. I know full well that our mandate was both delicate
and risky and I realize that we were walking a tightrope. I
realize also that, in our day and age, it is impossible to
achieve miracles or, as the French say, “to make an
omelette without breaking any eggs”. Therefore, it is not
only appropriate but also far more constructive for us to
avoid any futile and counterproductive exercises and to
concentrate, instead, on the main issue, on the plain and
simple facts.
16. Concerning the facts of what happened at Cotonou on
16 January 1977, I doubt if there is anyone who will
dispute what transpired on that Sunday morning at about
7 o’clock, when an unmarked aircraft made an unauthorized landing at the international airport. From that
aircraft a group of about 100 persons,both whites and
blacks, disembarked,dressedin military attire and carrying
largequantities of armsand ammunition.

22. We believe that it is incumbent upon all Statesto
co-operate with the Council in order to gather more
information and verify the documentationand data.That is
the only method to eliminateany doubt. There aremany
documents and facts not easy to verify without the
co-operationof certain States.

23. France, for example, could verify addresses,bank
accounts, French identity cardsanddrivers’licencesand,in
particular, could provide further information on the key
17. This assaultgroup of men,who acted in the mannerof
a well-organizedmilitary unit, after establishinga command personality in this whole abominableaffair, Gilbert Bour
post at the airport, proceeded towards Cotonou and geaud.Here I shouldlike to take note of and commendthe
positive French attitude shown in the statement to the
attacked the PresidentialPalace,the Hall of Congressand
Council by AmbassadorLeprette [ZOOlst meetind that
apartment buildingswith firearms and projectiles.On their
France had already conducted some preliminary .hives
way back, the invading force indiscriminately shot at
civilians and non-military establishments.The Beninese tigations and that the French Government was ready to
conduct further investigationsif requestedto do so. We
armed forces were able to repulsethe onslaughtand the
have been informed by AmbassadorLeprette that the
attackers were compelled, after a while, to retreat in the
direction of the airport. However, the gallant Beninese investigationshave been undertakenby the French Government on its own initiative and in accordancewith its own
military forces that pursued the attackers were unable to
prevent them from leaving Cotonou in the aircraft in which ment on its own initiative and in accordancewith its own
they had arrived or from killing six personsand wounding legislation.
51 others. One African memberof the assaultforce was
captured, a certain Ba Alpha Oumarou, and one European 24. It is also important to rememberthat the represen
tative of France did not exclude the possibility of individandone African werekilled.
3

30. I should also like to say that we have been disturbed
from the outset by the strange attitude of the mass
media-a negative attitude. From the very first day the
Western mass media took a strange attitude by attempting
to water down the importance of the events at Cotonou
and spread doubts about them, even before receiving full
information on what was actually happening there; and,
after that, what I can only call a complicity of silence
continued. Many States-m particular Western States-had
nationals there in Benin, some of whom were evacuated to
their countries of origin, while others were treated for
serious wounds and injuries. But we did not see any reports
or accounts of those accidents in the press or media in their
respective countries. To my mind, that is not only strange
but also totally out of character for media that are always
looking for and searching out sensationalism and are in the
habit of creating a big fuss on the occasion of insignificant
events and incidents in the third world. I believe that
further investigation and time will explain that attitude.

ual participation in the operation. We are relieved to hear
from him that the investigations undertaken revealed that
no officer corresponding to the description of Mr. Bourgeaud was in the French Army on active or reserve duty.
We sincerely hope that France will continue its investigations to provide the Council with more information on
Mr. Bourgeaud, if not as a member of the French Army
then perhaps in a different department or in the private
sector.
25. The Red Cross also could undertake an investigation
about the identity of the Swedish pilot Isberg Bjorg Leo,
who was employed some years ago by the Red Cross to
deliver aid to Biafra and whose personal documents, in
particular, identity card NO. 2103 issued by the International Red Cross at Geneva on 22 January 1969, were
found after the attack on Cotonou.
26. It would have been extremely difficult, if not impossible, for all the documents and testimony to have been
fabricated, and such an explanation or reasoning is far too
easy. It was asked here in the Council why there was only
one mercenary who was caught and only one testimony,
suggesting that the primary witness, B1 Alpha Oumarou,
could be a fake. It is legitimate to ask ourselves why
anyone, or any party, who would go to the trouble of
preparing a false witness would prepare only one, when
there were great opportunities to prepare a number of them
and thereby lend more credibility to the act of fabrication.
I should like to pose that question for consideration by my
colleagues in relation to the allegations of falsification with
regard to the witness.

31, There is another aspect which my delegation wishes to
mention: such an operation could be prepared elsewhere
against other small, defenceless and peace-loving countries
for a similar purpose. A careful study of the dossier,
combined with intelligent understanding of what is happening in Africa and in the world today, could give rise to the
impression that somewhere these types of specialized
groups and organizations exist, using mercenaries and
adventurers with a view to overthrowing progressive and
anti-imperialist Governments and regimes. Thus many small
and militarily weak States will be at the mercy of those
sinister groups of interventionists. It is not only important
but imperative that the Council should give serious consideration to these aspects of the problem, because the mere
presence of such groups and organizations threatens to
disrupt peace and security in the world and prepares for the
colonial reconquest of Africa and the third world. It is also
a further indication of a kind of unholy alliance between
the forces of domination and exploitation in the world,
contracted with a view to conducting a “holy war” against
the progressive and democratic forces in Africa and in the
third world. That type of operation is extremely detrimental to the progress and economic development of small,
poor countries which will be obliged to sacrifice a major
part of their budget and resources so as to build armies, arm
their people and organize adequate national defence. That
would mean a reduction of their potential and chances for
economic and social development and would, as a result,
also cause an escalation of the spread of armaments in the
world.

27. It was also suggested that tlie attacking forces had left
far too much documentation behind. I must admit that that
is a very good point and, if only for that reason alone, we
must attempt further investigations to shed light on
particular points of concern, One could imagine that those
documents were left because the attackers were 100 per
cent sure of their success, as was stated in one of the
documents: “there will be every chance of success”.
28. Another point to remember is that those people, those
mercenaries, are adventurers who gamble on the chance of
either success or death; consequently they have nothing to
be afraid of if the mission fails and documents are left
behind or captured. Furthermore, we have countless examples of similar badly organized operations conducted by
adventurers and by secret services of certain countries.
Many operations, even those conducted by secret services
of big Powers, have ended in tragic failure, just like this
one. But if it is difficult to understand why the attackers
left those documents behind and to justify this, those are
invaluable and relevant reasons to conduct further immtigations to explain the presence of that box full of documents
among the material left behind by the attackers and to
clarify two points: first, the authenticity of those docu! merits; secondly, their presence inside an ammunitions case
at the airport after the pirates’ plane escaped.

32. A question was raised concerning the distribution by
our brother from Benin of two reports; one on the
evaluation of damages and losses and the other the report
of the International Commission of Inquiry which preceded
our Mission in Benin. 1 should like to draw the attention of
the Council to the fact that, in our discussion with the
Benin authorities, our Mission requested the report of the
Commission in order to complete our information. Nowever, at that time, that report was not ready and the Benin
authorities promised to send it to us here. I shall read from
the provisional verbatim record of the tenth meeting held
on 23 February 1977 between the representatives of the
Benin authorities %and the Mission, I hope that the Secre-

29. We sincerely hope that members of the Council will
concentrate on the facts before them, avoiding any futile
debates, and will address themselves to the direct questions
posed by the aggression.
4

tariat will find it possible to circulate all the verbatim
records of the Mission to all the members of the Security
Council. At that meeting, Mr. Ogouma,representativeof
the Beninauthorities, said:

beendealingwith the problem of mercenariesfor about 20
years and we have an important number of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions concerning
mercenaries,calling on all Member States to outlaw their
activities and prevent their recruitment, training and move“Now, yesterday you requesteda certain number of
ment. The Organization of African Unity hasadopted many
documents:for instance, the mapof the city, a list of the
resolutionsconcerningmercenaries.I refer in particular to
wounded personnel, death certificates, lists of dead the Declaration on the Activities of Mercenariesin Africa,
personneletc. Thesedocumentsare available.We will give
adopted in 1971.r Consideringthe grave threat which the
them to you after you have completedyour examination activities of mercenariesrepresent to the independence,
of the photostats.
sovereignty, territorial integrity and harmonious development of the African States, and considering that the
“But there wasa third requestyou madeyesterdaythat
constant threat of the use of mercenariesconstitutes an
referred to the report of the International Commissionof
element of serious tension and conflict in Africa, the
Inquiry. Wehavecontacted the responsiblepeopleand we
African countriesexpressedthe necessityof putting an end,
have received our instructions, Now, the situation is as once and for all, to the subversiveactivities of mercenaries
follows: the report of the Commissionwas officially
in Africa, and reaffirmed the determination of the African
submitted severaldays ago, and it has beenreceivedby
peoples and States to take all necessary measuresto
the proper authorities. It hasnot yet beenstudiedby the
eradicate from Africa the scourge that the mercenary
Central Committee of our Party. This study is necessary system represents.They reiterated their irrevocable conbeforewe canpublishthe report.
demnation of the use of mercenariesby certain countries
and forces to jeopardize further the independence,sover“The conditions are not yet ripe to put this report at
eignty and territorial integrity of States membersof the
Organization of African Unity. They called upon Statesto
your disposal.After the examinationmade,bythe Central
Committeeof our Party, certain decisionswill be made take appropriate stepsto ensurethat their territories were
by the Central Committee of our Party, certain decisions not being usedto recruit, drill or ,train mercenaries,or for
will be taken, and it is possiblethat this report will be
the passageof equipment intended for mercenaries,aswell
as to hand over any mercenariespresentin their countries
distributed. At that moment we will contact you, either
to the States againstwhich they intended to carry out or
directly or through our representative to the United
had carried out their subversiveactivities. Further, they
Nations.”
invited all States not to allow mercenaries,whether their
33. At our last meeting,held on 25 February, Mr. Ogouma own nationals or not, to pursue those activities, not to
said:
tolerate the recruitment, training and equipping of mercenaries on their territory and to forbid their nationalsto
“Mr. Chairman, on the basisof your request,we have serveasmercenaries.
accomplishedthe essentialrequirementsraisedby the
35. I do not have to go through all the resolutionsof the
Mission-that is to say, we have provided you with the
different documents, with the photostats, and we have GeneralAssembly, the Security Council and the Organizaalsostatedwhat the situationis with regardto the record tion of African Unity and other appropriate resolutionsof
of the International Commission.
governmental and non-governmental agencieswhich are
concerned with mercenaries. However, what happened
recently in Benin drew our attention, once again, to this
“We have also provided ‘you with pictures of the
problem. We are convinced that the Security Counciland
different placesthat you havevisited. There is only one
the General Assembly must now take immediate and
item missingwith regardto the requestyou made:that is
to say, the evaluation of damagein material as well as appropriate measuresto co-ordinate the fight againstthe
useof mercenaries.
human and other terms. This task has not been completed. If we do not succeedin completingit before the
36. Wehave many possibilitiesin front of u!s.Wecanpose
Missionleavesour country, we will be forced to transmit
it to you through our Ambassadorto the United Nations, the problem of mercenariesasan independentitem in the
Security Council and/or in the General Assembly.We may
HisExcellency AmbassadorBoya.”
consider the possibility of creating an appropriate legal
instrument
to combat the use of mercenaries.We can
Therefore, the Benin delegationwas fulfilling the promise
considerthe possibility of holding international conferences
which it gaveto the Missionat Cotonou.
on the problem of mercenaries,or the creation of an
34. I promisednot to take up too much time, but I should international centre for exchanging information and COordinating efforts relating to the fight against the useof
like to singleout one other aspectof the problem,namely,
mercenaries,or the establishmentof a specialcommittee,in
the problem of mercenaries,We know that the use of
the framework of the United Nations, to study the problem
mercenariesis a problem as old as war itself. It appearsat
of mercenaries.In fact, the international community has
almost every stage of human history. In the twentieth
century, and after the liquidation of colonial empires, dealt with and has established instruments and bodies
concerningmany other evils in this world. I can mention,
mercenary activities becamea scourgein our society, and
we, in Africa, know only too well what mercenaries
1 Adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
indicate for us. They mean racism, imperialism,exploiAfrican Unity at its seventeenth ordinary session held at Addis
tation and colonial reconquest. The United Nations has Ababa from 15 to 19 June 1971.
5

for example, racism, apartheid,
Zionism, terrorism, hijacking, hostages, drugs, slavery and so on. So the time has
come to take positive and practical action to combat the
useof mercenaries.

42. The Romanian delegation has carefully studied the
report of the SpecialMissionof the Security Council to the
People’sRepublic of Benin,and the statementsmadein the
courseof this debateby the representativeof Benin and by
representativesof other States.

37. The use of mercenariesin the ageof nation-Statesand
ideological States is a crime in itself, but it is also an
instrument of aggressionagainst small countries for the
colonial reconquest of the third world and an instrument of
terror in the handsof certain Powersand secretservices.My
country will join its efforts with those of other concerned
sister countries in order to propose a specific mode of
action to the international community to combat the evil
of mercenary activities.

43. We find that, on the basisof the testimony received
and evidence examined by it, the Special Mission colzchided,in paragraph141 of its report /S/12294/, that “the
People’sRepublic of Benin was. . . subjectedto an armed
attack” by a group of mercenaries which arrived at
Cotonou airport on the morning of 16 January 1977, and
that the “primary objective of the invading i’orce wasthe
overthrow of the presentGovernment of Benin”. Equally
noteworthy is the conclusioncontainedin paragraph142 of
the report, that:

3X. It is extremely sad to seeourselves-Africans-divided
in this debate before the Security Council. However, this
djvision is a fact of life; it is a true reflection of our real
“Inasmuchasthe territorial integrity, independenceand
problemsand of our crisis in progressand development.It
sovereignty of the State of Benin was violated by this
reflects the fight within the third world between the forces
invading force which camefrom outside the territory of
of the past and the emerging forces of the future. We
that country, there can be no doubt that the State of
cannot avoid these facts; nor can we hide them behind the
Beninwassubjectedto aggression.”
facade of unity, becauseour unity is the unity of our
peoples,unity for progressand the liberation of OLM masses. 44. The Romanian delegationconsidersthat the Security
We are attached to African unity, as we are equally Council should formulate its recommendationsand deciattached to Arab unity, to Islamic unity, to third-world
sionstaking into account:the conclusionsreachedby the
unity, to non-aligned unity and to the developingcountries’ Special Mission. In this connexion, 1 wish to take this
unity. But all these forms of unity cannot hide the
opportunity to thank the membersof the Mission,particuinevitable struggle between the two forces, the past andthe
larly its Chairman, AmbassadorJorge Illueca, for the hard
future-between progressand reaction. However, the real work that went into the preparation of this voluminously
danger lies in intervention in this fight and intervention in
documented and impartial report. The Special Mission,
this natural confrontation by foreign, external Powers;this
directed with competenceand professionalprobity by the
could falsify the whole situation and create more obstacles Ambassadorof Panama,has thus carried out the mandate
and difficulties in the face of our progressand the final,
entrustedto it by the Security Council.
inevitable victory of our masses
and peoples.
45. We note that the Security Council has before it a
39. The PRESIDENT lirzterpretntion
jk~72
Sp7ish):
I
violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
thank the representative of Libya for his cordial words
United Nations Member State-the People’sRepublic of
about my country, about our President and about me. I
completely agreewith him about the role that our countries Benin--anact of brutal interferencein the internal affairs of
that State.
have played in OPEC and about what is being done to bring
about a new economic order for all peoples.
40. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intcrprefation
p’o171
French).
First of all, Mr. President, 1 wish to join my colleagueswho
have already congratulated you on your assumptionof the
presidency of the Council. Our pleasure at seeingyou
conducting the debate in this important body is particularly
great becauseyou are an eminent representativeof Venezuela, a friendly country of Latin America, a region of the
world to which my country, Romania, feels bound by
strong affinities of language,spirit andculture, aswell asby
our common yearning for a world basedon the principles
of equality and the independence of nations. We are
convinced that, thanks to your qualities and diplomatic
experience, with the co-operation of all Council members,
our work this month will take place in the best possible
circumstancesand will yield positive results.It goeswithout
saying that we pledgeyou our fullest support.
41. I also wish to thank AmbassadorYoung of the United
States, your predecessorin the presidency, for the devotion
and zeal which he displayed in conducting our work last
month, and particularly for the relaxed, friendly atmosphere which he brought to our work.
., .

6

46. My delegation wishesto condemnthat act of aggression committed against an African country dedicated to
peace and freedom, whose efforts arc devoted to the
consolidation of its political and economic independence
andto the building of a society basedon socialjustice.
47. My country has always condemned, and indeed
resolutely condemns,all acts of force committed against
the national sovereignty, political independenceand territorial integrity of States, aswell asany attempts to prevent
the developing countries from consolidatingtheir political
and economicindependence.In relations amongall States,
my country strongly favours respect for the principles of
full equality of rights, national independenceand sovcreignty, non-interferencein others’ internal affairs, mutual
advantage and the renunciation of the threat or use of
force. The Romanian people has always stood by the
African peoplesfighting for the complete removal of the
vestigesof colonialismand neo-colonialism,and the elimination of any policy for the domination and oppressionof
other peoples, as well as for the abolition of racial
discriminationand apartheid. At the sametime, we wish to
stress that solidarity and co-operation among Africa11

States-amone. all develoDine. countries-is essential to the
success df their struggle for their free and independent
development and for the establishment of a new international economic and political order.

5.5. I should like to take the opportunity to repeat my
warm congratulations to Ambassador Young, your predecessor, who, last month, demonstrated his devotion to the
cause of peace and took initiatives with regard to thf
problems of South Africa which, we hope, will help to
restore justice and calm to that area.

48. In our opinion, the complicated problems inherited
from the colonial era, which have created tension among
African countries, must be solved by the Africans themselves by peaceful means, through understanding, and in a
spirit of friendship and co-operation.

56. Undoubtedly, Sir, your task is formidable, but it is
also a noble one. Indeed, you have assumed the presidency
at a crucial moment, when the Security Council has an
opportunity to play a vital role in achieving conditions of
peace and security in the world and to show that it is not
going to let itself be swayed, manipulated or taken in by
intriguers who are attetipting to institutionalize bluff and
cynicism in international relations. The Council is, in fact,
firmly committed to a persevering and scrupulous quest for
the truth, for right and justice without which there can be
no lasting peace on earth.

49. Those African peoples which have won their freedom
and their right to a life of dignity after a long struggle and
with great sacrifices, are capable of solving the problems
confronting them on their own, and our Organization and
the Security Council have a duty to act to protect them
from any outside interference, from any exercise of
pressure or diktat on the part of the imperialists and
neo-colonialists.
50. As President Nicolae Ceauyscu
Republic of Romania stated recently:

57. I already had the honour of speaking on behalf of my
country in the Council on 8 February last [1987th ‘meeting], during the initial phase of the debate on the events at
Cotonou of 16 January, and my delegation is gratified at
the fact that it was one of those that laid particular stress
on the need to shed all possible light on those events and to
identify clearly all those responsible for the raid on
Cotonou. We did so on the explicit instructions of our
Government out of solidarity with Benin, which is a
brother country; we did so because of ‘our profound
devotion to the truth, to justice and to respect for the
sovereignty of nations, whatever they may be; we did so
because we are avowed enemies of alladesigns, such as the
vile mercenary system, which attack the dignity and
security of States and peoples.

of the Socialist

“Romania will continue in the future to give full
support to the African peoples and to strengthen its
solidarity with them in their struggle to recover their
national wealth, to assert their own interests and fully to
participate on an equal footing in international affairs in
the solution of all problems confronting mankind today.”
51. In our opinion, the Security Council should condemn
the armed attack perpetrated on 16 January 1977 by a
.group of mercenaries against the People’s Republic of
Benin, as well as the criminal practice of the use of
international mercenaries. Since the attack of 16 January
caused the loss of human life arid material damage, the
Council should reaffirm the principle of reparation for
damages, such as those suffered by the people of Benin.
That would be an act of justice towards the Beninese
people and would show the entire world that the Council is
determined not to tolerate any such acts in future,
regardless of where they may occur, because they are
contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to the
norms of conduct in international relations.

58. These same considerations, at the present stage of the
debate, account for our position, a position that we want to
make unambiguously clear and that we do not intend to be
linked to any division whatsoever in Africa or in the world
at large.
59. The phenomenon of mercenary activity and the
various uses made of it have a great many implications that
are too serious to allow us to accept that the debate
occasioned by the events at Cotonou, and which is taking
place in an atmosphere of calm, should be systematically
diverted from its proper goal by manoeuvres that show that
those resorting to them are completely lacking in elementary decency and are intent on preventing a clear examination of a matter that is being discussed here as a result of
their own complaint.

52. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the representative of Romania for his kind words
about my country and about myself. 1 certainly think that
the way he himself directed the arduous work of the
Council during the month of December is very praiseworthy.

60. In this matter, the main concern of my delegation is to
expose the truth and to see justice done. The emotional
element, which the Benin delegation has been attempting to
inject into the debate, cannot be explained as the result of
agitation due to the recent events. The manoeuvres of the
Benin delegation in the African Group and in the Security
Council and the distribution, in the middle of a meeting, of
a document concocted in the little back rooms of the much
touted revolution, containing slanderous accusations against
sovereign countries and distinguished heads of State, are
clearly undertaken for the purpose of sowing confusion in
the examination of an event that is, in any case, completely

53. The next speaker is the representative of Togo, whom
I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
54. Mr. KODJOVI (Togo) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, it is with genuine pleasure that I address to
you the warm congratulations of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month of April and on the competence with which YOU
have been conducting this debate, whose unusual character
is the result of the equally unusual nature of the mysterious
affair that we are considering.
7

enabled the members of the commando to board their
aircraft and leave after their more than three-hour spree at
Cotonou. I must say frankly that our young States may be
weak and exposed to the wildest schemes of the lowest
adventirers, but they are not as vulnerable a$ that. It is in
our interest to make this point absolutely clear for its.
deterrent effect.

shrouded in mystery. My delegation notes this and regrets
it, but we shall not allow ourselves to be intimidated or
overawed by anyone; we shall stay calm and make a brief
objective analysis of the situation.
61. We should like to extend the warmest congratulations
to the members of the Special Mission, our colleagues
Mr. Illu&a of Panama, Mr. Mulye of India and Mr. Kikhia
of Libya, for the remarkable work they did on their
mission. I take particular pleasure in paying a tribute to
them for the frankness with which they admitted that they
were unable, because of lack of time and in view of their
terms of reference, to pursue their inquiries any further and
to verify the assertions of the “prisoner”,
Bri Alpha
Oumarou, or indeed the evidence contained in the documents. This means that, in the circumstances, the inquiry
has not been concluded-far from it.

66. We most sincerely think that it would be to underestimate the efficiency of the mercenaries and thus to
underrate the danger represented by mercenaries, if we
were to admit that those experts of armed aggression, as
they embarked on an operation, would have encumbered
themselves with such a variegated assortment of documents of no use whatsoever to them, such as this primary
school certificate, these cheque-books, pay slips and so on,
and that they would have taken care, before undertaking an
orderly retreat, to leave for the Benin authorities those
compromising documents which some have described porn.
pously as “extremely edifying”.

62. The authenticity of the documents submitted as
evidence and the veracity of the statements of Ba Alpha
Oumarou have not been established and, therefore, cannot
serve as a valid basis for determining who is to blame. I
should like to make this clear. A document presented as
evidence can be authentic or forged. It can have been
forged by the person presenting it or by the person from
whom he has obtained it, with or without the consent of
that source. The inquiries which
have to bc made in this
area are not difficult, and all those-that is, everyone-who
are aware of the serious danger constituted by the
mercenary phenomenon for all countries without exception
must help in this task.

67. I wish to repeat and make clear, so that there can be
no possible misunderstanding on anyone’s part, that at the
present stage of the inquiry the multifaceted mystery that
surrounds the events of 16 January 1977 at Cotonou-and
we certainly agree that those events occurred-has not yet
been cleared up. We have not yet been provided with
irrefutable evidence to confound sceptics who are not
accustomed to taking Africa seriously or indeed anything
that happens there and who continue to wonder what really
happened and what provoked those events. Confusion
remains just as rife as ever and there arc many possible
explanations for the events. For, the honour of Africa, but
also and above all in the interest of Benin, the investigation
must be pursued to its conclusion so that we can expose
and confound all those responsible for the shady business at
Cotonou.

63. History has many striking instances of forgery. In this
particular case, if w.e are not careful, and if through
slackness the Council takes some kind of definitive decision-and some people seem to be tlying to get the Council
to do this, with a nai’ved which does them no credit-it is
liable to replace the real mercenary system, like that
observed in Zaire, Guinea, Nigeria and elsewhere, by an
imaginary mercenary system that it would be convenient to
use as a diversionary tactic, and the implications of this
would be a grave danger to peace. Furthermore, in certain
bodies, hasty definitive decisions on certain cases on the
basis of summary procedures dominated by cunning
machinations may well be contrary to justice and right and
hence constitute a grave threat to peace.

69. First, with a dignity which we respect, the representative of Benin said in this very Council in his statement of
6 April:

64. However that may be, my delegation is not yet in a
position to talk of an accumulation of irrefutable proof.
The origin of the operation, as is made clear by the
statements of the pseudo-mercenary, pseudo-prisoner and
obvious automaton, Bsi Alpha Oumarou, and the nature of
the documents which are alleged to have been captured lead
my delegation to exercise the greatest possible circumspection.

“The people of Benin ask the Council to take measures
to ensure compensation for damage and to provide
considerable assistance to our economy. But J want it to
be clearly understood that the people of Benin, a
revolutionary people, is not coming here begging for
international alms. . . . What the people of Benin demands
is that justice be done and that there be compensation for
all the damage.” /ZOOOth meeting, para. 81.1

65. We believe most sincerely that it would be an insult to
the valiant revolutionary people’s armed forces of Benin,
whose calibre we respect, to agree that they might have
forgotten, when they were repelling the aggressors, to do
the one elementary thing which would have occurred to the
simplest soldier: to sabotage the aircraft of the attackers to
prevent them from effecting their departure after the
failure of the operation. That extraordinary
oversight

70. That could not be clearer. Thi: justice claimed, as I
cannot but emphasize, so justly by Benin requires that
compensation be demanded from those responsible for the
damage. It is extremely important, therefore, to identify
first of all the people responsible, and this should be the
essential objective to which the international community
should address itself calmly and inexorably, because, as the
representative of Benin said, that is its “moral responsibil-

68. Again, to avoid misunderstanding, I should like to
make it clear that I actually said “also and above all in the
jnterest of Benin”, and I did so for the two following
reasons.

8

ity” [ibid.]. In the murky confusion now created and
maintained by hasty accusations, noisy, over-imaginative,
unfounded, weird and improbable charges and allegations
and the protestations to which those accusations have of
course inevitably led and which we have noted here, whom
are we to ask for compensation? Not the United Nations,
since it was not the United Nations that organized the
events. It would be unjust, however, if Benin did not obtain
compensation. So the inquiry must go on.

obliged to close our western frontiers for a time” (ibid.,
pfzra. 791.

So when the leaders of the Benin revolution speak of
African lackeys and imperialism, my country feels it iS
underattack.
76. Before commenting on these slanderousallegations,
my delegation wishesto make some remarks which will
make it easierto understand its indignation and stupefaction at these charges.We must refer to the nature of our
relationswith Benin.

71. The second reason why we think it is in the interest of
Benin for the investigation to be pushed through to a
conclusion is that the extraordinary revolutionary fervour
that Benin injects into these charges and the methods that
it has resorted to-and that eloquently illustrate the
concerns of those intriguers who have resorted to them-in
these accusations which are so lightly levelled, that fervour
and those methods are such as to confirm the suspicions of
the sceptics who, as everyone knows, are wondering
whether in fact what we are faced with here is not actually
something staged and whether perhaps something has not
gone wrong with the revolution to make the victim of
aggression into the aggressor, through the medium of
agents, for preventive purposes and to exploit the situation
for various ends.

77. Togo and Benin arc linked by ties forged by objective
historical and geographicalphenomenawhich are just facts
of life. This prompted President EyadBma, in his realistic
and clearsightedperception of the facts and with the assent
of the whole Togolese people, which has rallied around
him, to say that Togo and Benin are condemned to live
together. There are Togolesewho, becauseof their family
origins, are asmuch BenineseasTogolese,and vice versa.In
addition to their both belonging to OAU and all relevant
regional and subregionalorganizations, the two countries
have recently decided, through co-operative work, to make
of the valley of the Mono river a frontier element that
unitesand doesnot divide.

72. The Togolese, like all responsible African peoples, are
really concerned for the dignity of our continent and find it
difficult to accept these malevolent insinuations which are
often provoked by events occurring in Africa. In this case,
we cannot permit free rein to be given to insinuations
which harm the honour and dignity of those who worked
for the Benin revolution. In this regard too, my delegation
has every reason to demand that the inquiry be continued.

78. It is becauseof thesedifferent factors that we in Togo
consider that foreign aggressionagainst Benin will inevitably have a negativeimpact on Togo, whether directly or
indirectly. In the circumstances,it is logical that anyone
who sets out to attack Benin will find Togo in the way.
Togo could not possibly associateitself with any party
doing anything whatsoeveragainstBenin.

73. I would add that, in the view of my delegation, there
can be no question of the Security Council, wltich has such
a vital role to play in bringing about conditions ofjust and
lasting peace in the world, compromising its authority by
taking any final decision on this matter, for any reason
whatsoever, on the basis of an incomplete investigation,
placing its reliance on the assertions of the only “aggressor”
captured who remains in the hands of the Benin authorities,
or on documents the authenticity of which has, as we
know, not yet been established. In this regard, my
delegation has no hesitation whatsoever in leaving matters
to the wisdom and clearsightedness of the members of the

79. Togo is positively neutral with regard to imported
ideologies. It scrupulously respects the socio-economic
options of all States and the way chosenby eachpeopleto
achieveits national goals. That is how we have managedto
achievethe honour of maintainingin Africa and throughout
the world solid and active friendships, Marxism-Leninism
was not originated by or cultivated exclusively for Benin
and the choice of that ideology by that country can in no
way damageour fraternal links.
80. To these elementsshould be added the deep-rooted
tolerance, thoughtfulness and spirit of conciliation that
have always moved General Eyadema and encouragedhim
to avoid doing anything ta harm Togolese-Beninese
fraternity. PresidentEyadCmahas always seento that personally
and he has always adopted an attitude of active candour
and loyalty in his relations with his brother President
KBrikou. From Conakry to Lagos, through bilateral meetingsorganizedin Beninor Togo or on the frontier, the chief
of State of Togo has never for a moment departed from
that line of conduct, even if sometimesthe other sidehas
not demonstrated the same willingnessto enter into a
sinceredialogueand even if the other side seemsto take a
mean pleasurein turning those meetings into rounds of
fraudulent bargaining.

Council.

74. My country,
Togo, and its President, General
Gnassingbe EyadCma, haVe been. implicated in this matter.
It is alleged that, since October 1976, my country has
harboured a certain Second Company of a certain Foreign
Intervention Group coming from Gabon, whose task is
alleged to have been that of penetrating and attacking by
surprise the territory of the People’s Republic of Benin on
16 January 1977. It is alleged that, on 2 January 1977, in
Gabon, our President met with President Bongo and a
certain Colonel Bourgeaud to work out the arrangements
for the aggression of 16 January.
75. In his statement of 6 April, my brother the representative of Benin stated:

81. In this connexion, I would mention the recent meeting
at Lagos, organized to permit the leaders of -our JWO
friendly countries to settle the situation which aroseout bf

“for reasons of security which the documents in our
possessioh make it easy to understand, we have been
9

88. This insult to our country and to our President is
something that we in Togo will not lake. We regret that
those who are responsible for the decadence of Benin
thought it a good idea to use this ramshackle operation at
Cotonou in order to publicize the lowness of their methods
and the flagrant incompetence of their rdgime. We very
much regret that they thought it necessary, in this
important arena of international diplomacy and in this
body which should be a haven of serenity, courtesy,
wisdom and responsibility, to implicate in such a vicious,
stupid and criminal way our country and its guide, and to
do so after President KCrekou himself had stated, on 14
February 1977, to the delegation sent to him by President
EyadBma, that Togo had had nothing whatever to do with
this matter; to do so after the tripartite meeting at Lagos.

the slanderous accusations and wild charges made by the
Cotonou revolutionaries against Togo and its head of State
in connexion with the events of 16 January 1977. Dirty
linen should be washed at home. That is why we went to
Lagos and warmly supported the consensus arrived at in the
African Group. When one finds one’s brother is very
excited for some reason, one must be patient. But even
patience has limits.
82. It is painful for my delegation to have to take part in
an acrimonious debate in the Security Council, particularly
in a case which is so undignified and in the wake of such
wild allegations by brothers who have only brought
i&national
ridicule upon themselves. We do not want to
be their propaganda agents in this shady affair. But, in their
revolutionary fervour, those brothers use any instruments
they can lay their hands on. They are not in the habit of
burdening themselves with scruples and are capable of
interpreting an elliptical denial made with some disdain as a
mark of weakness.

89. Lies do not pay off. Liars always end up the victims of
their own contradictions.
90. The Togo of the new march is and will always be,
whatever the circumstances, a fervent supporter of truth
and justice. That is why, on the orders of my Government,
I solemnly call upon all the commissions set up to
investigate this matter, and particularly the Security
Council Special Mission, to go to Togo to make the
necessary inquiries in order to discover the truth.

83. That is why we should like to set matters straight. As I
have already said, the Togolese consider that anyone who
attacks Benin also attacks Togo. We do not see why, on our
frontier, we should create a situation of insecurity for our
relatives in Benin. It is clear that anyone who dared to
undertake the use of Togolese territory as a springboard for
aggression against Benin would have have little chance of
success, or, in other words, of escaping as easily as did the
attackers on 16 January 1977 at Cotonou. Our authorities
are tight-lipped about it all but they are on the watch. Our
militants have been mobilized and our soldiers know their
duty.

91 The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
92. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (irzterpretatiolz from
French): Mr. President, through you my delegation would
Eke to thank all the members of the Security Council for
allowing us to participate in this second stage of the debate
on the complaint submitted by the People’s Republic of
Benin. The importance of this debate no longer needs to be
demonstrated. I should like also to join other delegations in
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council and in expressing admiration for the
courteous and kind manner in which you are conducting
our deliberations.

84. Yes, the border was closed by Benin-not for reasons
of security but to sabotage the Economic Community of
West African States and to jeopardtie the economy of our
sub-region. That country was banking on the 6 billion it
had intended to claim as compensation from the international community.
SS. On 2 January 1977, General Gnassingbe EyadCma was
at home at Pya. Energetic and devoted to the service of
Africa, he travels a great deal to meet his opposite numbers,
from Conakry to Lagos, from Kinshasa to Niamey, l”rom
Ouagadougou to Libreville, from Cotonou to Abidjan and
Tripoli, and so on and so forth. He is indefatiguable and
moves around a great deal, but unfortunately he does not
have the gift of ubiquity, enabling him to have been both at
Pya and at Librcville on 2 January 1977.

93. We supported the People’s Republic of Benin during
the first stage of this debate, when it turned to the Council
for help in shedding light on the armed aggression to which
it had fallen victim on 16 January 1977. That was only
natural, for the concern of the Benin authorities to discover
and establish, internationally, the identity of the instigators
of and those responsible for this aggression, to understand
the motives and to establish the means used, is a concern
that we share with all countries, in particular those of the
third world, which are anxious to safeguard their territorial
integrity, their political independence and their sovereignty.

86. However that may be, it is indescribably naive to
accuse a soldier of the calibre of General EyadBma, so
worthy a leader as our President, the clear-minded artisan
of the new Togo, a fighter for African unity, cohesion and
solidarity and a proven supporter of justice and peace in the
world, of having had anything to do with the masquerade at
Cotonou.

94. Thus, we were the first to welcome the Council’s
decision to send to the scene a special mission, whose
report is now before the Council for consideration. We
should like to thank and congratulate those who prepared
this document and, in particular, Ambassador Illueca of
Panama, who introduced it [200&h meeting]. Before going
further, we would add that we are deliberately taking no *
account of the documents whose circulation was requested

87. It is particularly odious to make the hollow claim that
we gave refuge on our territory to an army of mercenaries
whose task was to attack Cotonou, in other words, to
massacre our brothers, our sisters, our children, our cousins,
our other relatives in Benin. What is the purpose of all this?
10

by Benin ‘and by other countries-even though that was
done in accordance with a consensus of the African
Group-because, technically speaking, the agenda limits us
to the consideration of the report of the Special Mission.

of the documents abandoned by the aggressors and communicated to the Special Mission by the Government of Benin.
They concern the place of recruitment of the mercenaries,
their training base, their transportation to Cotonou and the
political and military direction of the operation.

95. Consideration of that document prompts us to point
to three categories of facts.

100. Should these facts be considered as having been
established or, as some would have us believe, h.avewe just
been served up mere “imaginings”, “deceitful allegations”
and “slanders”?

96. In the first place, there are the undisputed facts, those
on which the voluminous evidence collected and the proof
examined on the scene by the Special Mission concord.
That is true of the fact that an armed aggression took place
on 16 January 1977, of the deveIopment of the attack, of
the mostly European composition of the commando band
of mercenaries and of the size of the material damage and
the loss of human life suffered by Benin.

10 1, Those who contest the validity of the report on those
particular points, use the following arguments: the invalidity of the evidence of the prisoner BB Oumarou and the
invalidity of the documents that were seized and are
considered not authentic.
102. Before considering the question of validity, we
should point out that, in those arguments, there is no claim
to provide evidence to the contrary or to invalidate the
contents of the report. We are dealing with an exception, a
question which needs to be settled first and, indeed, it
should be considered whether or not it is to be entertained
before entering into matters of substance.

97. In the second place, there are the facts which,
although not formally verified by the Mission, are none the
less established because, if they were not true, there could
have been no act of aggression against Benin. They are
certainly of concern to the Security Council as the body
primarily responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and’ security. They relate to the traffic in and
diversion of sophisticated weapons that were placed at the
disposal of the mercenaries, the availability, either through
sales or rentals, or in any other way, of logistical equipment, aircraft and means of communication, which made
possible the attack against Benin, and the recruitment of
mercenaries, in violation of resolution 239 (1967), of which
I quote the following paragraphs:

103. As regards the invalidity of the testimony given by
the prisoner, some, invoking Roman law, have said that the
testimony of a single person is not valid. Is that a rule with
universal value t&at can be invoked at the United Nations?
I would say no. Even in so-called European systems where
trials are of the “inquisitorial” type, and where this rule is
accepted, there are exceptions, because proof provided by
even a single person can destroy a presumption; such
testimony is acceptable when there is-as in this case-other
material or documentary evidence.

“2. Condem~zs any State which persists in permitting
or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the
provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations;

104. Furthermore, this rule does not apply in the AngloSaxon system where trials are of the “accusatory” type. We
saw that when the police of the City of New York told us
that the assault of which a member of our delegation had
been a victim could not be the subject of further inquiry if
the victim, the soIe witness, was not authorized to give
evidence against the criminal.

“3. Calls upon Governments to ensure that their
territory and other territories under their control, as well
as their nationals, are not used for the planning of
subversion, and the recruitment, training and transit of
mercenaries designed to overthrow (any Government/. ”

105. This rule-testis unus, testis nullus-which
does not
have absolute or universal value was deliberately not
invoked by the Special Mission. Could it in fact have said to
the Government of Benin: “Your testimony is presented by
a single individual and we cannot accept it”? Could it have
deprived the Security Council, which had established it, of
the information provided by the prisoner Bh Oumarou?

98. This category of facts is in stark contradiction with
article 3 (g) of the Definition of Aggression annexed to
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) which states
that the following qualify as acts of aggression:
“The sending by or on behalf of a State of almed
bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry out
acts of armed force against another State of such gravity
as to amount to the acts listed above, or its substantial
involvement therein.”

106. To satisfy the legal formalism which has appeared
during this Council debate, we should like to say that,
according to Canadian jurisprudence, to take one example,
Bg Oumarou’s evidence is acceptable. He has personal
knowledge of the facts and, as Canadian law says:

What do we care whether they are called adventurers,
marauders or reckless hot-heads seeking adventure. They
are all of the same breed; they obey the same masters who,
in a show of generosity, are always busy exculpating them.

“No one-except an expert witness-can provide testimony before sufficient proof has been supplied demonstrating that he has personal knowledge of the facts. That
proof can be supplied by the witness himself.”

99. The third category of facts to which I should like to
refer are those set forth in paragraph 145 of the report on
the basis of the evidence provided by a member of the
commando taken prisoner in Benin, as well as on the basis

That is what BB Oumarou did, and he is therefore qualified
to provide testimony. Furthermore, the testimony was valid
11

reasonable, as well as to show that it is irresponsible to
question the objectivity of the report on the basis of
unacceptable exceptions. How can one question the competence, impartiality and sense of responsibility of the
Mission and at the same time hope that it was able to
include and check all the international ramifications of the
aggression against Benin?

becauSe it was voluntarily given. Before each interrogation
the witness was told that he was entitled to make or not
make any statements. That is in accordance with article.52
of the Code of Proof established by the Law Reform
Commission of Canada in December 1975.
107. Even though we are discussing the validity or
invalidity of testimony provided by a prisoner, I cannot
help but refer to the statement made by the Chairman of
the Special Mission when the report was introduced:

113. Since the testimony of the prisoner Oumarou
“accorded with the documentation” and since the documents corroborate the testimony of the prisoner, I should
like to ask a question: what remains to be established and
where? Since we are still speaking about the place of
recruitment of the mercenaries, of their training base, of
their transportation
to Cotonou, of the military and
political direction of the operation-to the exclusion of the
other aspects of the aggression of 16 January-what
now
needs to be verified? Are we sure of having the co-operation of all the Governments concerned? Since the
mercenaries’ plane disappeared as if by a miracle, there is
some doubt about that. We can have doubts because no one
has indicated where that particular plane landed after it left
Cotonou, and the abstention of a single country can raise
the presumption of complicity on the part of all countries
within flying range of that plane. There is some doubt,
because Bourgeaud alias Maurin-to cite just one casewhose dual identity and whose guilt have been established,
is still at liberty, without an identity card or driver’s
licence, and no one comes forward to tell us where he is or
what has happened to him. We are not speaking of the
other mercenaries. Some of them returned to their irregular
situations somewhere and no country will indicate their
presence, at least not until they claim their next victims.

“After exhaustive interrogation, we found no flaws,
contradictions or obvious omissions in his testimony, and
his account in genera1 was the same as other accounts
and, in particular, accorded with the documentation
captured by the Government of Benin.“(Ibid.,
para. 25.1
Our opinion is the following: the evidence provided by
prisoner Bg Oumarou is acceptable, valid and conclusive.
108. I should now like to turn to the question of the
validity of the documents left by the attackers. With regard
to the source of those documents, guarded language has
been used and reference has been made to documents that,
supposedly, were abandoned at the airport. Another representative who considers that they are “compromising”,
finds it paradoxical that a commando of highly trained
professional mercenaries would, when attacking a country,
bring with them personal effects such as identity cards and
so on. In connexion with the contents, we all heard the
representative of Benin complain about the fact that his
country had been wrongly accused of having produced false
and forged documents.
109. Since, once again, we wish to remain strictly within
the legal framework,
we shall call those arguments prior
issues. They are issues that, as I said, must be settled first,
before the questions of substance are disposed of. As such,
the burden of proof is reversed and it is up to the person
raising the prior questions to prove what he is advancing.

114. All this brings us back to the harsh realities of the
imperfect world in which we live, a world where the gaps
and the weaknesses of international law make it hard to
subject supremely political questions such as the aggression
against Benin to a strict formal legal examination. The
Council has a very difficult task before it. It must critically
evaluate the proof before it and draw conclusions in
keeping with the spirit of the Charter and the requirements
of a delicate political situation.

110. Who can show here that the Government of Benin
obtained those documents illegally and that therefore their
acceptance as means of proof would tarnish the reputation
for justice of the Security Council? Who can prove that the
Govermnent of Benin forged a single one among the many
documents contained in the file? One would have to prove
false only one document to demolish the whole lot.

115. For our part, we are among,those who believe that
the entire report presented makes it possible to form a
reasoned opinion on the events which took place at
Cotonou on 16 January 1977, and we endorse the
conclusions reached by the Special Mission, namely, that
the People’s Republic of Benin was the victim of an armed
attack by a commando force made up of mercenaries; that
inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Benin were violated by those invaders who
came from outside the country, there can be no doubt that
the country was the victim of an aggression.

1 11. The Special Mission accepted the documents, so we
would like to find one single representative who would say
that the Mission was wrong in so doing, The Chairman of
the Mission said the following:
“That documentation is voluminous and constitutes a
meticulous and coherent inventory corroborating the
testimony of the prisoner and other evidence obtained by
the Mission.” (Ibid., para. 26.1
Perhaps that is the reason why so many would
remove them from the file.

I1 6. The careful preparation, the magnitude of the financial and military means employed as well as the intervention of mercenaries known for their attacks in Africa
and Asia long associated with imperialist, reactionary and
neo-colonialist circles, all justify the belief that this
operation had a definite international dimension, a dirnension which reduces to the level of alibis the aims attributed
to the presumed beneficiaries of that abortive attempt.

like to

112. We have dwelt on those legal points to show that the
foundation
of the Mission’s conclusions is valid and
12

117. The attempts made to limit the ramifications of this
aggression to the African continent are not credible and, in
our view, are obviously part of a larger neo-cblonial plan to
reconquer, destabilize and overthrow, one after another,
the r&imes whose options and tendencies are at variance
with imperialist and neo-colonialist objectives on the
African continent. The true dimension of the aggression
against Benin emerges, we believe, from a reading of
paragraph 144 of the report, in which the Special Mission
gives the following waning:

damage inflicted on the economy. of his country by the
aggressors. The amount of the damage-without
taking into
account damage other than material-estimated
at about
6 billion CFA francs, leads us to dispute the arguments of
those who minimize or laugh at this whole affair, those who
try to propagate the belief that a country which is already
economically weak could afford to stage a scenario to prove
one knows not what, but whose net results are clearly
negative.
124. Going from sarcasm to protest, from protest lo
denials, they finally would have us believe that the attack
of 16 January 1977 was the perfect crime, a crime
committed without criminals. That would be unfair to the
people of Benin and deplorable on the moral plane, for it
would mean that the desire of some to avoid their
responsibilities would have triumphed over the truth.

“From the manner in which the operation was conceived and executed, the Special Mission believes a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against small
defenceless countries for similar purposes.”
118. We could not better express our fears and our
apprehensions. Perhaps we shall be allowed to add that we
cannot help establishing a link between that warning and
the regrettable events which recently took place in that part
of Africa. First of all difficulties were created for the
Government of Angola so as to create in that country the
right conditions for military intervention; then there was
the assassination of President Marien Ngouabi of the Congo.
Those are two countries which, with Benin, are part of the
“progressive axis” referred to in the documents seized at
Cotonou.

125. In the overheated atmosphere of this chamber,
appeals have been made to the calmness of the wounded
people of Benin with the hope of making them lapse into
resignation and passivity. Appeals have been made to their
impartiality, asking them not to communicate to the
Council their own impressions and assumptions in connexion with an affair which
concerns them first and
foremost. Their goodwill has been appealed to, but there
has been a misunderstanding of the initiative which they
took when they tried to offer additional information, in
conformity with paragraph 145 of the report of the Special
Mission and with the consensus adopted by the African
Group.

119. The question before us relates to the safeguarding of
the territorial integrity of our countries, the safeguarding of
our political independence, of our right to choose the
socio-economic system which suits us, according to our
own criteria and without regard for the protection of
special or foreign in other words, retrograde interests.

126. What about the Beninese martyrs of 16 January? IS
our memory of them to be drowned by a deluge of
invective and vilification against the leaders at Cotonou?
Can wc accept without a murmur the insinuation according
to which those dead have been the innocent victims of a
scenario staged by Cotonou for the simple pleasure of
implicating the States with different but nevertheless
converging political ideas?

120. In this connexion, we cannot fail to fulfil our
responsibility. We cannot abandon our political commitment to break certain links which we have inherited from
the past and to pursue the path of a genuine policy of
national independence. That is why, in the present case, we
stand solidly with Benin.
121. We condemn the aggression of which that country
was the victim. We disapprove of the violent methods used
against its territorial integrity. We denounce the use of
mercenaries to interfere in its political life and to serve
foreign interests which wish to resume control of the
country.

127. It is all too easy to accuse others of being obsessed
with the notion of a plot. But perhaps “plotting-on-thebrain” is not so great an evil as one may think, if this
infection is the result of our constant vigilance and our
desire not to be lulled by the promises of imperialism, or of
our refusal to compromise in a dialogue the result of which
is always that we are made dupes.

122. In our opinion, the Council has the duty to react
against the act of aggression of 16 January 1977 and to act
in such a way that this type of attack will not take place
again, either in Benin or elsewhere. Mere condemnation is
inadequate, in our opinion, and would not meet the
constant threats to which our countries have been subjected. Perhaps the time has come for the Council to take a
further initiative and go beyond its own resolution
239 (1967), which I have already mentioned, in order lo
protect our countries from the criminal actions of mercenaries and from imperialist and neo-colonial Powers which
use them for purposes hostile to the independent development of our peoples.

128. The direction our debates have taken is particularly
regrettable because, at times, we have given the impression
of pursuing the shadow instead of the reality, of talking
about tangential bilateral or regional African problems
rather than about the truly international dimension of the
tentacle-like machinations of which the act of aggression
against Benin was but one manifestation. While we have
discussed the credibility, good faith and good will of the
Beninese authorities, the undoubted responsibility of international imperialism in this matter has only been commented on half-heartedly and without conviction.
129. Imperialism, which is still clinging to the African
continent, stands once again accused, as it always has been.
It stands accused of trying to have us believe that its

123. The representative of Benin has also drawn the
attention of the Council to the importance of the material
13

130. The total liberation of the African continent may not
perhaps take place without other incidents similar to those
I have just mentioned. But the decision we are awaiting
today from the Council must reflect the unequivocal
commitment of the United Nations to working for that
liberation; it must put an end once and for all to the
conspiracy of the forces of reaction and of those who are
nostalgic for the colonial era and who have already
committed too many crimes against Africa. That is the only
way of dealing justly with the complaint by Benin about
the act of aggression in question.

interests are our interests, or, at any rate, of placing its
interests above ours. It stands accused of wanting to impose
its laws and governments of its own choosing on peoples
that only want to follow the national course of their own
development. By virtue of its use of mercenaries, it stands
accused of belying its own claims of friendship, the
sincerity of which depends on the servility of those towards
whom it is directed. It stands accused of resorting to
violence and surprise attacks. Unfortunately,
it always
seems to find in Africa the necessary “connexion” and
springboard, such as the Territory of Namibia, which was
recently used in the invasion of Angola, just as South Africa
is being used to support the rebellion of Ian Smith.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77”70001-March

1978-2,200
