A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/171
22 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 91 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/717/Add.3)]
48/171. Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the 1990s
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/206 of 21 December 1990, in which it
endorsed the Paris Declaration and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the 1990s, 1/ 46/156 of 19 December 1991 on the
implementation of the Programme of Action and 47/173 of 22 December 1992 on
the implications of the application of the new criteria for identifying the
least developed countries in the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Recalling also its resolutions S-18/3 of 1 May 1990, the annex to which
contains the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular
the Revitalization of the Economic Growth and Development of the Developing
Countries, and 45/199 of 21 December 1990, the annex to which contains the
International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development
Decade, as well as the document entitled "A New Partnership for Development:
The Cartagena Commitment", 2/ adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its eighth session, and the texts adopted by the
__________
1/
Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, Paris, 3-14 September 1990 (A/CONF.147/18), part one.
2/
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Eighth Session, Report and Annexes (TD/364/Rev.1) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.II.D.5), part one, sect. A.

/...

A/RES/48/171
Page 2

United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, particularly
Agenda 21, 3/
Taking note of the declaration adopted at the Ministerial Meeting of the
Least Developed Countries, held in New York on 30 September 1993, in pursuance
of the decision taken at the Ministerial Meeting held at Dhaka in
February 1990, 4/
Recalling that the prime objective of the Programme of Action is to
arrest the further deterioration in the socio-economic situation of the least
developed countries, to reactivate and accelerate their growth and development
and to set them on the path of sustained growth and development,
Noting that while many least developed countries, for their part, have
been implementing courageous and far-reaching policy reforms and adjustment
measures in line with the Programme of Action, implementation of international
support measures and commitments by a number of donor countries has fallen
short of the provisions of the Programme of Action,
Expressing serious concern about the continued deterioration in the
socio-economic situation of the least developed countries as a whole,
Also expressing concern about the heavy debt stock and debt-service
burden of the least developed countries, the limited market for their products
and the reduced flow of development resources,
Stressing that the mid-term review of the implementation of the
Programme of Action provides a unique opportunity for the least developed
countries and their development partners to take new measures as necessary,
with a view to enhancing the implementation of the Programme of Action during
the rest of the 1990s,
Also stressing that the implementation of the Programme of Action
provides for a mid-term review conducted by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development in accordance with paragraph 140 of the Programme of
Action, the results of which will be submitted to the General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, 5/
1.
Reaffirms the Paris Declaration and the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s; 1/

__________
3/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
4/

A/C.2/48/4, annex.

5/

A/48/333.

A/RES/48/171
Page 3

2.
Calls upon all Governments, international organizations,
multilateral financial institutions and development funds, the organs,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and all other
organizations concerned to take concrete measures to implement fully the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s as a
matter of urgency;
3.
Welcomes the fundamental and far-reaching domestic reforms that
have been or are being implemented by the least developed countries and notes
that such efforts should be continued;
4.
Notes the efforts of the international community, in particular
the donor countries, to try to fulfil their commitments in all areas, as set
out in the Programme of Action, and urges the provision of adequate external
support to the efforts of the least developed countries, keeping under review
the possibility of implementing further new steps in specific areas of
importance to the least developed countries;
5.
Calls upon the donor countries to fulfil their aid commitments as
contained in the Programme of Action on a priority basis and to adjust them
upwardly so as to reflect fully the additional resource requirements of the
least developed countries, including those added to the list of least
developed countries following the Second United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries;
6.
Stresses that progress in the implementation of the Programme of
Action will require effective implementation of national policies and
priorities by the least developed countries for their economic growth and
development, as well as a strong and committed partnership between those
countries and their development partners;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General, in conformity with paragraph 142
of the Programme of Action, to continue to ensure the full mobilization and
coordination of all organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system in the implementation of and follow-up to the Programme of Action, in
close collaboration with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the secretariats of the regional
commissions and the lead agencies of aid programmes;
8.
Calls upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to initiate further innovative measures to provide and mobilize financial and
technical support for the effective implementation of the Programme of Action;
9.
Stresses the importance of effective follow-up and monitoring
mechanisms for the Programme of Action, and notes that the annual follow-up of
progress in the implementation of the Programme of Action undertaken by the
Trade and Development Board on the basis of the annual report on the least
developed countries helps to contribute to the development dialogue between
those countries and their development partners and urges that that exercise be
strengthened;
10.
Notes with concern the constrained resource position of the United
Nations Development Programme during its fifth programming cycle and its
impact on the least developed countries, and urges all concerned to take steps
to carry out their agreed development programmes;

/...

A/RES/48/171
Page 4

11.
Welcomes the initiatives of some donor countries to write off
and/or reduce, as appropriate, the official debt of the least developed
countries, and invites others to take similar measures;
12.
Reiterates that increased opportunities for trade can help
reactivate economic growth in the least developed countries, and calls for
significantly improved market access for their products, particularly through
the elimination, wherever possible, or substantial reduction of tariff and
non-tariff barriers, as well as giving special attention to the problems of
the least developed countries within the context of the Final Act of the
Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, with a view to integrating
them in the global trading system;
13.
Notes with concern the environmental and development challenges
facing the least developed countries and their vulnerability in this regard,
and urges development partners to provide those countries with additional
resources to enhance their capacity to achieve sustainable development;
14.
Invites the preparatory bodies and all relevant forthcoming major
meetings and conferences of the United Nations system, particularly the
International Conference on Population and Development, the World Summit for
Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for
Equality, Development and Peace and the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II), to take into account the particular needs and
requirements of the least developed countries in formulating their final
documents;
15.
Welcomes the positive contribution of the non-governmental
organizations in the least developed countries in the field of socio-economic
development;
16.
Decides to convene a high-level intergovernmental meeting to
conduct a mid-term global review, in accordance with paragraph 140 of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s and
General Assembly resolution 45/206, on the implementation of the Programme of
Action, to be held in the early part of September 1995 or at any other
suitable date during the second half of 1995;
17.
Stresses the importance of timely, adequate and thorough
preparations for the mid-term global review;
18.
Requests the Trade and Development Board to consider, at its
spring session in 1994, the elaboration of the preparatory activities for the
mid-term global review meeting, including intergovernmental, expert, sectoral
and inter-agency preparatory meetings and the substantive documentation;
19.
Urges all Governments and international organizations, including
multilateral and bilateral financial and technical assistance institutions, in
particular the United Nations Development Programme, to take adequate steps to
ensure appropriate preparations for an in-depth mid-term global review of the
Programme of Action;
20.
Requests all relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to submit reports containing a review of the
implementation of the Programme of Action within their respective fields of
competence, with special emphasis on areas where commitments have remained
/...

A/RES/48/171
Page 5

unfulfilled, and proposals for new measures, as necessary, as further inputs
to the preparation for the mid-term global review;
21.
Stresses the importance of maintaining the institutional identity
and visibility of the Division for the Least Developed Countries in the
secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which
is entrusted with the task of global-level monitoring of and follow-up to the
Programme of Action, and welcomes the action taken by the Secretary-General to
fill the vacant post of Director of the Division;
22.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in resolution
46/156, to mobilize extrabudgetary resources to ensure the participation of at
least one representative from each least developed country at the spring
sessions of the Trade and Development Board, as well as at the
intergovernmental, expert, sectoral and inter-agency preparatory meetings for
the mid-term review process;
23.
Decides to consider at its forty-ninth session the recommendations
of the Trade and Development Board on preparations for the mid-term global
review, as well as the question of meeting the cost of full and effective
participation of representatives of the least developed countries at that
meeting;
24.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session a report on the progress made in the implementation of
the present resolution.
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
