S/PV.6975

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6975th meeting

Thursday, 6 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Simmonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Millicay
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2013/326)

13-35562 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1335562*

S/PV.6975

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

peace to Somalia. They have made progress possible.
We must not allow any reversals of the hard-won gains.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2013/326)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ethiopia and Somalia to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo
Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs of the Somali Republic.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/326, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I recognize the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and give him
the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I want to begin
by thanking the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting during its Council presidency and for its
Government’s active role on Somalia, most recently by
hosting the London Conference on 7 May this year.
The Secretary-General and I have long followed
developments closely. Somalia has held a special place
in my heart since I worked in the country in 1992 as the
first United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator. As
members know, those were very dark days. It is a source
of deep satisfaction that today we welcome the Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Somalia,
Mrs. Adan, who represents a Government committed
to leading the nation to peace, unity, development and a
life of dignity for all.
Somalia still faces many challenges. But we must
remember how far we have come, not least thanks to
the women and men of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as to the Somali National
Security Force and their allies. I pay tribute to their
commitment and courage in risking their lives to bring

2

This week, we passed a major milestone in the
engagement of the United Nations in Somalia with the
successful launch of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in Mogadishu. The
Secretary-General’s new Special Representative,
Mr. Nicholas Kay, has already met the Speaker of
Parliament and the Prime Minister, pending President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s return to the country.
UNSOM will support political dialogue, peacebuilding
and the protection of human rights. However,
successfully meeting the major peacebuilding
challenges will depend primarily on the efforts of
the Government of Somalia. Foremost among those
challenges is the establishment of a well-functioning
federal structure. A parallel challenge are cooperative
relations between Somalia and its neighbours, based on
mutual and complementary interest.
Eight months since its formation, the Federal
Government of Somalia has established its political
programme and presented plans for stabilization
and peacebuilding. It has begun reaching out beyond
Mogadishu to realize its vision of a federated Somalia,
demonstrating commitment to dialogue with other
regional administrations. A process has been launched
to review the provisional Constitution ahead of the
elections planned for 2016. I commend the Government
for its efforts, which deserve full and continuing
international support.
Realizing a federal State in Somalia is a complex
and demanding task. We see the high stakes in the recent
rise in tensions in Kismayo following the declaration of
a regional State in early April. On 15 May, 500 delegates
to a conference in Kismayo selected a President of
what was called the “Jubaland State of Somalia”. That
administration is regarded by the Federal Government
as illegal and unconstitutional. The process has also
been criticized for being insufficiently inclusive. Since
then, six other candidates have declared themselves
President of the new entity. While there have so far
been no reports of military confrontation so far, the
situation remains volatile.
The issues related to the unity and federalism of
Somalia can be resolved only through dialogue among
the Somalis themselves. That requires patience and
pragmatism on all sides. The United Nations stands
ready, if requested, to provide good offices in full

13-35562

S/PV.6975

respect for the lead role of the Government of Somalia.
At the same time, Somalia needs the support of its
partners, neighbours and friends. The efforts being
made by the leaders of Somalia, Kenya and Ethiopia to
develop trust and cooperative relationships are essential
and must continue. There is agreement that a strong and
stable Somalia is in the interests of all. That recognition
should guide regional efforts to address outstanding
issues and potential sources of friction.
In that regard, I fully support the statement resulting
from the extraordinary summit of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) last month, which
recognized the lead role of the Federal Government
in addressing the situation in Kismayo. The summit
also recommended that the Government convene a
reconciliation conference with the support of IGAD
and the United Nations.
Meanwhile, let us recall that AMISOM has a
critical role to play in ensuring security and the
freedom of movement for all those engaged in the peace
process. As in so many countries across the continent,
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is vital to reaching our objectives
in Somalia. With the deployment of UNSOM, we will
work together on political strategy, peacebuilding
and stabilization, as well as the protection of human
rights. The new Mission’s impact will also depend upon
effective security arrangements in close collaboration
with AMISOM.
I wish to call attention to the Secretary-General’s
statement in his report (S/2013/326) that AMISOM is
reaching its operational limit in terms of holding and
expanding areas under its control. In order to keep
the momentum of the past year, the Mission needs
additional resources for ground and air mobility,
including helicopters and armoured personnel carriers,
as well as the means to reconfigure its forces. I urge
Council members to give positive consideration to these
requests. In addition, we remain open to discussions
on long-term options for the security track, together
with the African Union and the Federal Government
of Somalia. In a follow-up to the Security Council’s
request, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
jointly with the AU and in close consultation with
the Somali Government, will undertake an exercise
to review AMISOM’s deployment and establish
benchmarks for the possible future deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation.

Over the long term, Somalia must assume its own
responsibilities through integrated, accountable and
effective security institutions. That will require a wellfunded and coordinated strategic approach. I welcome
the pledges of support of more than $300 million made
at the second London Conference and appeal to donors
to live up to their commitments. At the Conference,
I was impressed by the resolve of Somalia and its
neighbours to forge positive relationships in the region.
That is essential to addressing mutual interests and
build a more stable and prosperous region for all. We
discussed the scope for economic cooperation between
Somalia and its neighbours, as well as the need to create
an environment conducive to the safe and voluntary
return of refugees. I wish to underline the importance
of achieving coordinated and common positions of
States in the region in support of the processes led by
the Federal Government of Somalia, as exemplified
in IGAD’s recent communiqué. I strongly encourage
all partners to continue their dialogue and to work
closely together in that spirit on efforts towards Somali
Statebuilding and peacebuilding.
We should accept that Somalia will require
sustained and generous international support to
continue on the path of progress. That means making a
clear commitment assisting to the Federal Government
in rapidly developing its plans and building its
capacities. We should all agree on a framework for
future coordination, building on the second London
Conference and on the side meeting on Somalia
at the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development. I welcome the launch of the “New Deal”
and look forward to the development of a new aid
compact, with Somalis in the centre, accompanied by
unified funding mechanisms.
In conclusion, as we enter a new era of United
Nations engagement in Somalia, I would like to
express my appreciation to the outgoing Special
Representative, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, for
his many contributions in helping to lay a foundation
for Somalia’s path to lasting peace. I also congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Kay on his new role. I look forward to his
engagement on the political process as well as the
other areas of UNSOM’s mandate. I thank all those in
Somalia and at Headquarters who have worked hard to
ensure the deployment of UNSOM on time.
We are committed to delivering on the Security
Council’s vision for a dynamic new United Nations

13-355623

S/PV.6975

presence in Somalia, grounded in respect for Somali
leadership and ownership. UNSOM has already set up
its headquarters in Mogadishu and will establish its
presence across the country, notably in areas recovered
from Al-Shabaab as well as in Garowe and Hargeisa.
The Mission will support political dialogue and advise
the Government on peacebuilding and state-building,
including the coordination of international assistance.
UNSOM will be an integrated Mission, offering “one
door to knock on” for Somalia’s engagement with the
United Nations.
I appeal to the Council to support UNSOM and
help it to fulfil its mandate, including by providing
the necessary resources to the Mission itself and to
Somalia. I call on all to come together in support of
the new Government in its efforts to bring peace and
stability to the people of Somalia. The SecretaryGeneral and I firmly believe that with the continuous
support and firm commitment of its partners, Somalia
can achieve its vision: a country in unity and at peace
with itself and its neighbours, living under the rule of
law and on the path to economic stability and decent
living conditions for all.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral very much for his statement. I should now like
to make a satement in my national capacity.
It is an honour for me to be here this morning to
preside over this meeting of the Security Council on
Somalia. I am grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing.
Following the Somalia Conference on 7 May, the
United Kingdom has chosen to make the situation in
Somalia a high priority for its presidency of the Security
Council this month. The Conference was distinguished
by the close working partnership between Somalia and
the United Kingdom. I am therefore delighted that the
Deputy Prime Minister has joined our meeting today.
I commend her tireless efforts since taking office to
promote peace and stability in Somalia.
Somalia has been through a dramatic shift over
the past 12 months. A new Parliament and Government
have been appointed in the most representative political
process in a generation. Somalia has a provisional
Constitution. The economy is recovering. The diaspora
are returning. Above all, there is a sense of hope.
Somalis are determining their own future.
Last month in London, we saw a united international
community ready to support the next phase of recovery:
4

Somali-owned and Somali-led. Somali Ministers
shared detailed plans for developing the country’s
armed forces, police, justice sector and public financial
management systems. The international community
endorsed those plans and committed expertise and
funding to deliver them.
The Security Council can be proud of its recent
role in Somalia, from ensuring that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has the resources and
mandate to succeed, to guiding the United Nations
towards its deepest level of engagement in Somalia for
more than two decades. The Council has stood beside
and behind the Somali people. We have a collective
responsibility to ensure that continues.
I am delighted that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) deployed on 3 June. The
Mission will play a key role in making the efforts of the
United Nations more coordinated and coherent and in
providing Somalis with “one door to knock on”.
Of course, none of that progress would have been
possible without the enormous contribution of the
African Union, and of AMISOM in particular. I pay
tribute to the bravery and sacrifices of all AMISOM,
Ethiopian and Somali personnel. History will show the
magnitude and importance of their contribution and
efforts in bringing peace to Somalia.
We look to both the United Nations and the African
Union to work in a complementary manner, for the
good of the Somali people. We are encouraged by
the forthcoming joint United Nations/AU review of
AMISOM’s progress. The development of AMISOM’s
concept of operations in January 2012 was an example
of the strong cooperation between both organisations.
The results on the ground speak for themselves. We
will support that work in any way we can.
It is in the interests of Somalia, the region and
the wider international community that momentum
be maintained, but we cannot be complacent. History
has shown that, if Somalia is allowed to backslide
into instability and conflict, the consequences will
be felt well outside its borders in the form of regional
instability, piracy and terrorism.
For all the progress that we have seen, Somalia
continues to face huge challenges. We should be under
no illusions as to the sustained efforts that will be
required, in Somalia and from its international partners,
to ensure that progress continues. Somalia lacks public

13-35562

S/PV.6975

services — schools, hospitals, clean water supplies.
More than 70 per cent of Somalis still live on less than
$2 a day. There is very real suffering on a daily basis.
We cannot stand by and risk another famine like the
2011 crisis, when more than quarter of a million people
are confirmed to have died.
Al-Shabaab is under real pressure but, as recent
attacks have shown, it still remains determined to kill
innocent civilians and halt Somalia’s progress towards
peace and prosperity.
The international community must work to
continue partnership with the Somali Government
to address those challenges. That means supporting
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s six-point plan by
ensuring that the commitments made at the Somalia
Conference are fully realized and aligned in support
with Somali priorities. It means ensuring the right blend
of international support to Somalia. It is imperative that
AMISOM and the United Nations, especially through
UNSOM and bilateral partners, work closely together in
a coordinated manner. It means ensuring that AMISOM
has the appropriate tools to carry out its mandate and
to develop effective, legitimate and affordable national
security forces, with clear accountabiliyt and oversight,
which will be essential for the Somali Government to
fulfil its role of protecting people and property and
preserving public order.
International partners should work together to
ensure that our support to the development of Somali
security forces is coordinated and aligned to the
Federal Government’s plans. It means addressing
serious human rights concerns. Somalia remains one
of the worst places in the world to be a woman. I
welcome the Government of Somalia’s commitment to
improving human rights, tackling sexual and genderbased violence and protecting both women and children
from the effects of conflict. They will have all of our
support as they tackle those vital issues. Ultimately,
political progress will remain the key to the long-term
stability of Somalia.
I welcome the Somali Government’s commitment
to holding democratic elections in 2016; to achieve
that, much needs to be done to resolve the outstanding
constitutional issues and the relationship between the
Federal Government and the regions. I welcome the
recent dialogue between the Government of Somalia
and the regions and hope that it will continue. I
commend the role played by IGAD and Somalia’s

neighbours. We were pleased to host the talks between
Somalia and Somaliland in Chevening in June 2012 and
welcome the continuation of the dialogue in Turkey. It
is only through dialogue that lasting solutions can be
developed.
I also welcome the European Union’s plans to hold
a conference on Somalia in September. The conference
will help sustain the momentum to build a new and longterm partnership between Somalia and the international
community for political reconstruction and economic
development.
In conclusion, Somalia has come a long way since
the days of extremism and tyranny, which brought
nothing but misery to the long-suffering Somali people.
The next 12 months will be pivotal for Somalia. We
must support the Federal Government to ensure that
plans agreed in London are implemented swiftly to
realize improvements in security, policing, justice and
public financial management. We must ensure that
ordinary Somalis across the country see changes on the
ground. And we must improve coordination between
the international community. Along with the Council,
the United Kingdom will stand shoulder-to-shoulder
with the Somali people and their Government as they
continue their journey towards a brighter tomorrow.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting, as well as
to congratulate the United Kingdom on the successful
holding of the London Conference on Somalia on 7 May.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his statement. Weare honoured by the presence of
Somalia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.
We would like to touch on five particular subjects.
First, we believe that the London Conference
set an important precedent in reaffirming Somalia’s
leadership position, given its role as co-host.
We acknowledge the great efforts that Somalia’s
Government has made to leave behind two decades of
crisis. That also required a great collective effort on
the part of its closest partners, in particular the troopcontributing countries to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority

13-355625

S/PV.6975

on Development (IGAD) and bilateral donors. We
appreciate the international community’s commitment
to providing financial assistance in three vital areas
for the stability of Somalia, namely, security, justice
and reform of the administration of public finances. In
addition, we want to highlight the joint communiqué
by Somalia and the United Nations with regard to the
prevention of sexual violence. We hope that the Somali
Government will implement the recommendations set
out in that document as soon as possible.
Secondly, we thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Agustin Mahiga for his dedication.
We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Nicholas Kay
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). We hope that UNSOM
will manage to establish a constructive relationship with
the Somali Government to face key challenges, such as
national reconciliation and the distribution of power
and resources among the regions, the reconstruction
of State institutions and the strengthening of human
rights.
Thirdly, we agree that reform in the security sector
is a priority and we take note of the national security
plan presented by the Somali Federal Government.
Like others, we believe that it is vital to consolidate
the armed and police forces in Somalia. In the light of
the partial lifting of the arms embargo, it is important
that Somalia establish the safeguards that the Security
Council called for in resolution 2093 (2013.) We also
cannot fail to acknowledge the work done by the
African Union Mission in Somalia. We hope that it can
count on the funding needed to extend its presence to
recovered areas.
Fourthly, we are concerned about the situation in
southern Somalia, and in particular about the issue of
“Jubaland”. That situation must be resolved through
a constructive dialogue that respects the provisional
Constitution, with the common goal of consolidating a
federal State in Somalia. Stabilizing the region is vital
for the future of Somalia and, in that regard, we take
note of recent IGAD’s visit to Kismaayo. Al-Shabaab’s
links to the region and the revenues it derives from the
unlawful selling of charcoal is also of great concern.
We consider it important to ensure that the embargo on
that product be implemented.
Fifthly, we would like to reiterate the point that
the Secretary-General made in his most recent report

6

(S/2013/326), namely, that achieving stability in
Somalia is in everyone’s best interest. We commend the
efforts that the new Government has made in building
links and trust with all its neighbours. In that regard,
we recognize IGAD’s important role in supporting the
priorities of the Somali Federal Government.
Somalia has one of the longest coastlines in
Africa. In the past, its coasts have been used for illegal
activities such piracy, illegal fishing and the dumping
of toxic waste. However, we hope that the Somali coast
will soon become a source of revenue for the Somali
population, rather than a challenge to the country.
Finally, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
today’s meeting
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. President, to express my gratitude to your country,
the United Kingdom, for having organized this briefing
on Somalia as well as for the special attention that you
have always paid to the reconstruction of that country.
I would like to pay tribute to you, Mr. Minister, and
thank you for being here among us to preside over
this discussion. Next, I would like to welcome to
the Security Council Ms. Fawzia Yusuf Haji Adam,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Somalia. Finally, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing.
The current situation in Somalia is radically
different from that which prevailed just a year ago.
The transition period has come to an end. The security
situation has improved and the country has entered into
a new phase, one of transformation with new elected
authorities as well as new institutions that have been
established. Furthermore, the new federal authorities
are undertaking initiatives to implement the six pillars
defined in the Government’s programme and to interact
with regional authorities to promote reconciliation and
national unity.
All of those efforts need to be consolidated
and accompanied by appropriate steps, such as the
Council’s adoption in May of resolution 2104 (2013),
which established the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). The same goes for the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Nicholas
Kay as Special Representative for Somalia and Head
of Mission of UNSOM and the holding, on 7 May in
London, of another Conference on Somalia, upon the
initiative of the United Kingdom.

13-35562

S/PV.6975

Great progress has been made in Somalia in the
political and security fields, but many significant
challenges remain. We were therefore pleased that the
London Conference provided an opportunity to take
stock of the current situation in Somalia and that the
discussions there focused mainly on the country’s four
priorities, namely, political stability, security, justice
and the management of the country’s public finances.
The importance of the partnership between Somalia
and the international community was once again
highlighted, and participants committed to providing
coordinated and ongoing support for the implementation
of the Federal Government’s plans. Everyone must now
play their part to ensure that those plans are translated
into concrete actions on the ground. In that context,
we welcome the European Union’s plan to hold a new
conference on Somalia in September in Brussel. We
hope that that conference will lead to decisions and
commitments that will support the relaunching of the
country’s development.
Among the challenges the country must face, the
Federal Government will have to resolve, through a
comprehensive approach, the outstanding fundamental
issues concerning Somalia’s long-term stability,
namely, political reconciliation, the development of a
federal system and the constitutional revision process,
including a referendum on the Constitution and
preparations for the 2016 elections.
Recent developments in southern Somalia,
particularly the setting up of regional administrations
in Jubaland, have solidified internal divisions and
reflect the magnitude of the challenges facing efforts for
reconciliation and the firming up of the federal system.
It is crucial not to lose sight of the fact that internal
rivalries play into the hands of Al-Shabaab, which still
controls vast rural areas. If the Federal Government
fails to exert its authority over certain regions, such as
Kismayo, it will see its influence undermined in other
parts of Somalia.

that targeted killings and attacks are reported on a
daily basis, while incidents involving explosive devices
increased in 2013 as compared with 2012.
We would once again highlight that Somali
forces backed by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) have made great sacrifices to
promote peace, security and stability in the country.
However, although they have caused Al-Shabaab to
lose significant ground, that group continues to pose a
threat to peace and security in Somalia. It is therefore
important to help Somalia reform and rebuild its own
security institutions with a view to enabling them to
shoulder their responsibilities themselves in the long
term.
Once the arms embargo is partially lifted, the
Government of Somalia must come up with effective
and inclusive security arrangements for the protection
of civilians. In that regard, we support the call for
increased support to AMISOМ, especially with regard
to force multipliers, in order that it may, with the
support of Somali National Security Forces, consolidate
the progress made on the ground and bring more areas
under the control of the Somali authorities.
Furthermore, efforts designed to strengthen security
are inseparable from those related to the promotion of
justice and the rule of law. It is therefore crucial that a
credible judicial system in Somalia be set up in order to
allow the State to regain the trust of the population and
bring about reconcililation in the country.
It is equally crucial that, in the fight against piracy
and armed robbery, Somalia take responsibility and
develop a comprehensive approach to security in its
maritime areas, in order to have the means, with the
support of the international community, to itself bring
to account those who commit, benefit from or are
involved in piracy.

In that context, the federal authorities should
develop and promote good-neighbourly relations with
other countries in the region, as their support is vital.
We welcome the efforts that have already been made
to achieve that goal, in particular in the context of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

I cannot conclude without briefly discussing the
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Due to the ongoing
conflict, the country is still in the midst of an extreme
humanitarian crisis, in which more than 1 million people
are in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. The
international community must pursue its efforts in a
coordinated manner in order to relieve the suffering of
those in need.

The security situation in the country remains
fragile, as outlined by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2013/326). The report also states

Finally, I would like to reiterate my country’s
support for Mr. Nicholas Kay, who has just taken on his
new role in Mogadishu. We would also like to pay tribute

13-355627

S/PV.6975

to Mr. Augustine Mahiga for having worked with such
determination to achieve a significant improvement in
the political, security and humanitarian situation in
Somalia.
Mrs. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/326) on the situation in
Somalia, the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and the
planning for the deployment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. I would like to
recognize the presence among us of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan.
Argentina welcomes the consolidation of the
efforts by the Government of Somalia to establish State
institutions that are credible and democratic. However,
we must be aware of the complexity of the tasks facing
the Federal Government in terms of drafting the
Constitution and establishing regional administrations
that will form the basis for the federal structure of
Somalia. In order for these tasks to be successfully
completed, there must be an inclusive dialogue leading
to the creation of broad consensus.
We welcome the recovery of certain areas near
Marka and Buurhakaba by Government forces, their
allies and the African Union Mission in Somalia,
and we lament the loss of the city of Xuddur, which
shows how difficult it is to retain control over areas
that are recovered. We continue to be concerned by the
unpredictability and fragility of the security situation,
in particular as a result of the attacks perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab, which continues to launch asymmetric
attacks using terrorist tactics that cause civilians
deaths.
We welcome the holding of the second London
Conference on Somalia, as well as the drafting of the
national security plan framework.
The difficult human rights situation is of deep
concern to us. Extrajudicial executions and the selective
killing of journalists can be added to serious violations
of human rights, including children’s rights, through
deaths, mutilations, the recruitment of child soldiers,
sexual abuse, kidnappings and sexual violence, in
particular in the internally displaced persons camps in
Mogadishu. Such abuses must come to an end. Those

8

responsible are not just Al-Shabaab, but also members
of the Somali forces and allied militias.
Argentina believes that those abuses must be
investigated properly and those responsible brought to
justice. In that respect, the Government must commit
decisively to fighting impunity. We welcome the
holding by the Government of the national conference
to examine the current justice system and to recommend
legislative and institutional reforms. That is an essential
contribution to cementing the establishment of the rule
of law.
Argentina would like to acknowledge the work
that the Government has done together with the United
Nations to apply a plan of action to put an end to the
recruitment, exploitation, murder and mutilation of
children. We commend the Somali National Security
Forces’ delivery to UNICEF of 41 former child soldiers
for reintegration. We welcome the signing on 7 May
of a communiqué between the Government of Somalia
and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual
violence.
We welcome the improved humanitarian situation;
however, we are still concerned about the fact that
2.7 million Somalis continue to rely on the provision
of aid. It is vital to ensure that such humanitarian
assistance reaches its destination in order to prevent
any deterioration of the situation. It is also essential that
the physical persons of humanitarian staff be respected.
Argentina would like to highlight the work being
done by the United Nations Office in Somalia and to
express its thanks to Mr. Augustine Mahiga, who has
facilitated the end of the transition period, and the
political process. We would also like to congratulate
Mr. Nicholas Kay on his appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. His
work will have my country’s full support as he provides
coordination assistance to the Somali authorities,
enabling them to consolidate successes in the areas of
security and support for the civilian population as well
as providing comprehensive support for peacebuilding
and the reconstruction of the State. We firmly believe
in the importance of maintaining an approach that fully
respects the Somalis’ responsibility for peacebuilding
and implements a long-term strategy for developing
their capacities, as well as supporting an accelerated
transition from humanitarian aid to economic recovery
and development.

13-35562

S/PV.6975

Lastly, Argentina would like to pay tribute to
the work of the African Union in Somalia through
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Its strategic
partnership with the United Nations remains crucial,
and we are sure that it will continue to play an important
role. We would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring that the Mission is provided with sustainable
and predictable financing mechanisms and the
operational capacity necessary for the fulfilment of its
mandate. In order to deal with all those challenges, the
international community must remain committed to
Somalia.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in convening this meeting on Somalia, and to
thank Mr. Simmonds for presiding over our discussion.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing, and to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Somalia now has a historic opportunity to make the
transition from turmoil to stability. A breakthrough was
recently made in the peace process. The transitional
period has ended smoothly, and the first elected
Government and Parliament in 22 years have been
formed, starting the process of rebuilding the State. The
security and humanitarian situation has also improved,
and China welcomes those developments.

and join the political process unconditionally and as
soon as possible. We hope that the parties will put the
interests of the State and people first, and that in a
spirit of solidarity and reconciliation they will temper
their differences through dialogue and consultations,
so they can work together to maintain the unity and
stability of the State as well as its economic and social
development.
Secondly, in support of the efforts of regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
address this issue, China commends the efforts made
by countries in the region and regional organization
towards achieving peace and stability in Somalia.
We hope that in dealing with these issues, the United
Nations and the international community will
strengthen their coordination with those countries and
the relevant regional organizations and take full heed of
their opinions. The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) plays a vital role in maintaining security
and stability in Somalia, and has made sacrifices and
an important contribution to that cause. The United
Nations and the international community should
increase their support to AMISOM and provide it with
sustainable and predictable funding.

First, in order to make tangible progress in the peace
process, we should support the Government’s efforts to
enforce the provisional Constitution, implement its sixpillar policy and speed up State institution-building,
particularly in the areas of security and the judiciary,
and to promote a functioning Government capable of
administering the entire country effectively.

Thirdly, the United Nations and the international
community should play a positive and constructive
role in resolving this issue. We hope that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) will
be deployed as soon as possible, that it will strengthen
its coordination with Somalia and the relevant parties
in the international community and carry out its work
according to the Council’s mandate. We hope the
international community will continue to increase
the attention and support it gives Somalia and to
provide support and assistance for efforts aimed at
peacebuilding and reconstruction, particularly the
Government’s capacity-building efforts. We welcome
all efforts on the part of the international community
to resolve this issue successfully, including the second
London Conference on the issue, held in early May.
We also reiterate that the international community
should fully respect the sovereignty and independence
of Somalia, and that its various components should
strengthen their coordination with one another while
making full use of their respective advantages.

National reconciliation is the only way that Somalia
can achieve long-term stability and security. We urge
opposing groups in Somalia to renounce violence

China follows developments in Somalia closely.
We are a firm supporter of the peace process there
and have provided assistance, within our capacity

We also know that Somalia still has a long way
to go to achieve lasting peace and development. The
Government is still facing many difficulties and
challenges in maintaining stability and promoting
reconciliation and development. The security and
humanitarian situations remain fragile. Somalia must
not falter in its efforts to address those issues, while
the international community must also continue to
provide strong support. For now, we should focus on
the following aspects.

13-355629

S/PV.6975

to do so, to Somalia and AMISOM. Along with the
international community, we stand ready to make
our due contribution to achieving lasting peace and
reconstruction in Somalia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the United Kingdom’s leadership on Somalia.
I welcome the presence of Deputy Prime Minister
Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan. We admire her singular
contribution and history. We are also grateful for the
Deputy Secretary-General’s briefing. I will circulate a
slightly more detailed statement later today.
This is a pivotal time in Somalia’s history — a
time of great hope and optimism, but also a time when
gains remain fragile. But there is a unique window
of opportunity that we must open further. The
opportunities are significant. Somalia’s most
representative Government in 20 years is in place in
Mogadishu and has outlined strong plans on security,
justice and financial management that the international
community must remain committed to supporting.
The security gains made by the Somalia National
Security Forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and strategic partners have been impressive.
We would like to recognize the great sacrifices made by
AMISOM contributors and the Somali security forces,
and we commend the leadership of the African Union
(AU).
The new United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) has a strong mandate to support
the Government to advance peace and reconciliation,
and to coordinate donor support. It responds to the
Government’s call for “one door to knock on”. Close
cooperation with the AU will be decisive, and we express
our strong support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kay.
Somalia’s economy is picking up, investment is
beginning to flow, and the diaspora is returning. That is
a cause for optimism. But the challenges are immense,
and sustained international support is essential. On
the political front, Somalia is moving towards the goal
of holding national elections by 2016. That involves
building up State institutions, often where central
Government structures have not been relevant for a
generation; advancing reconciliation; developing a
federal system; and undertaking a constitutional review.
UNSOM must respond flexibly to the Government’s
needs for support in those areas.

10

We know that establishing a federal system will
not be easy. Relationships between Mogadishu and
local and regional administrations will be critical. We
welcome the reopening of dialogue between the Federal
Government and Somaliland.
Tensions in the Juba region are of particular concern,
and a solution is urgent to avoid the unravelling of recent
gains. We welcome the Government’s commitment to
pursuing reconciliation and the role being played by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
urge UNSOM to use its good offices in support of this.
The Council must pay close attention, and we would
welcome a dedicated briefing at some time on this
important subject.
More broadly, Somalia’s relations with its
neighbours are vital, particularly given the intertwined
nature of their security challenges. We recognize the
role that those neighbours play in assisting refugees and
urge the continuation of the work under way by Kenya,
Somalia and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to develop a framework for
voluntary refugee returns.
The human rights situation remains of grave
concern. Levels of sexual and gender-based violence,
particularly in camps for internally displaced persons,
are alarming. There can be no impunity. The protection
of human rights is at the heart of efforts to build a new
Somalia, and we welcome the Government’s intention
to adopt a human rights road map. We will be looking
to UNSOM to take forward its strong mandate to assist
the Government’s human rights capacity and to monitor
and report.
Turning to security, we all know that Al-Shabaab,
although diminished, remains a threat, as evidenced by
the recent attacks in Mogadishu, as well as its ability to
regain territory where a security vacuum emerges. It is
critical that we support the Government in delivering a
peace dividend in recovered areas.
AMISOM is clearly overstretched. The Mission
is unable to continue the commendable progress it
has achieved in recovering territory with its current
resource levels. Its lack of enablers and resourcing
constraints threatens its long-term success. We
think the time has come for an in-depth analysis of
AMISOM’s needs in relation to force numbers and
configuration, enablers and financing. We look forward
to the forthcoming joint review by the Department of
Peackeeping Operations and the AU. We urge close

13-35562

S/PV.6975

cooperation between the United Nations and AU on
this exercise, in the spirit of the AMISOM strategic
concept produced in 2011-2012, which was an excellent
example of the two organizations working together. It
will be important for countries that contribute troops to
AMISOM be consulted closely.
Of course, the end goal is for Somalia to assume
responsibility for its own security. Rebuilding the
security services will be a long-term endeavour, but
work to consolidate the nucleus of those forces is urgent.
Compliance with reporting requirements for the partial
suspension of the arms embargo is also important, as
are long-term efforts to counter piracy.
In conclusion, we all have a stake in Somalia’s
success. The conflict has had significant, broader
implications for terrorism, refugees and piracy.
Like others, we pledge our support to the Federal
Government’s efforts to ensure that the page is
turned, that gains are consolidated, and that Somalia
continues down its new path towards peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President and Minister, I welcome your participation
in today’s debate. I welcome also the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, and I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
For over a year, undeniable progress has been made
in Somalia, with the recovering by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Security Forces of territories held by Al-Shabaab; the
completion of the transition, which marked a political
turning point with the election of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud; and even the hope of economic
recovery. These developments are undoubtedly positive.
Nonetheless, they remain fragile and reversible.
At the security level, progress seems to have reached
a plateau. Al-Shabaab has proved to be resilient. It still
controls significant areas and has demonstrated, through
deadly actions, its ability to conduct destabilization
operations in the liberated territories. In addition, as
underscored by the Secretary-General, AMISOM no
longer seems able to recover new territories.
At the political level, the Government is facing
difficulties in establishing the regional administrations.
The current tensions in the south, especially in
Kismaayo, are the result of various factors: clan

rivalries, foreign influences and problems related to
the sharing of resources. This crisis has the potential
to destabilize southern Somalia and undermine months
of progress.
Faced with these challenges, the Council must
continue its support for AMISOM and its troops, whose
sacrifices are immense. The Council must also continue
its support for the Somali authorities, whose duties are
just as important. We cannot lose this opportunity to
pull Somalia out of the vicious circle in which it has
been caught for more than 20 years.
The military effort must be carefully considered in
three stages. In the immediate future, we must ensure
that the Ethiopian withdrawal from western Somalia
takes place in coordination with AMISOM. We must
avoid creating a security vacuum, which would allow
Al-Shabaab to regain its foothold in the liberated areas.
The Ugandan and Burundian contingents must be
deployed, in accordance with agreements reached with
Ethiopia, as soon as possible.
In the medium term, we must think about a strategy
for taking back the Somali territory that remains under
the control of Al-Shabaab. We must also think about
how to strengthen AMISOM to enable it to expand
its area of control. In that context, we must take into
account existing budgetary constraints. It should
be recalled that, since 2007, the European Union
and its member States have been the main financial
contributors to this operation, the costs of which have
significantly increased since the beginning of 2012.
New contributors are now essential in order for the
effort to be continued.
In the long term, our strategic priority must be to
strengthen the capacity of the Somali forces, which is
the only response that could sustainably stabilize the
country. To that end, we encourage Member States to
strengthen their cooperation with the Somali forces,
following the example of the training undertaken by
the European Union. We also expect the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to provide
all necessary support to the Somali Government to
coordinate international assistance in the area of
security.
In the absence of a political solution in connection
with regional administration, our military efforts
will be insufficient. A negotiated political solution
must be found to the current crisis in Kismaayo. To
that end, France supports the mediation role of the

13-3556211

S/PV.6975

Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
in accordance with the terms of the communiqué
adopted at the summit of the IGAD Heads of State and
Government, held in Addis Ababa on 24 May. We call on
all parties to exercise restraint and work towards national
reconciliation. Neighbouring States should also play a
constructive role in helping the Somali Government.
UNSOM may, for its part, contribute through its goodoffices mandate. In any event, it is essential that the
Security Council redouble its monitoring of that issue
given its potential for destabilization.
In that regard, my delegation is gratified by the
message sent by the draft presidential statement that we
will adopt at the end of this debate.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Mark Simmonds, Minister for African
Affairs and President of the Security Council, for
having organized this important briefing. I take this
opportunity to commend the United Kingdom through
you, Mr. President, for the positive role it continues to
play in favour of Somalia and its people. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted shortly.
I wish to acknowledge the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Somalia, and His Excellency
Mr. Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia and representative of the Chairperson of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
I also wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing.
As the people of Somalia continue to rebuild the
country, which was described as a failed State during
the last two decades, we can today be reasonably
optimistic. We are indeed witnessing significant
progress towards sustainable peace and stability in
Somalia. The Federal Government of Somalia, under
the leadership of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
has shown its commitment and willingness to address
major challenges, which will ensure peace, stability
and development while promoting human rights in
Somalia. In that context, we will come to the six-pillar
policy framework, adopted by the Federal Government,
which aims to tackle the most urgent issues for the
Somali people. We call on the international community
to continue its support of that aspiration for prosperity
and self-reliance.

12

We praise and acknowledge the tremendous efforts
of the Somali National Security Forces, which, with
the support of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), has succeeded in improving security in
the country, defeating Al-Shabaab in a number of cities
and areas. However, the fight against Al-Shabaab is far
from over. We hope that the efforts made by the Somali
National Security Forces will be amplified in order to
ensure an the full liberation of of Somalia. In that regard,
we urge the Security Council to consider positively the
request of the African Union (AU) addressed to the
Secretary-General to provide additional resources to
AMISOM, which is reaching its maximum operational
capability. Those necessary resources, which include
enablers and force multipliers as well as the means
to reconfigure AMISOM forces are critical for the
Mission to be able to hold territory and to expand areas
under its control.
On that note, we once again reiterate our gratitude
to AMISOM, its troop-contributing countries as well
as the AU, the IGAD and financial partners, such as
the European Union, for their support to Somalia.
Furthermore, it is imperative for long-term security
in Somalia that the Federal Government undertake
security-sector reforms and work at building a strong
and professional army able to defend and protect the
Somali population while combating Al-Shabaab and
any other threats facing the country.
We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the broad
mandate it was entrusted with in support of the Federal
Government of Somalia. We stress, however, the need
for effective national ownership in the peacebuilding
phase. In that regard, we are convinced that Nicholas
Kay, the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, has the competence required to
lead United Nations efforts on the ground.
On the political process, Rwanda welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Somalia to continue
its effort to establish regional administrations and
to engage country-wide reconciliation and political
outreach. We call upon the Federal Government and
regional administrations to always aim for dialogue in
their relationship in accordance with the provisional
federal Constitution.
We acknowledge the imrpovement in the
humanitarian situation and we note that the needs remain
very significant, with 2.7 million Somalis dependant on

13-35562

S/PV.6975

assistance. We urge international solidarity for Somalia
and we once again commend the United Kingdom for
hosting the Somalia Conference in London on 7 May.
In conclusion, Rwanda stands ready to continue its
support of Somalia and assist other countries. Somalia
has indeed made significant progress and is ready
to own its destiny with the support of bilateral and
multilateral partners. Security challenges remain, but
we are convinced that Somalia will at last win its battle
after two decades of conflicts and statelessness.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the United Kingdom for having convened this
meeting during its presidency of the Security Council,
providing us with an opportunity to take stock of
the situation in Somalia one month after the London
Conference on Somalia. Mr. Minister, I also welcome
your personal participation. Allow me also to welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, Ms. Adan.
Somalia has indeed entered a new era. The
transition has concluded. Legitimate authorities that
enjoy the trust of the majority of the population are
consolidating their efforts to promote peace and to
establish representative institutions in Mogadishu
and beyond. The country, which for far too long has
been ravaged by war, is now on the right path, that of
political and security progress. However, considerable
challenges remain.
With the support of the international community,
including the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the Somali authorities will have to establish a
federal system, revise the Constitution and prepare for a
referendum on the future Constitution and for elections
to be held in 2016. Women should be fully involved in the
political process. In parallel, a process of reconciliation
should be undertaken between the Federal Government
and regional entities, particularly in Kismaayo, where
the situation is especially worrisome.
We believe that particular attention should be
given to the regional dynamics. The establishment
of a regional framework could help build confidence
among the States of the Horn of Africa, define the
necessary security guarantees and strengthen economic
cooperation in that part of Africa. In that context, we
welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Agency
on Development to support stabilization in Somalia.

Security is a precondition for the reconstruction of
Somalia. Despite the remarkable efforts of the Somali
National Security Forces, their allies and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Al-Shabaab
still controls a large part of the country. We therefore
welcome the adoption by the Somali authorities of
strategic plans aimed at developing the security and
police forces, as well as the judicial system. During the
London conference, my country was among those that
committed itself to financially supporting securitysector reform. The Federal Government of Somalia
will have to be in a position to coordinate the activities
of international donors in that area. It must also
work to establish a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General,
who believes that AMISOM has reached its limit in
terms of its capacity to retain control of the liberated
areas and to continue its offensive operations. We
therefore support the Secretariat’s intention to carry
out this summer, jointly with the African Union, an
assessment of AMISOM, with a view to reinforcing the
complementarity of United Nations and African Union
efforts.
Improved security conditions on the ground will
also help to address the root causes of piracy. In that
context, the adoption of the new Somali strategy
for maritime security is welcome. Luxembourg will
continue to provide assistance in that area by making
maritime surveillance aircraft available to the European
Union’s Atalanta Mission.
I will conclude my remarks by briefly addressing
the human rights situation, which, regrettably, remains
of great concern. The number of journalists killed and
of incidents involving sexual violence, particularly in
camps for internally displaced persons, and acts of
violence against children continue to be alarming. It is
important that the Somali authorities ensure that those
responsible for such violations of human rights are
brought to justice.
In that context, Luxembourg welcomes the
commitment undertaken by the Federal Government of
Somalia to combat sexual violence and to implement
the action plans adopted in 2012 aimed at putting an
end to the recruitment and use of child soldiers and to
the murder and mutilation of children. It is important in
that regard that security-sector reform provide for the

13-3556213

S/PV.6975

establishment of measures prohibiting the recruitment
and use of children by the Somali armed forces.
We are convinced that with the decisive support of
the international community — the Brussels conference
to be held in September will represent an important
step in that respect — and of the Security Council in
particular, the Government and the people of Somalia
will be able to continue to advance along the path of
peace, security and prosperity.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President — Minister
Simmonds — for hosting this session and to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing.
I wish to welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Somalia as
well.
At the outset, we would like to take this opportunity
to express appreciation to the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and to the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
for their contributions to Somalia’s progress. The
United States welcomes the establishment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
based in Mogadishu, and looks forward to its expanded
presence in key locations throughout the country. With a
fully integrated United Nations country team, UNSOM
will provide the Somali Government “one door to
knock on” for United Nations support. We also welcome
Nicholas Kay as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of UNSOM.
We support his early outreach to the African Union,
as the UNSOM-African Union partnership is critical to
fostering peace and stability in Somalia. In addition,
we especially want to thank the brave soldiers of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Ethiopian Defence Forces and the Somali National
Security Forces. Their sacrifices have made possible a
brighter future for the people of Somalia.
But much work remains. Despite many tactical
successes, Al-Shabaab is not yet defeated, and there
are others who wish to drag Somalia back into chaos.
Recent terrorist attacks show that Mogadishu and many
rural parts of Somalia are still vulnerable. We look to
the Somali National Security Forces and AMISOM to
continue their efforts to expand and maintain control
over the country, so that the Somali Government can
improve governance and the rule of law. In addition, we
urge Member States to fulfil their obligations related

14

to the targeted sanctions, the modified arms embargo
and the charcoal ban to stop proceeds from providing
revenue to Al-Shabaab.
We strongly support President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud’s national security strategy and look
forward to its implementation. At the second London
Conference on Somalia, held on 7 May, the United
States announced almost $40 million in new assistance
to support development and justice sector reform in
Somalia. We applaud those who also made pledges
and stress that fulfilling our pledges is essential for
continued progress.
Long-term stability in Somalia depends on many
factors — an effective, responsible security sector,
good governance and the rule of law, and economic
development. On the security front, AMISOM’s
training of the Somali National Security Forces and
joint combat operations are critically important. The
relocation of the European Union Training Mission in
Somalia from Uganda to Mogadishu is another positive
development.
We encourage United Nations entities and donors to
continue to support economic development, including
efforts to address land disputes, which is a key driver of
conflict. We recognize the work of the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a microfinance
mechanism in Somalia and encourage greater attention
to youth unemployment.
The United States remains gravely concerned
by continuing human rights violations in Somalia,
including alarming reports of sexual violence and
exploitation. We appreciate the work that Special
Representative Bangura has contributed towards the
United Nations-Federal Republic of Somalia joint
communiqué of 7 May, in which Somalia makes
significant commitments to addressing sexual violence.
The substantial decline in reported cases of grave
violations against children in the first quarter of 2013 is
encouraging, but the 552 cases that have been reported
remain alarming. We urge increased attention to that
overall problem and look to the Somali Government to
follow through on its declared intent to work with the
international community to fight the scourge and hold
perpetrators accountable.
We are also concerned about Somaliland’s decision
on 14 May to ban United Nations flights over Somaliland
airspace. That could harm the humanitarian situation
there and affect the provision of food, shelter, water

13-35562

S/PV.6975

and sanitation, and other support by humanitarian
organizations. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs estimates that approximately
413,000 people in Somaliland need humanitarian aid,
including 39,000 children who suffer from malnutrition.
More than 85,000 people remain displaced due to
recurrent drought and conflict.
Somalia must continue moving along the path to
national elections and a referendum on the national
constitution by 2016. The United States continues to
support Somali-led governance and calls for further
dialogue with local political and community leaders,
including women, on unresolved regional issues. The
situation in Jubaland is particularly concerning. We
look to Somalia’s neighbours for support in easing
the tension and finding lasting solutions. We applaud
those regional actors that have played a positive role in
supporting Somalia’s unity and sovereignty, especially
in the early days of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s
Administration.
We join those here today who are committed to
Somalia’s success and will continue to make every
effort to support the Government and the people of
Somalia as they strive for peace and prosperity in their
country.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me to welcome you among us this morning,
Mr. President. I would like to thank the delegation of
your country, the United Kingdom, for having organized
this important meeting on Somalia at a crucial point in
the reconstruction of the Somali State. I also welcome
among us Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement. Our congratulations also go to
Mr. Nicholas Kay on his appointment, and we would
like thank Mr. Augustine Mahiga for the remarkable
work that he did as Head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.
Morocco welcomes the significant progress that
has been seen in Somalia as it proceeds along the path
of reconciliation and peace. A new dynamic has been
launched for the rebuilding of a unified Somali State
following a civil war that has lasted more than 20 years.
The emergence of the new political situation would not
have been possible without the determination of the
Somali people and the impetus given to the process of
political stabilization by the international community.

However, Somalia continues to face a number of
challenges which require significant support from its
various partners.
The deepening of the political and security
achievements made up until now is of primary
importance to enabling Somalia to move assuredly
towards the next political steps, particularly the
establishment of a federal system, the adoption of a
constitution and the holding of the elections planned for
2016. The second London Conference, on 7 May, helped
to maintain the impetus of the international community
to strengthen the capacity of Somalia, particularly in
the areas of security, justice and the management of
public finances, which are critical aspects to ensuring
the stability and the viability of the Somali State.
The gains made in the area of security and the
freeing of Mogadishu and other parts of the country
were decisively important for the success of the
political process and the end of the transitional period
in Somalia. We would like to express in that regard
our thanks to the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, as well as to the
troop-contributing countries for their efforts and their
sacrifices. However, the security situation in Somalia
remains fragile, and the Al-Shabaab movement is still
a threat to the peace and security of the country. The
loosening of the arms embargo through the resolution
2093 (2013) should strengthen the Somali security
forces in order to make it possible for the Somalis to
take ownership of their own security and to ensure
peace throughout the country.
Somalia needs the help of all partners in order to
make progress towards political stability and social
development and in order to establish a sustainable
economy. We welcome resolution 2102 (2013), on the
creation of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and its deployment, which was adopted a few
days ago. It is important to stress the need for there to
be greater coordination of international assistance in
order to avoid fragmentation and duplication of efforts.
National ownership by the Somalis of the process
of reconstruction of their State should be one of the
guiding principles for any assistance provided to
Somalia, both in terms of political facilitation and
economic development. The six priorities of the
Somali president provide an adequate framework for
strengthening stability in the country on the basis of a
Somali national vision.

13-3556215

S/PV.6975

We welcome the resumption of economic activity
in the capital, Mogadishu, thanks to the improvement
of the security situation. The promotion of investment
in activities that create jobs and the provision of basic
services to the Somali population are necessary for
ensuring that the gains obtained in matters of peace
are lasting. Despite a steep drop in the number of
new attacks, piracy along the coast of Somalia is
still a worrying concern for international shipping in
the region. Solving the problem of piracy in Somalia
requires a wide-ranging approach that tackles the root
causes, as well as continued international cooperation
based on coherent, coordinated action. To that end, the
international community must continue to show proof
of its solidarity and step up its efforts to conquer the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We welcome you, Mr. President, in your capacity as
President of this Security Council meeting, which
comes as a follow-up to the successful international
Conference on Somalia held in London.
We are pleased to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Somalia, to the
Chamber. We would like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/326). We agree with
his conclusion that the military and political situation in
Somalia remains tense and will require corresponding
continuing military pressure on Al-Shabaab. That
terrorist group still controls a significant piece of the
southern and central part of the country and is in active
opposition, resorting to partisan attacks on African
peacekeepers and security forces and using terrorist
tactics, including in Mogadishu, where an extremist
underground movement is reportedly still active.
Reports of Al-Shabaab’s spreading influence in the
north of the country can only provoke anxiety. It is
essential to reinforce and build on the recent military
successes of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the National Security Forces and their
Ethiopian colleagues, by acting vigorously, avoiding a
military vacuum and speedily occupying the remaining
extremist positions so as to allow them no independent
local base from which to regain control over liberated
areas. And that, unfortunately, has already happened in
a number of cases.
In that regard, there can be no doubt as to how
essential it is to continue to help to strengthen

16

AMISOM, given its limited resources and increasing
area of responsibility. The arms and charcoal embargoes
on Somalia and the region remain important tools in
the cooperative stabilization effort as long as they are
strictly observed by Member States, which is far from
always the case. Weapons freely enter Somalia, and
charcoal continues to be shipped to consumers, and is a
source of significant material and financial sustenance
for Al-Shabaab.
Given current realities, one of the Somali
Government’s priorities should be strengthening the
security sector and State institutions, including in
areas where it is essential not to leave a political power
vacuum in the wake of Al-Shabaab’s exit, to provide
the population with vital basic services and to advance
the political process with the aim of establishing a
permanent constitution for the country and holding
general elections in 2016.
Tackling the tasks of national reconciliation
is just as important, including the reintegration of
former combatants and the development of federalism
by strengthening links to regional administrations
and taking local social traditions and customs into
account. We support the Government’s efforts to
launch a dialogue with representatives of Somaliland
and Jubaland on how to conduct mutual relations
based on the inviolability of the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and in accordance with its
Provisional Constitution. We believe that the role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
as an intermediary in this area is fundamental.
As before, the humanitarian situation, which is still
an acute threat, requires serious attention. The numbers
of starving people, the internally displaced and refugees
are not falling.
We should not fail to note the positive trend in the
fight against piracy. International efforts in that area
have led to a substantial drop in the number of pirate
attacks. The key to solving the problem still lies in
achieving a complex anti-piracy strategy, and above
all establishing order on land. Also in the forefront is
the task of coordinating efforts to suppress financing
channels for piracy, including by applying specific
sanctions.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome Mr. Nicholas
Kay’s start at work as the new Special Representative for
Somalia. We hope that the recently created forthcoming
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia

13-35562

S/PV.6975

(UNSOM) will be rolled out as soon as possible and
will busy itself by supporting the Government of the
country in resolving the priority tasks of peacebuilding,
including security-sector reform and the coordination
of international aid. In that regard, it will be essential to
refine the mechanisms whereby UNSOM coordinates
its activities with the United Nations country team, the
African Union and IGAD, and giving special attention
to the security situation. We believe that the new
United Nations partnership will give impetus to the
stabilization process in Somalia, for whose success the
primary responsibility lies, of course, with the Somalis
themselves. We would like to wish them every success.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the United Kingdom for convening today’s meeting
on the situation in Somalia. We welcome you,
Mr. President, in your capacity as President of today’s
meeting. I would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Deputy Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing. And we appreciate the participation in today’s
meeting of Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji
Adan, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.
As many Council members have emphasized,
Somalia is at a critical juncture. There have been signs
of hopeful progress as well as daunting challenges. The
dangers of Al-Shabaab can easily overshadow many
political and security developments. Today, I would like
to focus on three points that are crucial to maintaining
positive momentum. First, we commend the fact that the
second London Conference, held in May, successfully
garnered the necessary political will and commitment
needed to enhance the political situation in Somalia.
We hope that the Federal Government of Somalia
(FGS) will continue to establish well-functioning State
institutions and to settle constitutional issues with firm
resolve. Proactive engagement with local authorities
will be a big task for it. Dangers still lurk, however.
Clan-based rivalry in Jubaland threatens federalism
in Somalia and risks inciting further conflict. We
strongly encourage the Federal Government and the
regional authorities to continue constructive dialogue
on consolidating federalism. In that regard, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM)
provides a useful platform from which the international
community can pursue engagement with the Somali
authorities in a coordinated and effective manner.

Secondly, addressing the security threats posed by
Al-Shabaab is vital. Although it has been weakened by
successful operations conducted by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), there is still a risk that
the political and security gains achieved so far may be
reversed. The Federal Government should continue with
its efforts on security sector reform. At the same time, it
should also tackle the continuing abuses of civilians by
undisciplined elements of the Somali National Security
Forces. We appreciate the sacrifices and efforts made
by those countries contributing troops and police to the
Mission. We also recognize the efforts of the Member
States and regional organizations that are contributing
financially to sustaining AMISOM’s operations.
Another vital necessity is the strict application of
the sanctions regime, as the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/326) underscored. The international ban on
charcoal from Somalia established by resolution 2036
(2012) is a useful measure for preventing the flow of
revenues to Al-Shabaab. In that regard, it is worrying
that charcoal is still being produced and exported. The
Federal Government should take concrete measures to
find a lasting solution to this problem, and Member
States should also make the greatest possible effort to
implement the embargo on Somali charcoal.
Security Council resolution 2093 (2013) partially
suspended the arms embargo in Somalia in order to
support the strengthening of its security institutions.
The potential flow of arms into the hands of
terrorists should be avoided at all costs. In this regard,
the Somali Government and supplying States are
strongly requested to abide by the provisions of the
resolution. As Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, the Republic of Korea will do its
utmost for the effective implementation of the Somalia
sanctions regime.
Thirdly, measures to improve the human rights
and humanitarian situations need to be taken. Women
and children are the major victims of human rights and
humanitarian violations. The level of sexual violence
remains high. In this regard, we welcome the joint
communiqué issued by the Federal Republic of Somalia
and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual
violence.
Although the humanitarian situation in Somalia
is improving, the need for humanitarian assistance is
still grave. In order to help cope with the persistent

13-3556217

S/PV.6975

humanitarian challenges, the Republic of Korea is now
seeking ways to increase bilateral support for Somalia
in line with the national plan, in addition to multilateral
cooperation.
Long-term sustainable economic development is
another key area that the Somali Government and the
international community should pursue. We believe
that Somalia should first seek a competitive economic
basis on which it can advance economic growth. After
that, the well-coordinated support of the international
community will be crucial in realizing Somalia’s vision
for economic. In this process we would like to stress
that measures to improve the situation in Somalia
should be based on the principles of Somali national
ownership, partnership and coordination.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, allow
me to express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
and presiding over this important meeting. We are also
grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his comprehensive briefing and presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/326). I
should also like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister of Somalia, Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, to today’s meeting.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
Somalia is on the right path towards achieving stability
that could, in turn, create conditions for tangible
peace dividends for all Somalis. We welcome the
progress made on the political and security fronts in
Somalia, and reiterate our strong support for the Somali
authorities in their efforts to overcome the obstacles
to achieving reconciliation and to build and secure a
united, democratic and prosperous nation.
The international conference convened in London
7 May agreed on the need for the sustained engagement
of the international community to support the long-term
State-building efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia. We are confident that the Brussels conference
will be another important milestone in providing
results-oriented support for the peace and development
process in Somalia.
The Council’s approval of the Secretary-General’s
vision for the new, full-fledged United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) represents a
renewed commitment on the part of the United Nations
to assisting the Federal Government in creating a
political and strategic environment conducive to
peacebuilding in Somalia. We believe that the six-pillar

18

policies defined by the President of Somalia constitute
a solid basis for a comprehensive and multidimensional
strategy that will further contribute to political
and national reconciliation, the swift and effective
implementation of security-sector reforms, economic
recovery and development. We note the strong political
will of the Federal Government to rebuild Somalia’s
war-torn society and to push forward the peacebuilding
and State-building process.
We also share the Federal Government’s view
that security is the essential prerequisite for further
progress in all other spheres. It is crucial to continue
to make all necessary efforts in order to effectively
address the threats and challenges posed by terrorist
and armed opposition groups, in particular Al-Shabaab,
including by supporting and implementing measures
against those internal and external actors who attempt
to undermine the country’s peace process. There
is thus an urgent need for enhanced support to the
Somali National Security Forces and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), particularly through
the allocation of additional investments and resources.
Such support is indispensable for sustaining security
gains and creating conditions for further peacebuilding.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of the
consistent, strong commitment of the Security Council
and the broader international community to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and unity of Somalia. In that context, we take positive
note of the recent dialogue between the Federal
Government and Somaliland in Ankara as a significant
step towards peace and stability in Somalia. At the
same time, we share the concern expressed over the
situation in Kismaayo at the twenty-second summit of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, held
in Addis Ababa. Additional efforts are also needed in
combating piracy, armed robbery and hostage-taking
off the coast of Somalia.
It is important to ensure that national commitments
are matched with the strong support and assistance
of the international community. Full respect for the
relevant international law is a necessary precondition
for the effectiveness of the anti-piracy response and
international cooperation.
In conclusion, let me pay tribute to the United
Nations, the African Union, AMISOM and the troopcontributing countries for their continuing commitment
to bringing peace and stability to the country. I

13-35562

S/PV.6975

should like also to commend the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and individual Member States for
their contribution to achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia and mobilizing assistance to
meet the urgent needs of the peoples affected by the
humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir,
for presiding over the Security Council’s debate, and we
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan
to the Council. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Somalia (S/2013/326) and for his concise
and action-oriented briefing to the Council.
Pakistan welcomes the continuing transition
towards peace and stability in Somalia. The SecretaryGeneral’s determination that Somalia is on the right
path to achieve stability and progress is reassuring.
The four-year strategic plan adopted by the Parliament
and the Government’s six-pillar policy to revitalize
national institutions demonstrate the leadership’s
strong commitment to rebuilding Somalia, which was
wracked by decades of strife and civil war.
The efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia
to establish credible State institutions and to reach out
to the various subregions will consolidate democracy
and federalism in the country. We applaud the close
personal engagement of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud to pursue national reconciliation and hope
that his efforts will pave the way for the finalization of
the Constitution and the holding of national elections in
2016. In the context of that effort, the good offices of
the United Nations will be most helpful.
Despite the obvious progress made, Somalia still
faces daunting challenges. Power-sharing among
federating units, the distribution of revenues and
resources, the establishment of local administrative
institutions, the provision of basic services and the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
require strenuous efforts and adequate resources.
The most serious of all challenges is security
and stability, which is threatened by a defiant and
recalcitrant Al-Shabaab and other militant outfits.
Somalia cannot overcome those problems on its own;
it needs sustainable international support. Such support
was evident at the London Conference last month,
where concrete pledges were made to assist Somalia in
strengthening its armed forces and police, rebuilding

the justice sector and improving public financial
management. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Kingdom in organizing the Conference. We agree
with you, Sir, that Somalia should not be allowed to
backslide under any circumstances.
Rebuilding Somalia is closely linked to security.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has brought vast areas of the country under the
Government’s control. We commend the AMISOM
troop-contributing countries for their resilience in
fighting asymmetric threats posed by terrorists and
extremists.
It is gratifying to note that AMISOM has made
crucial gains in all sectors of its operations. To maintain
its high level of success, AMISOM needs continued
international assistance in the form of predictable
logistical support, and enablers and force multipliers to
undertake its operations.
We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). It is
important that UNSOM establish a significant presence
in the country and undertake its mandate-related tasks
with the full ownership of the Somali Government. We
congratulate Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Kay on his appointment.
UNSOM should also assist Somalia and the
international community in eradicating the menace of
maritime piracy. We appreciate the proposal made by
the Secretariat to include a multidisciplinary task force
on maritime issues in UNSOM. The recent reduction
in piracy-related incidents off the Somali coast is
encouraging. However, we should not lower our guard.
Pakistan will continue to support Somalia
bilaterally and as a member of the Security Council,
the Organzation of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group
on Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. As always, our Somali
brothers and sisters will find Pakistan a steadfast
partner.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.
Ms. Adan (Somalia): I am honoured to be here
today, and I thank the Council for this opportunity to
inform the Security Council of the progress and recent
developments in the Federal Republic of Somalia.

13-3556219

S/PV.6975

First and foremost, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on Somalia, and I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for your personal engagement
and support for Somalia. I have no doubt that our
collective desire to achieve the common goal of a
peaceful and thriving Somali nation will prevail.
The Council’s commitment and sustained effort
in support of our Government’s policies and priorities
is critical as we work together to bring about an
economically, politically and socially stable Somalia.
We are obliged to the Council and the United Nations
for bringing international attention to the challenging
circumstances facing the Somali nation.
Somalia welcomes United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and Mr. Nicholas
Kay, and congratulates him on assuming his duties in
Somalia, on 3 June.
Since my last statement before the Council, on
14 February (see S/PV.6921), there have been significant
and encouraging developments in my country. Somalia
has finally rejoined the community of nations and is
moving from emergency to recovery. The Government
has adopted and is now implementing the six-pillar
policy framework, a credible and relevant political
platform based on the principles of the foundation
of a new Somalia, with the objective of creating an
achievable and applicable political platform.
Security is improving as Somali and African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) forces and their
Ethiopian allies recover towns and routes previously
held by Al-Shabaab. The number of pirate attacks
committed off the coast of Somalia has also drastically
decreased.
Without the support of AMISOM and the troopcontributing countries, such as Uganda, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Burundi, Djibouti, Sierra Leone and Nigeria,
Somalia would not be where it is today. The ultimate
sacrifice of those troops in the quest towards the noble
goal of peace and security for Somalia will be indelibly
recorded in the history of Somalia.
The Government is in control of more areas than
at any other time in the past 20 years. Many areas have
recovered from the enemy, Al-Qaida. Al-Shabaab has
lost fighters, finances and territory, and their morale is
low. Both young people and adults continue to defect
from the misery that terrorism offers.

20

However, we should be under no illusion that the
road is cleared of obstacles. Challenges still remain.
Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab are still a threat to peace
and security. Millions still live in camps for internally
displaced persons and refugees, and the country lacks
developed Government structures, schools, hospitals,
sanitation and other basic services. We have those
problems and issues to overcome. Our most pressing
concern is to bring to an end the constant threat and
cycle of conflict that bubbles beneath the surface in so
many of our communities.
The positive news, however, is that the famine
has receded, the diaspora has begun to return, and the
economy is starting to recover. Piracy off the coast of
Somalia is down. There were only 36 confirmed pirate
attacks in 2012, as compared to 176 in the previous
year. Only five ships were captured, down from 25 in
2011. Overall, the number of ships seized has fallen by
80 per cent as compared to the previous year, and that
is matched by the falling cost to the global economy by
some $580 million, or 12.5 per cent since 2011.
After more than 20 years of war and anarchy,
Mogadishu, the capital, is finally enjoying relative
calm. But we remain vigilant, and the President is
deeply engaged in alleviating the problem, not only
through security measures, but also by creating
initiatives promoting development and employment
for all, including potential pirates and former militia
groups. We are reforming our justice sector, rebuilding
our armed forces, developing our police forces and
revolutionizing our public finance management.
However, we lack developed Government institutions
and are reviewing our Constitution, which is only
partially complete.
On the foreign affairs front, the Government
achieved several foreign policy goals it had planned to
achieve in the first six months. Those include the formal
recognition of the United States Government, which
has already led to many more doors opening up. That
includes the reinstatement of Somalia’s membership in
the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and
a partial lifting of the arms embargo by the Council.
More embassies have been opened in Mogadishu, with
the United Kingdom being the most recent Government
to open an embassy there, and ambassadors are queuing
up to hand in their credentials. That also includes the
most recent finalization of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) summit agreement.
We have been engaging with and encouraging the

13-35562

S/PV.6975

diaspora communities to come back and rebuild the
country, signing joint communiqués with Ethiopia,
Kenya and several other countries, and actively
participating and co-hosting and organizing major
international conferences.
Our collective vision is for a federal Somalia at
peace with itself and its neighbours that poses no threat
to the world and actively contributes to regional and
international issues. Somalia is moving forward, finally
returning to take its place among the community of
nations.
Also indicative of that progress was the recent
holding of the London Conference on Somalia,
co-hosted by Prime Minister David Cameron and
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The conference
lifted Somalia further. The Somali people are grateful
to the United Kingdom for that successful initiative. It
was followed the next day by a private-sector investor
conference, which was imbued with the knowledge that
there was growing investor confidence, improvements
in security and promising signs of opportunities for
business throughout Somalia. Another positive event
was the holding of the Nairobi conference organized by
Somali diaspora groups on private-sector investment in
Somalia, which was well attended. We also welcome the
Brussels conference to be organized by the European
Union in September.
Somalia is rich in natural resources and has a lot
of potential. The key to unlocking all that potential
is support, development investment and recognition.
Somalia is blessed with the longest coast in Africa,
the highest per capita availability of livestock, some of
the richest marine resources in the region, more than
8 million hectares of agricultural land, rivers flowing
into the sea, as well as minerals, gas, oil, uranium, coal,
titanium, to mention but a few of the resources. The
Government is fully aware that the long-term economic
and social viability of the country will depend upon
our ability to lay the policy foundations and establish
the confidence-building measures that will allow the
domestic private sector to flourish, and likewise attract
foreign investment in the Somali economy.
Somalia is fully committed to the “New Deal”
and compact initiatives. However, based on our
Government’s action plan, we must understand that
the stabilization of Somalia is dependent upon on the
robust development of the security sector. In particular,
we need to establish the rule of law, develop an effective

justice system and strengthen the capabilities of the
national security forces. The military gains of the past
year are at stake if the national security forces lack
training and equipment.
Ultimately, however, we should rely on fair, just
and effective governance as the most effective way
to bring peace and security to our nation. We are
painfully aware that our forces lack discipline and
professionalism. The President has personally engaged
in enhancing control and oversight over the armed
forces. Rogue individuals acting with impunity cannot
be tolerated, nor can violations of human rights. We all
agree that strict monitoring and accountability must
be put in place to ensure that our forces perform and
operate in accordance with international convention on
human rights.
The current Government will not tolerate any
abuse or violation of human rights. We are particularly
committed to abolishing the recruitment of child soldiers
in armed conflict. Furthermore, we are committed to
preventing sexual violence and to implementing the
joint communiqué that my Government signed on the
margins of the London Conference on Somalia held on
7 May.
The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to implementing gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women, so as to ensure that all
women are legally protected against violence and
exploitation. We seek further international support for
that endeavour, and we want to assure the Council of
our firm commitment.
On the Juba regions, the Federal Government of
Somalia welcomed the recommendations of the IGAD
mission that visited Mogadishu and Kismayo. We also
welcomed the recent IGAD communiqué following
the meeting held in Addis Abeba on 24 May, which
recommended that the Federal Government of Somalia
convene a reconciliation conference with the support
of IGAD. The communiqué also recommended that
the Government consult key stakeholders in the Juba
regions of Somalia, with the goal of developing a road
map that establishes an interim administration and
permanent regional administrations in accordance with
the provisional Constitution and with IGAD playing a
supporting role.
My Government is therefore ready to lead
reconciliation efforts in the Juba regions and to hold a
genuine reconciliation conference with key stakeholders

13-3556221

S/PV.6975

in order to devise a programme and plans to establish
an interim administration that can lead to the formation
of federal unit states in accordance with the provisional
Constitution. We therefore urge UNSOM, IGAD and
other appropriate actors to support the process.
The Federal Government of Somalia is mandated to
represent the interests of all Somali people, including
those who are silent and powerless as they look for the
Government to safeguard their constitutional rights.
The culture that developed over the past two decades in
Somalia due to the lack of a functioning State was one
in which everyone and every group claimed the right to
represent the Somali people. The Federal Government
sent a committee to Kismayo to start a process of
reconciliation based on a road map that outlines the
way forward until federal units are established in the
regions.
I would also like to report to the Council that,
with the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Kenya — with whom I have spent more time working
than any other Foreign Minister, which is a sign of
the closeness between our two countries; not just in
proximity in physical proximity but also in the depth
and breadth of cooperation and interests that ties
our two countries and the region at large — we have
launched a joint cooperation commission that will be
responsible for promoting and enhancing cooperation
between our two countries. The commission will
also coordinate the implementation of all bilateral
agreements to be concluded between us. We also signed
a similar agreement with Ethiopia a few months ago.
Before I conclude, I would like again to express
our thanks and gratitude to the Security Council, the
African Union, IGAD, the European Union and other
members of the international community for their
continued support to Somalia on peace enforcement
and stabilization efforts. I also wish to thank all the
Governments who made pledges during the London
Conference totaling more than $300 million. On behalf
of my President and the people of Somalia, may I also
pay the utmost tribute to Ambassador Susan Rice for
her unrelenting efforts and support to my people and
the people of Somalia, which will not be forgotten. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Mahiga for his
relentless and hard work during his tenure in Somalia.
In conclusion, allow me to leave members with the
words of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud: “Winning the war
in Somalia has proved that winning the peace will take

22

patience and great skill. We are at a critical juncture,
and the time is now.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak on behalf
of the countries members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which held two
extraordinary summit sessions on Somalia in the
course of past month alone, specifically on 3 and
24 May. Before getting into the substance of what those
two sessions dealt with, let me take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President and dear Minister, for coming
to New York to preside over this important meeting. We
are very grateful to your country for having taken up the
situation in Somalia very seriously — and with a lot of
care, I might add. The latest meeting, of 7 May, that the
United Kingdom co-hosted with Somalia at Lancaster
House was a further affirmation of the readiness by the
United Kingdom to make a significant difference in
Somalia and in the broader IGAD region.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf
Haji Adan, who has been instrumental in the further
consolidation of peace in Somalia and in strengthening
and expanding the ties of friendship among IGAD
member States. Her wisdom and pragmatic approach
to difficult issues have been a source of strength for
IGAD.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for being here and for his contribution in this domain
and other areas, which he makes with very welcome
passion. We are very grateful to him.
There is absolutely no doubt that Somalia is on a
very encouraging and promising trajectory. In a number
of ways, the issues that are of concern today in Somalia
bear no resemblance to the challenges the country faced
not long ago. Not that complacency is justified, for some
of the security challenges still exist — Al-Shabaab
has not been totally defeated — which is why IGAD
countries continue to call for the situation in Kismayo
not be allowed to distract attention from the urgent task
of maintaining the momentum in the fight against that
extremist group. That was underlined by IGAD Heads
of State and Government at their meetings on 3 and
24 May.

13-35562

S/PV.6975

Strategically speaking, Al-Shabaab is on the way
out, not because it has lost the military wherewithal
but because it has absolutely no popular support. The
fact that the people of Somalia have decided to embrace
their new Government is very obvious. That is where
more work is needed on the part of both the Federal
Government and the international community. That
is also where the London Conference on Somalia
of 7 May was extremely significant. The Lancaster
House Conference has given further impetus to more
coordinated international support to Somalia. The
Conference also outlined the critical areas where
further input is necessary to ensure that the momentum
is maintained in Somalia.
We have always emphasized how critical it is
for the Federal Government to continue to build its
credibility, and therefore its legitimacy, among the
people of Somalia. That is a major undertaking that can
be fulfilled only when the Government is in a position
to deliver services to the people. We believe that the
call in the London Conference communiqué with
respect to the development of a longer-term sustainable
financing architecture for Somalia, including a World
Bank multi-donor trust fund, is an initiative that
should be pursued in earnest. As has been suggested,
that could serve as a vehicle for the normalization of
Somalia’s financial relationship with the international
financial institutions. In the meantime, it is IGAD’s
hope that partners will make serious effort to make
use of the special financing facility and the rule-of-law
fund as mechanisms to channel funding to enhance the
Government’s capacity to deliver basic services to the
people in a variety of areas.
For IGAD countries, there are few priorities
as critical and as vital as the security, stability and
regeneration of Somalia. That explains why, in the
course of May, as I mentioned a while ago, our leaders
held two extraordinary sessions. They did so because of
their conviction that there was a need for more speededup efforts at national reconciliation in Somalia. At
their meeting on 3 May, they agreed to establish five
principles, namely, the leadership of the Government in
the process of reconciliation; respect for the provisional
Constitution; an all-inclusive consultative process;
a supporting role for IGAD based on the priorities of
the Somali Government; and fighting Al-Shabaab as
the primary focus of the Somali Federal Government,
AMISOM and regional and international partners.

The logic behind the emphasis given to the fight
against Al-Shabaab has to do with fact that a loss of
momentum in that fight, let alone a reversal of the
gains so far made, would easily herald an unravelling
of the entire situation, which has been the source of so
much hope and confidence. That is why IGAD Heads
of State and Government have underlined the fight
against Al-Shabaab as the primary focus of cooperation
among the Somali Federal Government, AMISOM and
regional and international partners.
At this point, let me express how pleased we are
to welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Kay, in whom we have
great confidence and with whom we look forward to
working very closely, as in fact we did with Ambassador
Mahiga, to whom we remain indebted. It was during
Ambassador Mahiga’s tenure that we came up with a
very innovative mechanism of tripartite consultation
among the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
AMISOM and IGAD. It was quite an achievement. We
are hopeful that Mr. Kay might wish to look at that
experience closely, because it might be useful. All the
same, IGAD countries look forward to working with
him closely, and we are pleased that the United Nations
Assistance to Mission to Somalia (UNSOM) was
launched a few days ago.
Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment
of IGAD countries to working closely with UNSOM.
We remain hopeful that the international community
will help to ensure that the planned conference on the
repatriation of Somali refugees will be a success. Of
course, we are very grateful to all those who called
for this meeting for enhanced support to AMISOM,
which is long overdue. I also wish to acknowledge the
sacrifices made by AMISOM and Ethiopian troops.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a draft presidential statement on the subject of today’s
meeting. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Council members for their valuable contributions to it.
In accordance with the understanding reaching
among members of the Council, I shall take it that the
members of the Council agree to the statement, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/PRST/2013/7.
It is so decided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded

13-3556223

S/PV.6975

the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
Could I personally add my thanks to all participants
for their significant contributions today. Finally, let

24

me emphasize the importance of maintaining the
momentum and high energy levels.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

13-35562
