1st

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL

•

AS.SEMBLY
THIRTY-FOURTH SESSION

Official Records
CONTENTS

Page

Agenda item I:
Opening of the session by the Chainnan ofthe delegation of
Colombia
,
.
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

,

.

Address by Mr. Indaleci? Li~vano, Tt:mporary President.
.
Chairman of the delegatIOn ofColombta
Agenda item 103:
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
,..........................
Contributions
Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-fourth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Agenda item 4:
Election of the President of the General Assembly
Agenda item 103:
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on Con,." .•.• ,
,.......
tributions (continued) .,
Agenda item 19:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations ... ,..

2

3
3

8
8

President: Mr. Salim Ahmed SALIM

(United Republic of Tanzania)

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the
Chainnan of the delegation of Colombia

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I declare open the thirty-fourth regular
session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditatjon

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish); I invite representatives to stand and
observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.
Address by Mr. Indalecio Lievano, Temporary President,
Chairman o/the deiegation o/Colombia

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish); In keeping with time-honoured tradi-

Tuesday, 18 September 1979.
at 3.15 p.m.
NEW YORK

tion, it is my duty to make a ?rief stater,nent to the
General Assembly in m):' capacI,ty as E!~sldent of ~he
thirty-third regular seSSIOn, ThiS tradltlonal practtce
provides the opportunity for the person selected by the
Member States to share with the Assembly the impressions he has gathered, from the singular vantage-point
afforded by the presidency of the Assembly, on the
issues which are of greatest concern to the world's
peoples and which could have an effect on international
peace.
4. The prestige of the United Nations as the natural
forum for discussing the problems of mankind is greater
than ever before. The Organization has acquired a universal character with the entry as Members of numerous States representing various forms of political and
economic organization, and this has given the United
Nations the pluralistic complexion which its founders
intended it to have. This diverse assembly ofjuridically
equal States, each with its own voice which no one can
silence, is what makes the United Nations the appropriate setting for identifying conflicts. instead of
Ignoring them, and for finding peaceful solutions to the
disputes, great or small, which arise from conflicting
interests. Experience has shown that it is difficult to
negotiate outside the United Nations, even when it is
believed, in good faith, that problems brought here
because they affect world peace can become merely
bilateral disputes. In reality, today there is hardly a
dispute in the world that is bilateral. The conflicts that
in our day threaten peace are not mere border incidents
but problems which affect everyone, either because
they occur in strategic regions or because they involve
philosophical and legal principles which arouse the
emotions of the world's peoples. It is not unusual for
specific negotiations between nations to take as their
point of reference documen ts emanating from the General Assembly or the Security Council, documents
which, after much talking around the matter, must be
taken into account in order to achieve a satisfactory
settlement. Over the years, and perhaps imperceptibly,
the General Assembly, the Secretariat and the other
principal organs of the United Nations have acquired
skill in negotiation, a sense of proportion in the exchange of ideas and precision in the use of methods for
promoting compromises and avoiding confrontation.
This maturing of the international system is beginning
to bear lasting fruit in terms of the preservation of
international peace and security.
5. In a world in which the storms of history have
swept away institutions and ideas which for centuries
governed the life of societies, thereby increasing conflicts and geographical shifts in power, only an organization such as the United Nations can create the necessary conditions for averting the catastrophes that can
befall mankind in an era in which science and
A/34/PV.l

2

General Assernbly-Thirty-fourth Session-Plenary Meetings

technology-the highest products of human intelli·
gence-have placed in the hands of States weapons of
such destructive power that they could, if used in a
moment of madness, jeopardize the very survivalofthe
species.
6. World peace and security are therefore the great
cause of the United Nations. This is our feeling today,
40 years after the Second World War was launched with
the aggression against a heroic and defenceless nation,
Poland, a war which came to represent mankind's
cruellest experience, with the snuffing out of millions of
lives and the creation of an atmosphere of hatred which
shook all the cultures and civilizations established up to
that time.

1i

7. The negotiations which have been carried on here
in the quest for legal instruments to safeguard peace
give us some cause for optimism. The same can be said
of the atmosphere in which the discussions on disarma·
ment are be 109 conducted, and especially of the widespread recognition of the need to reach agreements to
limit the production of, and traffic in, nuclear and con·
ventional weapons. There is, still, however, valid con·
cem over the ever-growing economic dependence of a
number of industrialized countries on arms production
and sales. There is also unanimous criticism ofthe arms
race, which compels States poor in economic resources
to devote to the insatiable acquisition of the implements
of war substantial portions of their budgets, which
should be used to improve the social conditions of their
peoples.

I':

,1"

8. The international community is concerned also
over the appearance of ominous signs concerning the
economy. Oil, a raw material which was thought to be
in limitless supply and which, as a result, some
hedonistic societies have wasted and continue to waste
improvidently, is beginning to run out. Naturally, the
price ofoil is rising in every market. We are discovering
that this fossil fuel is the very basis of a style of civilization whose days now seem to be numbered, and there is
no doubt that we should prepare ourselves for a future
whose shape is yet uncertain. The developing
countries, in particular, owing to the form of their
economic systems and their scanty international currency holdings, will not be able to meet the heavy cost
of fuel. This new and unexpected circumstance will
accentuate the inequalities suffered by the developing
countries.
9. Parallel with this situation, we should note that
little I?rogress has been made by UNCTAD and in the
ne~otlations tn the so-called North-South dialogue.
ThIS stagnation is discouraging, for the developing
countries have seen their plans to improve the conditions of their peoples undermined by deterioration of
the terms of trade, the neo-protectionism practised by
wealthy countries, the miserly transfer of technology
and the cold selfishness of some powerful States. I trust
that at the 1980 special session of the General Assembly
devoted to the establishment of a new international
economic order it will be possible to bridge the gap
between opposing positions and reach an agreement by
consensus, which will constitute a major advance towards greater equity in international economic
relations.
10. The last regular session was marked by the participation in the general debate of more States than ever

before in the history ofthe Organization. It was also
characterized by the special attention it devoted to
problems which have long been on the agenda, but are
no less important for all that-the changing situation in
the Middle East, the defence of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, the liberation of Namibia, the
struggle against apartheid, and stabilization in the Far
East. The session was also marked by an encouraging
return in a number of regions to political forms whose
reaffirmation signifies respect for the human person and
the inherent rights of every human being. In order to
give impetus to that process, the Latin American
countries, I have been informed, will submit for the
consideration of the General Assembly a plan for assistance to Nicaragua, the heroic Central American nation
which has made sacrifices in human lives and material
losses for its unshakeable determination to attain political freedom.
11. As we begin this new session we have before us a
provisional agenda which includes 124 items covering
the major problems of concern to States. Some of these
items are of major importance for the preservation of
international peace and security; others, for the
achievement of a more equitable distribution of the
world's wealth; still others, for assuring the enjoyment
by peoples of independence and the exercise of selfdetermination, or for creating conditions which will
enable human beings to live in an atmosphere ofdignity
commensurate with their high spiritual level. On the
basis of the experience acquired in my year of serving
as President of the General Assembly, I have no doubt
that the delegations attending this session will work
with their usual zeal, wisdom and dedication to promote the welfare of the peoples of the world.

!

-I"

0.;,

. Artic.

Cred.t

r<

of 1

,15. '

from
vides
each.
dent,
meml

,
I

thirt~

shoul

Belgi
Senel
State
have
eredl

It 1

Ell

16.
from

12. Before concluding, I wish to associate the General
Assembly with the grief felt by all of us at the death of
Mr. Agostinho Neto, the President of the People's Republic of Angola. Poet, warrior, statesman and leader
of his people, he unquestionably represents the generation of African leaders who in recent years have led
their nations to independence and the realization of
their full political destiny.

ASSf

the J

17.
tioOl

nom

18.

13. Lastly, it remains for me only to express gratitude
once again, on behalf of my country Colombia and on
my own behalf, for the honour done me by my election
to the presidency of the thirty-third session of the
United Nations General Assembly in 1978. This office
is an honour to anyone, whatever his merits and
achievements may be, and [ shall keep happy memories
of the deference and cordial understanding always
shown me by the delegations ofeach and every Member
State.
AGENDA ITEM 103
Scale of assessments for the apportiorunent of the expenses of the United Nations: report of the Committee
on Contributions
..
14. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): Before we proceed to the next item on
the agenda, and in accordance with past practice, I wish
to draw the attention of the General Assembly to document A/34/474, which contains a letter addressed to me
by the Secretary-General informing the Assembly that
three States Members are in arrears in the payment of

grou

prec
part!

men
cee(

by ~

sem

I

)

It

19.

/rOfl

Sail

den
Ass

~

Tall

Ge~

20.

/rOl

Mr,

/or

1st meeting-I8 September l'n9

LS also

ted to
)ut are
tion in
5hts of
ia, tne
he Far
raging
whose
:mand
'der to

erican

or tne

assist·
nation
ate!ial
politi-

re usa
Ivering
fthese
tion of
)r the
of the
,ymenl
)f self·
;h will
:lignity
)n the
ierving
,doubt
I work
:0 pro-

ieneral
~ath of
:'s Re·
leader
enera·
ve led
.ion of
ltitude
Uld on
ection

of the
office
s and
nories
Llways

ember

their United Nations contributions under the tenns of
Article 19 of the Charter.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-fourth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee

IS. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the beginning of
each session shall appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine
members. Accordingly, it is proposed that, for the
thirty-fourth session, the Credentials Committee
should consist of the following Member States:
Belgium, China, Congo, Ecuador, Pakistan, Panama,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
States of America. May I take it that the countries I
have mentioned are hereby appointed members of the
Credentials Committee?

It was so decided (decision 34/301).
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly

16. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I now invite the Members of the General
Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of
the Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.

17. Under rule 92 of the rules of procedure, all elections shall be held by secret ballot and there shall be no
nominations .
18. However, after consultations with the regional
groups, I should like to propose that, without setting a
precedent, the Assembly agree to waive rule 92 in this
particular election and that, on the basis of the endorsement of his candidacy by all regional groups, we proceed to elect the President of the thirty-fourth session
by acclamation. May I consider that the General Assembly adopts this proposal?

It was so decided.
19. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I therefore declare Mr. SaJim Ahmed

be ex·
mittee

tation
~m on
[wish
docu,
tome
y that
ent of

Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania elected President of the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.

Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim (United Republic of
Tanzania) was elected by acclamation President ofthe
General Assembly (decision 34/302).
20. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I extend my sincere congratulations to
Mr. Salim and I invite him to assume the presidency.

Mr. SaUm took the Chair.

J

21. The PRESIDENT: I am deeply moved by th~
confidence you have demonstrated in electing me PresIdent of the thirty-foUlih session ?fthe {jnited Na~i(;ms
General Assembly. I consider thIs unammous deCISIon
to be a tribute to, and an honour for, my country, the
United Republic of Tanzania, whose Government and
people have steadfastly and consistently supported the
United Nations and actively worked for the Im~lemen­
tation of the principles and purposes for whIch our
Organization stands. It is also a recognition of my continent and of the Organization of African Unity which,
through their trust in me, made this election possible.
22. The presidency of the General Assembly. is a
heavy responsibility, but in the discharge of this res,?onsibility I am foJJowing a tradition and a line of very
dIstinguished personalities whose qualities of excellence I can only attempt to emulate and from whose
achievements and accumulated wisdom I intend to
learn and profit.
23. I also know that I can count on the advice and
co-operation of my immediate predecessor, Mr.
Lievano of Colombia, who presided over the thirtythird session with such distinction, dedication and skill.
In recognizing his contribution, I pay a tribute to a
distinguished diplomat and an outstanding spokesman
for justice and international amity.
For more than nine years now, I have had t~e
honour and privilege of representing my country in thIs
Organization. This period has not only given me the
opportunity to learn more about the United Nationsits successes and short-comings-at close qUaIiers, but
has also afforded me the opportunity to make acquaintances .and develop friendship and co-operation with
many outstanding personalities, including a great many
who are here in this Assembly. Among the relationships
that I will always cherish has been my close association
with our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. I
have been particularly privileged to work closely with
Mr. Waldheim on many issues of common concern to
the Organization in my capacity as Chairman of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
during the period when I was honoured to represent
Tanzania in the Security Council. His total dedication
to our Organization, his commitment to the cause of
freedom, justice and peace, as well as his over-all appreciation and management of delicate situations, are
rightly admired. I therefore feel very much encouraged
that I can look forward to his continued co-operation
and assistance, as well as the co-operation of all the
members of· the Secretariat, in the fulfilment of my
responsibilities.

24.

25. With deep sorrow and grief, we learned of the
most untimely passing away last week of Mr.
Agostinho Neto, the President of the People's Republic
of Angola. The untimely death of President Neto has
robbed An~ola of its founding father and illustrious
leader; AfrIca of a distinguished freedom fighter and
valiant revolutionary; and the world of an outstanding
statesman. I have had the unique honour of personally
knowing President Neto both in the course ofthe liberation struggle in Angola and after the liberation of that
country. He was undoubtedly one of Africa's towering
figures. His modesty and simplicity were remarkable.
Angola, Africa and the international community are

4

Gelleral Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session-Plenary Meetillgs

certainly poorer today with his passing away. I wish
therefore to take this opportunity to associate myself
fully with the remarks made by the outgoing President
of the General Assembly and to convey my deeply felt
condolences to the family of President Neto, to the
MPLA' Worker's Party, and to the Government and
people of Angola, as we mourn this irreparable loss.
26. The current international situation imposes on the
United Nations a heavy and urgent responsibility for
action in many areas if we are to dispel the gloom that is
now overshadowing the world and if we are to rekindle
mankind's hope in the efficaciousness of international
mechanisms to solve urgent problems and bring peace
and justice to humanity.
27. Today is not the darkest hour of mankind, nor is it
a sunny day. For it is still one of the unpleasant facts
that millions of the world population continue to li ve in
economic misery and other deprivation. Many others,
especially in Africa, the Middle East and Asia, are
suffering from the humiliation of being a subject people
under colonialism, racism and other forms of domination and indignity.
28. In another area, disarmament talks continue to
take place against the background of the philosophy of
security through a balance of terror. It is no wonder,
therefore, that the arms race-and the danger it poses
to international security and the waste of resources it
brings with it---continues unabated. Above all, the conditions which have created and perpetuated the great
divide between the North and the South have now been
accentuated under global recession and inflation, and
this has resulted in the further condemnation of millions
ofthe world's people to absolute poverty in perpetuity,
without hope of reprieve.
29. Yet the irony is that, year in and year ou t, the
nations represented in this Assembly pledge
themselves to work for a humane and more just order.
But it is precisely because the situation continues to be
wanting, and in some cases has even worsened that we
find ourselves again with the same tasks u~accom­
plished, with problems unmitigated and with some
problems even solution-resistant.
30. How is it that, despite our commitment to work
towar9s a new. international economic order, meaningful aC~lOn.contmues t~ elu.de the community of nations,
resultmg III the detenoratlOn of international economic
relations? Why is it that, despite our collective abhorrence of racism and condemnation of colonialism this
twin evil still prevails in southern Africa? Thes~ and
many other peltinent questions cry out for genuine
answers.
31. These are questions that touch on the daily lives of
the people we rep,resent, as, indeed, they affect the very
peace and ~ecunty of our world. At any given time
these questIOns are peltinent and timely. But I would
su~gest that they are even more relevant today considenng that our session is taking place on the thr~shold of
a new decade, as another decade is fading away. For it
must be our collective objective and endeavour to prepare the ground for a better and more just order as we
en~er the 19~Os. r think this should be the beacon to
gUIde the Unttcd Nations during this session, so that the
I

Movimento Popular de Libertar;iio de Angola.

coming decade can be recorded in the annals of history
as the decade that turned dialogue into action and promise into fulfilment.
32. The United Nations came into being after a war
that had caused vast destruction of human life, institutions and property. The nations that gathered in San
Francisco for the signing of the Charter were guided by
their apprehension of the inherent vulnerability of a
fragmented world. They were also guided by the desire
of their peoples that this world should be made a more
secure place in which to live through the reduction of
conflict-hence the vigorous promotion of the ideals of
liberation, human rights, equality, dignity andjustice as
elements conducive to a stable and peaceful order.
33. Today, over three decades later, the community
of independent nations represented here has increased
threefold. This, in itself, is eloquent testimony to the
relevance of the United Nations. It represents a realization that, only in circumstances of unity and collective
effort, will it be possible to make the world more peaceful. This Organization has not only survived more than
30 years since its formation, but remains the only effective and meaningful institution for international dialogue and co-operation. The truth is that, all our political, social and economic differences notwithstanding,
we have continued to have faith in the United Nations
and have turned to it for solutions in times of difficulty.
34. But this Organization will fail to achieve the lofty
ideals enunciated in its Charter if we as individual nations choose to use it only periodically as an instrument
of convenience. It will meet our expectations only ifwe
proceed deliberately to build it and use it as the permanent instrument for the reconciliation ofour differences
since the option of unilateral action predicated on the
use offorce is becoming less and less attractive because
of its futility.
35. In the final analysis, therefore, the existence and
the conduct of this Organization rest on the will of
nations. Its making or unmaking is the responsibility of
the Member States. Thus the failure of the international
community to resolve some of its major problems and
conflicts is a failure of its constituent Member States,
both individually and collectively. Much remains to be
done by nations to translate their faith ID the United
Nations into concrete action. Nations still need to demonstrate greater political will, which is essen~ial for the
establishment of a more secure world in which nations
big and small can contribute to the implementation of
the goals and objectives of the United Nations Charter.
36. To date the world is entangled in conflicts and
nobody can claim that peace, freedom, human equ;"ity,
dignity and justice have triumphed. The General Assembly has a duty to address itself to the root-causes of
these confl~cts in order t~ formulate and implement
!TIeasures aImed at resolvmg them. For unless we go
I~to the root-causes of problems real peace will contmue to elude us.

37. Of all the ~e~d~ of our time the greatest is peacepeace for the mdlvldual, so that he can live out this
exi~tenc~ wi.thout.fear for his life; peace for each nation
t~ lIve With Its neIghbours without fear for its national
h~e; peace. for the world derived from an al1'angement
wlthm which the natIOns of the world could interact
without fear for their survival. Peace such as this pro-

,
I
I

i

1st meeting-Ill SeplemlJef 1979

Is ofnistory
nand prom-

after a war
life, institu-

~red in San

'eguided by
ability of a
y the desire
ladea more
'eduction of
the ideals of
ndjustice as
'ul order.

community

lS increased

nony to the
Its a realiz.ad collective

norepeaee-

d more than
~ only effecational WaII our politiithstanding,
tedNalioDS
)f difficulty.

:ve the lofty
dividual naI instrument
IS only ifwe
l thepenna. differences
:atedon the
:ive because

~istence and

the will of
onsibilityof
nternational
'oblems and
rlber States.
:mains to be
the United
leedto dem:n~ial for the
hich nations
nentatian or
nsCharter.

mflicts. and
lan equality.
Jeneral Asot-causes of
I implement
nless we go
ce will con;tispeaceive out this
eachnalion
, its national
lITangement
,uld interact
as this pro-

vides for !reedom and justice for every individual and
eyery natIOn. Peace such as this provides for human
r:ghts for everyone within all nations and for equal
nghts for each nation within the international
community,

38. All nations have underlined their commitment to
the promotion of human rights. This commitment has
found specific expression in the numerous covenants
declaratio.ns and resolutions adopted by States Mem~
bers of thiS Organization. Regimes which have consistently denit;d their peoples such rights have been condemned. It IS none the less regrettable that violations of
human rights in various forms still continue to exist.
And nowhere have such violations taken such a
massive and grotesque form than in southern Africa
where institutionalized racism is entrenched and wher~
a human being is judged, not by his contribution to
s<;lciety, not by his ~u~anity, but by the pigmentation of
hiS SklO and the ongln of his race.

39,

40. But whether in Africa or el~ewhere on the globe,
the people who have been demed their fundamental
r~ghts have not/ail.ed to re.sist such oppression, humiliation and explOLtatlOn. ThiS resistance has taken different fOlms., including, as a last resort, armed struggle.
Those millions of oppressed people who suffer the
ordeal of colonialism and racist domination and millio~s more elsewhere who languish under for~ign occupation, have known no peace and no reprieve from the
burden~ of living. Such situations are a negation of
peace; IOdeed, they constitute a threat to it in that they
affect the security of the world as a whole.

41. It is therefore only logical that States Members of
this Organization have not been found lacking in their
support for the struggle waged by liberation movements
against the systems and regimes practising the obnoxious policies of colonialism, foreign occupation and
apartheid.
42, The conflict in southern Africa concerns the
choice between domination and freedom, apartheid
. and non-racism, inhumanity and human dignity. It concerns the light of all human beings to freedom and
equality, regardless of race or colour. It is a struggle
that must be of concern to all of us, for the negation of
humanity anywhere is a negation of humanity everywhere. To the people of that part of the world, it has
meant a perpetual nightmare of constant resistance to
oppression by the racist white minority regimes.

43. This constant oppression of the people of southe.m Africa is equally an arrogant repudiation of internatIOnal norms and a defiance of civilization. It becomes a
challenge, therefore, to the civilized world to put an end
to this tragic absurdity.
44. The pernicious system of apartheid and its brutal
instruments of repression and oppression of the African
people continue to reign supreme. The continued illegal
occupation of Namibia by the South African regime, in
defiance of international law and the will of the international community and in a spirit of total obstruction of
the United Nations plan for the independence of that
Territory, and the deteriorating and uncertain situation
in Zimbabwe are clear manifestations of the inadequacy
of our Organization in our collective search for freedom
and human dignity,

5

45.. Yet, as we lament our failures, we must also recOgOlz~ the achievements that our Organization has
made In the field of decolonization. Indeed, there is no
doubt tha~ the process of decolonization has been one
of the glOriOUS chapters o~the l! nited Nations. The very
grow.th of our membershIp to I ts present level testifies
to thiS process.
46.

~ext y~ar,

we shall be commemorating the

~wentleth anmversary of the Declaration on the Grant-

mg ofIn.dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
fresolutl,on 1~14 (X~)], That occasion will be significant
m that It w~1l proYlde. an opportunity for nations to
reaffilm theu unflll~chm.g support for decolonization.
The world commumty WIJI also be able to review strategie~ in con.fOl:nit~ with the contemporary realities, with
a view to hqUldatmg the last remaining vestiges ofcolonialism and racism.

47.

In the Middle East, the situation remains fluid and

co~p.1ex. Recent developments have given rise to new

realities and. also to new problems, which have to be
reckoned WIth as. the international community end~avours to find a Just and lasting solution to the confll~t. It must, ~owev~r, be stressed that peace in the
Middle East wIIl contmue to elude that area if the rootcause of the c.onflict is not taken fully into account. The
core of the Middle East problem is the continued denial
of the inali.ena.ble ~ight 0'£ the P~estinian people to
~elf-determJOatlon, mcludmg the fight to establish an
mdependent state.

48. The realization of that right, the refusal to give

I~gitimacy to the fr~its of conquest, the respect of the
!'lght of all Statt;s. In the area to an independent exIstence, are conditions necessary for the attainmentofa
genuine, viable and permanent peace in the region.
Furthermore, it is evident that in the search for such a
just solution the role of the Palestine Liberation Organiz~tion, the representative .of ~he Palestinian people, is
pivotal. It IS the responsibilIty of all nations to give
unlimited support and encouragement to all efforts desi~ned to attain this objective. It is my hope that during
thiS Assembly we shall be able to make a contribution
towards that end.

49. The tragic situation in Lebanon continues to cause
serious concern to the international community. The
senseless bombings of civilian targets, causing considerable loss of life and destruction, further threaten the
peace and security of the region. The world community
must redouble its efforts to bring an end to this tragedy,
so that the freedom, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon are respected.
50. In Cyprus, the situation remains polarized, It is
regrettable that, despite the efforts of the United Nations, there seems to be no end in sight to the tragedy of
Cyprus. The international community must redouble its
eff0l1s in support of a solution that will ensure respect
for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of Cyprus, as well as a new era of
hamlony between the two communities But whatever
the intentions and actions of the United Nations, these
cannot be a substitute for the efforts and determination
of the Cypriot people themselves.

51.

I am therefore taking this opportunity of appealing
to the Cypriot leaders to promote a more meaningful
and effective dialogue in order to bring to an end the

6

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session-Plenary Meetings

tragedy which faces their countly. In this respect, it is
re~rettable that the positive dialogue undertaken earlier
thiS year between the President of Cyprus, Mr.
Kypnanou, and the leader of the Turkish community,
Mr. Denkta~, at the initiative of the Secretary-General,
has not been followed up by the parties concerned. It is
my hope that in the interest of Cyprus and its people the
spirit which permeated those talks will be revived.
52. I should now like to turn to one of the serious
problems that has rightly preoccupied the attention of
the international community, namely, the growth of the
refugee population. When people are denied their
rights, they feel insecure. But so do those who deny
them these rights. As a result ofthe combination offear,
on the one hand, and political, cultural, economic and
sometimes religious persecution or deprivation on the
other, more and more people are fleeing their national
territories. International and regional conflicts have increased the tempo and circumstances of flight. With
over 10 million refugees-more than the world has ever
seen before in a time of peace-we are confronted with
dismaying testimony to man's inhumanity to man.
53. The United Nations, through its Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees, has done a great deal to
alleviate the plight of refugees. But Member States can
and should do more to stem the tide of refugees and to
ameliorate their condition. They can respond as required by accepting their humanitarian obligation to
receive and protect the people affected. They can also
help by increasing their contribution to the resources of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
But above all, they can make such human flights unnecessary in two ways. First, on the national level, they
can observe or enforce the various covenants and
norms of human conduct and government responsibility, so that none of their citizens will be obliged, for
whatever reason, ~o ~ote with their feet. Secondly, they
can uphold the prmclples of the Charter of our Organiza~ion, resolve international disputes peacefully and
bUIld constructive relations with neighbours and within
regions. In this way, they will make human migration
across frontiers unnecessary.
54. The l!nited N~tio~s is an instrument of peace. It
was establIshed prImarIly to promote that objective.
But the achievement of this goal continues to be
frustrated by the development of new and even more
sophisticated means of human destruction. That is why
peace cannot be considered without reference to the
mstruments of war.
55. Despite detente and the spirit of r~pprochement
am<:ll1g the great ~owers, the world is still living in a
penod of very fragIle peace. For while the international
atmosI?here has certainly improved as a result of the
reductIOn of tension among the major Powers, the
danger. of a nuclear war has not been eliminated. For
some time now, the final objective of the efforts of all
States has been general and complete disarmament under e!fectiv~ in.ternational control, while the immediate
goal IS to elImmate the danger of nuclear war, to halt
and.reverse the arms race and to clear the path towards
lastmg peace.
5~.

The relaxation of international tensions through
detente and peaceful coexistence has contributed
greatly towards this process and also towards the initia-

tion of other negotiations. Today, the mutual reduction
of forces in Europe, the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe and the implementation of the
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
[resolution 2832 (XXVI)]; as well as the negotiations
conducted within the framework of the Strategic Arms
Limitation Talks, are characteristic of the attempts to
establish a new era of peace. While co-operation should
replace confrontation, there is a need to ensure that this
co-operation is universal and is not confined to a group
of nations. It should ensure the establishment of a more
secure world in which peace is based on a lesser dependence on armaments, and not on the outmoded
theory of the balance of terror and mutual destruction.
It should also ensure the participation of all nations in
determining the modalities of peace, taking into consideration the sovereignty and independence of all
nations--big and small.
57. The entire international community has come to
realize that international peace and security are indivisible and that they must be total and global to be viable
and lasting. This realization should enable nations to
give priority to the economic well-being of the world's
people instead of piling up armaments.
58. Disarmament, decolonization and human rights
are not the only ingredients of international security.
Lasting peace can only be ensured ifit is also basedona
foundatIOn of economic justice and equality. It is in
recognition of this principle that at the sixth special
session of the General Assembly [resolution 3201
(S-VI)] the international community proclaimed its determination to work urgently for the establishment ofa
New International Economic Order based on sovereign
equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States. For we cannot talk of political and civic rights in isolation from economic and
social rights.
59. Today, the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations is being convened at a
most critical m.oment in the history of the ongoing
North-South dIalogue and international economic
negotiation processes. During this year alone the entire question of international economic relations has
been examined at several major world conferences: at
the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of77, held
at Arusha, the United Republic of Tanzania from 6 to
16 February; the fifth session of UNCTAb held at
Manila from 7 May to 1June; the Preparatory Commit.
tee. for the .New International Development Strategy,
which met.m New York in April, June and September;
the Commrttee of the Whole Established under General
Assembly Resolution 32/174, which met in New York
III March and September; the Tokyo Economic Summit,.whi~h met on 28 and 29 June; the second regular
sessIOn m 1979 of the Economic and Social Council
held in Geneva from 4 July to 3 August· the World
Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rur~l Developme~t, held in Rome from 12 to 21 July; the United
NatIons Conference on Science and Technology for
Development, held at Vienna from 20 to 31 August· the
Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonw~alth
Countries, held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August· and the
Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Gove~mentof
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana from 3 to 9
September.
60.

But I think the time has come when the realm of

1st meeting-iS September 1979

I reduction
curityand
.tion of the
~ of Peace

dialogue has to give way to the realm of action. The
discussions in various forums on a new international
order have been long and comprehensive. They have
been able to isolate and bring into focus many practical
areas of international co-operation to make inter_depend.ence a reality. These practical elements continue to be denied application through the pursuit of
narrow, short-term interests. The political will to implement solutions which have obtained overwhelming advocacy continues to be lacking from those we expect to
lead in shaping this world into a truly interdependent
one, mutually supportive and reinforcing.

~gotiations

tegicAnns
lttempts to
:ion should
re that this
to a group
tofamore
lesser deoutmoded
estruction.
nations in
lto cons idlce of all

61. Many decisions and resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations have remained by and large unimplemented. Dialogue must
produce concrete results or confrontation becomes inevitable. As my President, Mwalimu Julius K. Nyerere,
in his address at Howard University in August 1977,
said:

is come to
ire indiviso be viable
nations 10
:he world's

man rights
II security.
'basedona
ty. It is in
I(th special
'Jtion 3201
med its de:hmentofa
1 sovereign
st and colk of politinomic and '
le General
lVened at a
le ongoing
economic
ne, the enlations has
erences: at
of77,held
_, from 6 to
D, held at
yCommitt Strategy,
;eptember;
lerGeneraJ
New York
Jmic Summd regular
l! Council.
the World
I Develop:he United
nology for
\ugust; the
nonwealth
st; and the
~rnment of
'om 3 to 9

"Confrontation is not a desired strategy of the
weak; but if reason, justice and dialogue all fail to
bring international changes needed to win the war
against world poverty, then economic conflict is
bound to follow."
62. We are meeting at a time when the final days of
this decade are closing in. This decade has been a
decade of serious economic negotiations, yet the international economic situation of low growth rates, runaway inflation, unemployment and serious balance-ofpayments difficulties, particularly for the developing
countries, has persisted. The gap between rich and poor
nations is widening and will continue to do so. But more
importantly, living standards in developing cou~t~es,
particularly among the poorest, are falhng. Condltlons
that have given rise to abject poverty are worsening
instead of ameliorating, because of a combination of
many factors, both new and old.
63. The experience of the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)], which will soon come
to an end, should guide us in our deliberations for the
pref;laration of the new strategy for the third decade. All
avaIlable data demonstrate clearly that the present
Strategy has failed miserably in meeting the aspirations
of the developing countries. The existing Strategy was
based on the notion that the development of the develoJ?ing countries could be achieved through the transmisSIOn of growth, or "trickle down" method, fr~m the
developed countries. This process has not only faded to
bring about meaningful changes; it has in f~ct served. to
perpetuate the dependence of the developmg countnes
on the developed ones instead of promoting their
independence.

~

le realm of r

64. The present Strategy has failed to bring about
meaningful changes in international economic relations
because it did not address itself to fundamental
structural changes in the existing international
economic system. As we move to the next decade,
therefore, these fundamental structural changes should
be the target of negotiations in the preparation of the
new strategy. The new strategy must indeed be de
.. signed.to.promoteJhe q~yelopment of the d~ve.loping
countries and it should be fonnUlated Wlthm the
framewo;k, and directed to achieving the objectives, of

7

the New International Economic Order in all its
aspects-international trade, commodities, the transfer
of real resources, science and technology, industrialization, food and agriculture, and the promotion of
economic and technical co-operation among developing countries.
65. It is said that knowledge of the past is essential in
order to understand the present and plan for the future.
I submit that this truism is equally relevant in the context of our quest for a New International Economic
Order. We must properly diagnose the pitfalls and setbacks of the present decade, whether in the realm of
political changes or in the domain of economic problems, so as to equip ourselves to confront and overcome the challenges of the next decade-the decade of
the 1980s.
66. This decade has been one of the most eventful.
The world has been through political turmoil which has
perhaps changed to some extent the structures and the
balance of power. Developing nations are increasingly
demanding their rightful share and the opportunity to
participate in international politics, as well as in international economics.
67. The non-aligned movement, in which the overwhelming majority of the third-world countries are represented, has played a role in the vanguard of the struggle for democratization of international relations and
the establishment of a New International Economic
Order based on equity, justice, mutual benefit and
genuine interdependence. Only nine days ago, the
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
countries, at their Sixth Conference in Havana, Cuba,
gave a fresh and dynamic impetus and momentum to
these lofty goals. As a result of those efforts, coupled
with the imaginative leadership displayed in some sections of the developed world, the need for change is no
longer contested. Rather, it is the nature and pace of
that change that continue to encounter varied reactions, which in some cases border on obstruction.
68. The challenge of the 1980s must, therefore, first
and foremost include how to make good the necessary
changes. In this context it behoves those countries
which, while professing acceptance of change, continue to cling to policies geared to the maintenance of
the status quo to desist from such policies and to join
the mainstream of the world community. At the same
time, it should be emphasized that for such changes to
be meaningful they must be all-encompassing.
69. Both the develoJ?ed and the developing countries
must play their part In ensuring that the changes we
seek result in the greatest moral and material benefits
for our peoples. Above all, it must be stressed that
certain prerequisites are basic to the very foundation of
the new order to which we are all aspiring. Thus, it
would not be enough to demand national rights without
ensuring human rights within nations. It would likewise
be of limited effect if nations demanded change and
embarked on the establishment of new international
norms without establishing corresponding ones at the
national level. We must aim at the strengthening of
national foundations of power and at the elimination of
glaring inequalities between people within nations and
between nations.
70.

There is no better instrument, or, for that matter,

8

General Assembly

Thirty-fourth Sessio[)-Plenary Meetings

any real alternative institution, for bringin~ about ~uch
a change than the Unit~d ~at~on~. The U~lted Nations
is the most representative mstltutlOp, part!cuil;l.rly when
we consider that the goal of umversahty IS almost
within our reach. We must there~ore endeav~:lUr.to e~­
sure that the United Nations family of orgamz~tlOns IS
equipped to face the new challe!1ges. To make It abl~ to
accommodate such change, it IS necessary to provide
for broader and enhanced participation by all ~ati~ns. It
is equally imperative to ensure the democratIzation of
United Nations institutions. Above all, w~ m~st wo~k
to improve the effectiveness of our Orgamzatu~n. This
becomes all the more relevant when we take mto account the fact that the United Nations today faces what
has been described as a crisis of confidence.
71. We in this Assembly can make a sound beginning
towards that objective by ensuring that our delib~ra­
tions and the decisions we arrive at enhance the Umted
Nations as an instrument for the promotion of peace,
freedom, justice, international security and international co-operation. Perhaps the time has come when
we should be more concerned with the implementation
of the decisions that we arrive at than with the proliferation of the resolutions that we adopt. We should also
aim, wherever possible, at adopting decisions which
will mobilize the capabilities and meet the aspirations of
the people we represent. Equally important, we mllst
seeK to mvolve the commitment ofworld public opinion
towards the noble goals to which the United Nations is
committed, that is to say, universal freedom, equality
and justice-in a word, genuine peace.
72. The hope for peace burns eternally in the breast of
mankind. The quest for enduring peace is an arduous
but glorious crusade, bringing together all nations of
different political persuasions and diverse cultures in
one splendid and fulfilling march.
73. There is not, and never has been, anyone cause of
war. But never in the history of man and ofintemational
intercourse have there been so many causes of war as
prevail today. I have referred to some of them: the
monumental poverty of two-thirds of the world's
people, the widespread deprivation of political and human rights, the escalating arms race and the refusal to
respect the sovereignty of others, including their
sovereignty over their national resources. Each and
every one of these represents a stream of potential
unrest, impatienc~ and revolt. Their confluence could
become the f100dwaters of world instability and war,
but at that point of confluence there might also be
erected a gigantic dam fraught with all the potential of
mankind's hope for development and peace.
74. Our United Nations was instituted to confront
that second challenge. It is not beyond the will of man
or nation to work for peace. I believe that our Organization is capable of strengthening this will. With your
co~operatlon we can make this thirty-fourth regular
seSSIOn of the United Nations General Assembly a
turning-point in man's eternal journey towards freedom, unity, equality and co-operation-the true
corner-stones of peace. And I can think of no better
way of crowning a year which the United Nations has
dedicated as the International Year of the Child than by
strengthening our commitment to these lofty
objectives.

AGENDA ITEM 103

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Na~ions: report of the Committee
on Contributions (continued)
75. The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the next item
on our agenda, I should like to inform the General
Assembly that Chad has made the necessary p~yme~t
to reduce its arrears below the amount speCIfied m
Article 19 of the Charter.
AGENDA ITEM 19

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
76. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the procedure followed in the past, I should now like to invite the
General Assembly to consider, under item 19 of the
provisional agenda, the positive recommendation by
the Security Council for the admission of Saint Lucia to
membership in the United Nations. This special procedure has been applied previously in order to give States
recently recommended by the Security Council for
membership in our Organization the opportunity, if the
General Assembly acts favourably on their requests, to
participate from the outset in the work of the session. If
there is no objection, we shall proceed accordingly.

t
f

It was so decided.
77
The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has in
do~ument A/34/464 recommended the admission of
Saint Lucia to membership ill the United Nations. In
this connexion a draft resolution has been submitted,
document A/34/L.I and Add. 1. May I take ~t that the
General Assembly accepts the recommendation. of the
Security Council and adopts the draft resolutIon by
acclamation?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 34/1).
78. The PRESIDENT: I declare Saint Lucia admitted
to membership in the United Nations.

The delegation of Saint Lucia was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly hall.
79. The PRESIDENT: As President of the thirtyfourth regular session of the United Nations General
Assembly, I wish to extend a wann welcome to the ne:w
State of Saint Lucia, whose application for memb~rshlp
in the United Nations has just been approved. WIth the
admission ofSaint Lucia, the membership ofthe United
Nations has increased to 152 and our Organization has
taken a further step towards the goal of universality.
The United Nations has thereby been strengthened as
an instrument for world peace and co-operation.

80. The admission of Saint Lucia to the United Nations gives me personally great satisfaction because it
marks one more advance in the ongoing process of
decolonization. Having been for a number of years
Chairman of the Special Committee on decolonization,
I have closely followed Saint Lucia's progress towards
full independence and I share with the people and the
Government of Saint Lucia their joy on this happy
occasion.
81.

I

I

I should like to congratulate them, and particu-

,
<11

1st meeting-18 September 1979

lady their Prime Minister, Mr. Allan Louisy, on the
unanimous approval with which the international community has received Saint Lucia's application for admission to membership in the United Nations. This
approval signifies the recognition of the will of the
people of Saint Lucia to work together with all peoples
In the interest of world peace and co-operation. I have
no doubt that Saint Lucia will make a constructive
contribution to the work of the United Nations and, on
behalf of the United Nations, I welcome its delegation,
led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. George OdIum.
82. Several representatives have e~pressed the desire
to speak at this juncture. I now call on the first speaker,
the representative of Liberia, who wishes to speak on
behalf of the African States.
83. Mr. TUBMAN (Liberia): On behalf of the Mrican
group of States, I wish to express the profound sense of
loss and grief that we feel at the untimely death ofone of
the great leaders of our continent, Agostinho Neto, the
President of the Republic of Angola. Our hearts go out
to the bereaved family and we wish for them and for the
people of Angola the fortitude and faith to endure these
sad and difficult days, so that their brave country can
continue to stand tall in the front ranks of the struggle
for African liberation, for human dignity and for the
peace of the world.
84. At the appropriate time, African personalities of
the highest authority and eminence will express from
this rostrum the great pride and satisfaction which Africa feels in having you, Mr. President, one of its young
and brilliant sons, preside over the thirty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. As Chairman of the group of
African States for this month, it is my honour and my
almost impossible duty to express appropriate thanks
to your great predecessor, Mr. Lievano of Colombia,
and to try to convey to you the real sense of pleasure
which all of us, your colleagues from Mrica, feel at
seeing you deservedly elevated to this high position.
Your great country, the United Republic of Tanzania,
and our common continent, Mrica, can be proud that
no other country or region of the world could have
produced a more youthful, more experienced or more
gifted diplomat having the Wisdom, patience and skill to
guide the work of the Assembly in these uncertain days
of difficulties-as well as opportunities-for the internat,ional community.
85. Because the independent States ofAfrica make up
one-third of the membership of this Organization, our
group's co-operation and support are essential for the
success of any session of the General Assembly. This
year, as always in the past, fully conscious of this
responsibility which the power of our numbers confers
upon us, the African group will give its full support to
the President of the Assembly in the discharge of his
duties. But because this year the President-you, Siris one of us, because the joy of your elevation today is
shared by all of us, and because your certain success
will bring credit and benefit to our beloved Mrica,
please rest assured that the African group will leave no
stone unturned in the most vigorous efforts to make
your presidency, an African presidency, one of the
most productive and memorable in the annals of the
United Nations.
86. The entire United Nations community knows that
this day is one of particular significance for you, Mr.

9

President, because it coincides with the final formal
action just taken by which the State of Saint Lucia has
now become the one hundred and fifty-second Member
of the United Nations. This is a proud achievement for
you personally and you have every reason to rejoice
since this act has, in no small measure, come abQut as a
result of the valuable and painstaking work of the Special Committee on decolonization over whose activities
you have presided with statesmanship for the past seven years.
87. Last week when the Security Council voted unanimously to recommend to the General Assembly the
admission of Saint Lucia to membership in the United
Nations, I had the honour, on behalf of the Mrican
group, to extend congratulations to that new State and
to welcome it into the United Nations family. In renewing those sentiments here in the General Assembly,
where there are neither small States nor big States, it is
not inappropriate to recall that this Organization is
based on the principle of the sovereign equality ofall its
Members. There are no minority States in the United
Nations. All the States here are equal, and that equality
is not to be measured by financial contributions to the
United Nations budget or by geographical size orpopulation; on the contrary, ignoring such considerations,
the unique and enduring appeal of the Charter derives
from its call to all nations to practise tolerance, to live in
peace with one another as good neighbours and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples.
88. Because those principles of the Charter are still
valid today, small States like my own country, Liberia,
and our newest Member, Saint Lucia, can come
proudly to this forum and here, free from intimidation,
endeavour to make our contribution in dignity and with
a sense of responsibility to the lofty objectives for
which this Organization stands.
89. So long as the United Nations remains loyal to the
principles of its Charter its influence, regardless of the
III wishes or contemptuous actions of some of its detractors, instead of declining, will rise and the United
Nations will continue to attract and be attractive to all
States until the desirable day of complete universality
of its membership has been reached.
90. Let us therefore, on this day ofanother beginning,
indulge the hope that, during this year when the African
Chairman of the Special Committee on decolonization
presides over the General Assembly, the stubborn vestiges of racism and colonialism still remaining in southern Africa will, by the actions taken here in the next few
weeks, be hastened to the day of their destruction. On
that triumphant day when colonialism will be finally
buried all States Members of this great Organization
will be able to march forward in unity and brotherhood
discharging the sacred task of strengthening peace and
employing the full force ofhuman ingenuity and resolve
to make this world a better place for all nations and all
peoples.
91. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Papua New Guinea, who will speak on behalf of
the Asian group of States.
92. Mr. MATANE (PapuaNewGuinea): On behalf of
the Asian group of States, I congratulate you, Sir, on
your election to the high office of President ofthe thirty-

10

General Assembly-Thlrty·fourth Session-Plenary Meetings

fourth session of the General Assembly. With your
wide experience in international affairs, manifested
especiaUy in the deliberations of, for example, the
Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on decolonization, I am more than convinced that this session is, and will be, in very capable hands.
93. The Asian group of States would like to pay a
parti'cuJar tribute to the outgoing President for the skilful and firm manner in which he led the meetings ofthe
last session. The results of that session speak for
themselves.
94. It was with sadness that we learned of the untimely death of the President of Angola, Agostinho
Neto.
95. The Asian group of States cordially and warmly
welcomes Saint LUCIa as the newest Member of this
world body. Each year, more and more colonies become politically independent. This is, and should be,
the normal thing to happen, because all people of the
world want, and have the right, to be free from foreign
domination. There is nothing better than to be free, to
be our own masters, again. We call on colonies which
are still under foreign domination to move forward towards political independence. We also call on colonizers to set the colonized people free. We welcome Saint
Lucia to our midst.

%. If I may digress for just one moment, international
communities continue to use some words or groups of
words which my delegation deplores as, in some cases,
derogatory and, in other cases, simply meaningless.
Such words or groups of words are: "developed
countries" and "developing countries", or "first",
"second", "third" and "fourth" world. The way
things are going, we will soon come to the "fifth" or
even "sixth" world.
97. First, let us stop deluding ourselves, because, as
far as my delegation is concerned, there is no country in
the world that is truly developed. If there is one, then I
have not heard of it. So-called developed countries are
still developing. That is a fact; we all know it for certain.
Why, then, should we use the term "developed
countries" ?
98. Secondly, as for the various worlds to which we
refer, my delegation does not see why there should be
differences. We all know that there is only one worldmother earth-on which we live, unless, of course, we
are talking about other celestial bodies. We undoubtedly are not talking about other celestial bodies--only our world. If that is so, then why do we become so
unrealistic by referring to "first" and "second"
worlds, and so on? For the record, my delegation
strongly objects to such meaningless words. Let us be
realistic and begin to use, for example, "industrialized
countries" instead of the so-called "developed" or
"first-world" or "second-world" countries and "nonindustrialized countries" for the so-called' "developing" or "third-world", "fourth-world" or whateverworld countries.
'
99, If the suggestions I have just made pose some legal
complIcations, then it is time for us to look for
correction.

100. If I may resume, speaking on behalf of the Asian
group of States, I wish this session seriousness and
success in all our deliberations.
101. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Romania, who will speak on behalf of the group
of Eastern European States.
102. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interpretation
from French): Sir, permit me to congratulate you most
cordially on your election to the important post ofPresident of the General Assembly. The head of the Romanian delegation, when he addresses the Assembly next
week, will of course have the pleasure ofcongratulating
you appropriately on your election and ofexpressing at
the same time hIS great appreciation to your eminent
predecessor, Mr. Indalecio Li6vano, for his remarkable
contribution to the work of the last session of the General Assembly.
103. The Romanian delegation whole-heartedly endorses the words ofdeep sadness which you, Mr. President, have just voiced on the occasion of the unexpected death of that great son of the Angolan people,
President Agostinho Neto. In the passing of that distinguished statesman the friendly people of Angola, the
people of Mrica and the international community have
lost a determined and indefatigable fighter for the cause
of the national independence and political, economic
and social emancipation of his country, as well as for
the triumph of peace, freedom, justice and human
dignity throughout the African continent.
104. I would request the delegation of Angola to accept our sincerest condolences and the expression of
our whole-hearted solidarity, We are convinced that
the people of Angola will continue to pursue the noble
ideals to which President Neto devoted all his talents
and energies.
105. It is my honour, as Chairman of the group of
Eastern European States, to welcome Saint Luciaon its
admission to the United Nations.
106. In the midst of our pleasure at the increase in the
membership of this world Organization by a new
Member, it is worth recalling that the aspirations of the
people of Saint Lucia to freedom and national independence are quite familiar to us. Indeed, the United Nac
tions, in the implementation of the General Assembly's.
historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has played a most
important role in the developments which culminated,
on 22 February last, in the proclamation by the people
of Saint Lucia of their national independence. The action just taken by the General Assembly through its
unanimous decision lends the seal of formality to the
place which this young Latin American State has just
taken among the free and sovereign nations of ·the

~ili.

.

....

107. The proclamation of the national independence
of Saint Lucia and its admission to membership in ,the
United Nations are an expression of the histonc
changes that have occurred in the world today and a
further proof of the will of peoples to live as free and
independent nations and to develop in accordance with
their own interests.

1st meeting-18September 1979
Jl
IC!

108. As a Member of the Organization, which has just
taken a further step towards universality, Saint Lucia
will be in a position .to contribute to the attainJ!lent of
the ideals of the UOlted NatIOns and to make Its Own
unique contribution to the examination of, and the efforts designed to solve. international problems with a
view to peace, justice and equitable co-operation
among all nations of the world. At the same time, the
people of that country will no doubt find in the United
NatIOns an experience and spirit of solidadty which will
be particularly valuable for the consolidation of their
own political independence and their economic and
social development.
109. Before concluding, I should like to recall that on
the occasion ofthe proclamation of the independence of
Saint Lucia the Romanian Government communicated
to the Government of that State its best wishes for
success in the work of free and independent
development.
110. While congmtulating the Government and
people of Saint Lucia on the l)ccasion of such a
momentous event, we wish to express our desire to
establish friendly co-operation with that country's delegation to the Unite'd Nations,.
Ill. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Panarna , who will speak on behalfofthe group of
Latin American States.
112. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) UnluprelllliOlI from
Spanish): The election of a states.man with your. eminentqualities as President ofthe thirty-fourth session of
the United Nations General Assembly is a matter for
singular satisfaction for the entire international community, but particularly for the peoples of the third world,
whose interests you have so loyally defended th['ou~­
out your fruitful public life. On behalf of the Latin
American group of States, I am plea~ed to congratul~te
you most warmly and at the same time to offer you Its
most resolute co-operation for the complete success of
your important office as President.
113, I wish to place on record also OU!' group's
warmest appreciation to the outgoing PreSident az~d
distinguished Latin American statesman, Mr. Inda,leclo
Lievano Aguirre, for his magnificent work as PreSident
of the thirty-third session of the Geneml Assembly.

et

be

it:
.8

:Id
th

114. A mournful event has engulfed us in deep SOITOW
and moves us on this solemn occasion to express Our
feelings of solidarity with the people of Angola on the
premature passing of that great African stat~sman,
Agostinho Neto. President Ne!t) won the affectIOn and
admiration of the peoples of the third world bec~use \If
his outstandin~ intellectual qualities, his humamty, ~IS
talent and ability. which constantly opened up promising roads for the nation of Angola and for the peoples of
southern Africa desirous of freedom and justice. On
behalf of the Latin American group, I wish to transmit
the most heartfelt condolences and sorrow to the family
of President Neto and to the Government and people of
the People's Republic of Angola.
115. In my dual capacity as the. repre~entativ~ of
Panama and Chairman t1f the group of Latin American

11

States during the month of September. I wish to state
that my country is a sponsor of draft resolution A/34/
L.I and Add. 1, which concludes with the Assembly's
decision to admit Saint Lucia to membership in the
United Nations, having considered the fact that the
Security Council unanimously approved resolution 453
(1979), In which it recommended the admission of Saint
Lucia as a fun Member of the United Nations.
116. The unanimous welcome given by the Security
Council to the entry of Saint Lucia has created a propitious atmosphere for this Assembly to approve unanimously the draft resolution which will make Saint Lucia
the one hundred and fifty-second Memberofthe United
Nations and the twenty-ninth member of the group of
Latin American States.
117. For Latin America, the entry of Saint Lucia is a
cause for satisfaction because it gives effect to three
basic fundamental premises deeply rooted in the conscience of Latin America, namely, the self-determination of peoples, the sovereign equality of States
and the universality of the United Nations.
118. It is also a matter of profound satisfaction that
Saint Lucia has achieved its independence as a result of
a peaceful process which had the support both of the
United Workers Party, the government party, and the
Labour Party, the opposition party, as well as the forthright and firm co-operation of the United Kingdom, the
administering Power, which deal! with this matter in a
manner that deserves the cordial appreciation of the
international community.
119. Although in the Security Council debate it Was
mentioned that Saint Lucia would become the eighth
Commonwealth member in the Caribbean region, it is
fitting to point out that in the development of harmonious and brotherly relations between the peoples of
the Latin American continent a happy understanding
has been reached to consider all the States in that
geographical area as being equally Latin American,
This was the fortunate conclusion reached in Panama,
when the Convention Establishing the Latin American
Economic System was adopted. 2 The Bolivarian idea of
the unity and integration of Latin America remains
alive, strong and dynamic in the Latin American human
communities without any distinction for reasons of
race, language, origin, nationality, sex or ideol~gy, and
regardless ofgeographical location. from the RIO Bravo
to Patagonia, in the north, centre or south of Latin
America, including the Caribbean sector. With the entry of Saint Lucia, Latin America m~ntains the prol?ortion of 20 ~ercent of the c.omJ;l0sltlon ~f t~e UOlted
Nations which together With Its contnbutlon to the
world economy and to peace and to friendship and
co-operation amon~ States, assures for it ~n increa~­
ingly important pOSItion in international relatIOns and In
the future of mankind.
I

120. I conclude by reiterating the satisfaction of our
region at the unan!m~us appr<;wal by. the General Assembly of the admiSSion of Samt Lucla, whose people
and Government I most cordially welcome on behalfof
the Latin American group.

l

Signed al Panama City on 17 October 1975.

12

General Assembly-Thirty·fourth Session---Plenary Meetings

121. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Belgium, who will speak on behalf on the group
of Western European and other States.
122. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) (interpretation
from French): As Chairman of the group cif Western
European and other States, I should like to welcome
Saint Lucia to the United Nations as its one hundred
and fifty-second Member State. We recall with plea.sure
that it is a country which benefited from the emancipating work of the United Kingdom. I should like to address a cordial greeting to the Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr. Geor~e Odium, who is heading the delegation of
Saint Lucla.
123. I should hope that the leaders of Saint Lucia will
feel at home here, as we all do. The small size or
remoteness of a country has never prevented its influence being felt. We all have our roles to play. Saint
Lucia will be able to determine its role and to fulfil it.
124. Our Organization is designed to reflect the universality of nations. Its rapid expansion over the last
few years, of which Saint Lucia's admission marks a
new stage, calls, in our view, for an ever more intensive
search for consensus. The weight of votes is something
that fades, while the moral authority ofconsensus tends
to expand intenational law.
125. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the group of Western European and other States, on your accession to the presidency of the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. Our States take great
pleasure in your election. For many years now, we have
been able to appreciate here, in these precincts, your
human and professional qualities and your concern to
endow our Organization with a greater measure of effectiveness and equipoise. Your long experience of international problems and your profound knowledge of
our Organization are the best guarantees of your success in that task.
126. It behoves the President of the General Assembly more than anyone to demonstrate profound attachment to the prinCIples ofth~ Charter, to recall them and
to see that they are observed. The group of Western
European and other States knows that this has always
been and will remain one of your prime concerns.
127. You may be assured of the full support of our
group in the perfonnance of your arduous duties.
128. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Lievano, for the way in which he presided over the thirty-third session of the General
Assembly.
129. In conclusion, we should like to associate
ourselves with the tribute you paid in memory of Mr.
Agostinho Neto, the President of the People's Republic
of Angola. The Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Henri Simonet, was able personally to appreciate
his political vision. Many States in the group ofWestern
European and other States owe to him a tightening of
their links with Angola.. His loss is felt, and we hope for
the sake of world peace that his example will remain
alive.

130. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Qatar, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Arab States.

(it

eml
eca

Tel

131. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) (interpretation from
Arabic): Mr. President, allow me, on behalf of the Arab
group of States and on my own behalf, to congratulate
you most sincerely and warmly on your election by
acclamation to the presidency of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly. Your long experience in
international affairs and your great competence make
you an exemplary person to guide our work in this
mternational forum towards the success we all seek.
Your country, the United Republic of Tanzania, which
plays a positive role in promoting the progress and
prosperity of the developing countries, represents for
us the best guarantee that our session will be crowned
with success.

m

is i

nit'

col
10

wc

CO

13~

[et

Sa

we

L\

ffil

132. On this occasion I should like, on behalf of the
States of the Arab group, to transmit to the Government
and people of the State of Saint Lucia our warmest
congratulations and best wishes on their admission to
membership in this world body. That event will un·
doubtedly strengthen the United Nations in its task or
serving the cause of international peace and justice. We
wish this young nation all success in the attainment of
the objectives and fulfilment of the principles of the
United Natipns in order jointly to contribute to the
greater well-being of mankind as a whole.

th,
de

re,

to

t atM

C(

Ih
pI

14

pi
133. Finally, I must not fail to mention the
praiseworthy work and major contribution of your predecessor, Mr. Lievano, which helped to ensure the
success of the thirty-third session.

01

134. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Guyana, who will speak on behalf of the Caribbean States.

bi

135. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): Mr. President, permit
me to express to you, on behalf of the Commonwealth
Caribbean States, our sincerest congratulations on
your unanimous election as President of our Assembly.
The leaders of our delegations will shortly be congratulating you approptiately on your election on behalf
of their respective Governments. On those occasions
they will also express the appreciation of their Governments for the very important contribution made to the
success of the work of the last Assembly by your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Indalecio Lievano.
136. It was with a sense of profound shock and regret
that we learned of the demise of the late President or
Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto. With his passing, Angola
has lost a noble son and leader whose courage and
sacrifice during Angola's protracted liberation war will
live forever in our memories. We should like to extend
our sincerest sympathy and solidarity with the family of
the late President and with the Government and people
of Angola in their hour of loss.
137. It is a great honour for my delegation, in the name
of the delegations of the Commonwealth Caribbean
Territories, to extend a welcome to Saint Lucia to our
world body. With Saint Lucia, our Territories share a
history of slavery, colonialism and exploitation, a
history that dates back more than four centuries. Along
with this common history, geographical proximity has
destined us to close, cordial co-operation. In fact, our
relations with Saint Lucia are a story of long, fruitful.

sil

t(i

t~
C(

i~

01

I,

\\

C

If

I1

11
C

A

. sh"

I

I
f

11

S

p

~

s

------

lion the represenla.
~half of the groUP or

nterpretation ~rorn

)n behalf of the Arab
half, to congratula1e
on your election by
he thirty-fourth Sel·
Ir long experience in .
Lt competence m~e
je our work in this
,uccess we all seek.
; of Tanzania, which
19 the progress and
tries, represents for
lion will be crowned

ke, on behalf of the
t to the Govemmelll
Lucia our warmesl
n their admission to
That event will Ul\o
rations in its task of
~ace and justice. We
in the attainment c:i
le principles of tilt
o contribute to the
l whole.

I to mention the
ribution of your pre·
~Iped to ensure the

11 on the representa·
behalf of the CariIJ.

[r. President, permil
the Commonwealth
congratulations on
nt ofour Assembly,
'ill shortly be conClr election on behaH
:In those occasiOn!
ion of their Govem
ibution made to the
mbly by yourdistino Lievano.

nd shock and regrel
he late President of
his passing, Angola
;l/hose courage and
j liberation war will
:lOuld like to extend
ty with the familyor'
ernment and people
~gation, in the name
nwealth Caribbean
I Saint Lucia to our
Territories share a
nd exploitation, a
ur centuries. Along
hical proximity has
:ration. In fact, our
,ry of long, fruitful,

ist meeting-IS September 1979

sisterly co-operation over the years, a co-operation that
embraces numerous areas of activity in the political,
economic, social and cultural spheres of the life of our
Territories.
138. Perhaps our most significant co-operative effort
is in our regional organization, the Caribbean Community, where we are all striving together to increase our
collective strength through reciprocal co-operation and
to make our region better equipped to survive in the
world of today. In this regard, Saint Lucia's role and
contribution have been most outstanding.
139. The Commonwealth Caribbean States therefore
feel a particular pride and sense of honour in welcoming
Saint Lucia into our midst today, just two weeks after
we had the pleasure in Havana of welcoming Saint
Lucia to observer status within the non-aligned movement. Among other things, this accession is symbolic of
the irreversible march of decolonization and of the indomitable nature of the desire of the peoples of our
region for freedom and for the enjoyment of their right
to self-determination. We are confident ofSaint Lucia's
ability and determination to fulfil its obligations as a
Member State of our Organization and we are likewise
confident that Saint Lucia's participation in the work of
the Organization will make a positive contribution to
promoting the ideas of our Charter.

140. As we welcome Saint Lucia among us, it is appropriate that we also give some thought to others in
our region who are still under colonial rule. We
sincerely hope that those peoples will soon be enabled
to exercise their right to self-determination and take
their place as fully sovereign States in the international
community. The States of the Commonwealth Caribbean look forward to working closely with Saint Lucia
in this Organization, both here in New York and in
other forums.

13

Lucia to the important work of the United Nations, we
wish also to assure them of the full co-operation of the
United States in our common endeavours. We extend
to them and to the people of their nation the warm
greetings and best wishes of the American people. We
look forward to a close association and to an increasingly constructive relationship between the United
States and Saint Lucia, as well as with other nations of
the Caribbean.

146.. SiT Ap.thony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
BreVity IS Said to be one of the national characteristics
of the British. But it does not, certainly on this occaSion, denote any lack of warmth.
147. My delegation is delighted to extend a very warm
welcome to Saint Lucia on its admission to the United
Nations and to its Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. George
Odium ~nd his delegation. The United Kingdom is always pleased to welcome new Members to this Organization, and it is a particular pleasure to us when the new
Member is a fellow member of the Commonwealth.
148.. ,The United Kingdom .has fully supported Saint
LUCla s moves towards full mdependence. It is therefore a matter of great personal satisfaction to me that
my first appearance at this podium occurs on this day
when Saint Lucia takes its place in the international
community. My country's association with Saint Lucia
is a long and' happy one. As a result, we have great
experience of the qualities of the people of Saint Lucia
qualities which I am sure will make a full contribution t~
the work of the United Nations.
}49:. The PRESIDENT: I nO~,take great pleasure in
mVltmg the Deputy Pnme Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Saint Lucia, Mr. George OdIum, to
address the General Assembly,

141. We call on all other States in the Organization to
work with us, extending to Saint Lucia all necessary
co-operation in that great national effort of which its
independence in February of this year has marked only
the beginning.

150. Mr. ODLUM (Saint Lucia): My delegation and I
wish to express the profound sorrow of my country on
the news of the death of the distinguished revolutionary
leader of the Angolan people, Agostinho Neto. This
marks the passing away of one of the true national sons
of the third world.

142. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of the host country, the United States of
America.

151. Mr. President, I extend congratulations to you
and your country on your election as President of the
General Assembly.

143. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): As
host country, the United States is pleased to welcome
Saint Lucia as the one hundred fifty-second Member of
the United Nations. In the Security Council debate on
Saint Lucia's admission, we already expressed our support for this new State's application and our belief in its
readiness to assume the responsibilities that membership entails.

152. My delegation wishes to extend the sincerest
thanks of the people and Government of Saint Lucia to
all those who were so instrumental in making it possible
for Saint Lucia to take its seat within the portals of this
body. We are aware of the obligations and responsibilities that are attendant on membership and are fully
committed to upholding the ideals of the United Nations and are pledged to continuing to foster the spirit of
good-neighbourliness and international co-operation in
a peaceful world for the betterment of the peoples of the
international community.

144. We expect that the principles which guided the
people of Saint Lucia successfully to independence on
22 February of this year will continue to guide them as
theYJ'oin in O1.).r common efforts here to establish a
worl of peace, justice and prosperity. Saint Lucia has
already assumed an active role in international affairs,
and we support its efforts at regional co-operation
through meetings with its Caribbean neighbours such as
one recently held at St. George's, Grenada.
145.

As we welcome the representatives of Saint

153. We are an island people. We are constricted in
size, population and resources. Yet the peace of the
world, perhaps poignantly for us, is something that we
cannot allow to be compromised. Peace is vital to our
economic existence, to our development, to our pro~ress. Without it our people remain destitute and the
mdependence of action, thought and existence which
we have so recently achieved becomes meaningless and

_ _ _. . . . . . . . . . .

14

1

............

~

...._ _ .

General Assembly-Thirly-l'ourlh Session-Plenury Meetings

unproductive to our people. Therefore my delegation
and the people it represents are consciously and vitally
concerned with maintaining peace in this world.
154. Recent national disasters, fundamentally of the
type that has recently affected our sister island of
Dominica, remind us how vulnerable an island State
can become to the vicissitudes of nature. This reality
heightens our conviction and realization that we must
endeavour totally to utilize the twin facets of progress
and development, namely co-ordination and cooperation, in our dealings with the international
community.
155. Because we are constricted by the confines of
our existence as an island State, we are more specifically aware of our very serious and real development
problems. We are equally aware how easily our progress can be reduced, or even negated, by factors
beyond our control, be they natural or otherwise. It is
precisely because of our island constraints that my
delegation feels that the island-State concept and what
it entails must be projected and pursued, particularly in
meetings of the Committees and the plenary Assembly,
in order to ensure that due notice is taken and adequate
consideration given to our extreme vulnerability.

156. The uniqueness of our situation is underlined by
the fact of our geographical identification, which negates to a large extent the normal and accepted prerequisites for development. In short, we constitute a
very special case.
157. My Government recognizes that a great deal can
be achieved through regional arrangements, and that
through these arrangements the larger international
community can be enabled to appreciate the myriad of
nuances that beset the smallest of OUl' sovereign entities. That is why we relentlessly pursue our association: with the Caribbean Community [CARICGM], the
Organization of American States [GAS] and the nonaligned groupings. We endeavour to support to the
fullest extent the process offurthering regional integration in our area, and to that end we seek through our
subregional arrangements to bring every detail of our
own circumstances to the forefront in OUl' group deliberations in order that they may obtain a proper hearing
and be supported and transcribed within the larger
framework of the OAS system. If the problems of our
region are to be solved they must first be identifiable
and identified at the base and then they must be seen in
the perspective of raising the standards ofour collective
peoples in order to attain a decent and comparable
standard of living.

158. That is why, even within our CARICOM confines we seek to analyse, consider and project the specific considerations that pertain to the Eastern Caribbean grouping. We seek therein an identification of the
peoples and the Governments, and, in turn, the acceptance of that approach in the larger CARICOM arena.
159. On our first appearance here, it is only natural
that we should give some brief indication of the principles of our J?0licy that will enable us to play a role in the
general deliberations of this Assembly.
160. The corner-stone of my Government's policy is
that we hold sacred our readiness to enjoy the best

relations with all States of the international community
and that we appreciate fuJJy any measure of assistance
and partnership they may wish to provide, singly or
collectively, in cementing the bonds offriendship between our people and theirs. The only exception to this
declaration is our general and committed position that
we will not contemplate or entertain any relationship,
association or connexion with any country that
practices racism or apartheid in the broadest interpretation of these words. We particularly single out South
Africa and the present Zimbabwe regime in this context. We are following the deliberations currently taking place in London on the question of Zimbabwe and
the legitimate aspirations of its peoples, and we have
taken note of the position of the front-line States in this
re~ard. We sincerely hope that the conference will meet
With success.
161. We will support every legitimate, regionally recognized liberation movement in realizing its quest for
justice. We deprecate interference of any kind in the
affairs of any State or any threat made to the inviolability and ten'itorial sovereignty of a State. We note that
there is still an impasse on the question of Belize. We
observe and welcome the efforts being made by
Barbados and the United Kingdom to overcome this
situation. We pledge our unflinching support for Belize's immediate and uncompromised independence.
162. We also welcome the United Kingdom's resolve
to !Vant independence to the remainder of the West
Indles Associated States, and we look forward to
welcoming St. Vincent to membership in the United
Nations this year. We are celiain that the United Kingdom is doing its utmost to enable Antigua, Se KittsNevis-Anguilla and Montserrat to realize their preferred choice of expressing their self-detelmination in the
shOliest possible time. We will continue to hold a
watching brief in this regard.

163. It is necessary for me to emphasize my Government's earnest hope and wishes for the achievement of
a new international economic order. We have followed
intently the deliberations of UNCTAD, the NorthSouth dialogue, and the other various forums that have
sought to make some progress in that direction. These
meetings are not only important but vital to us. We shall
endeavour, to the extent our resources permit and in
the context of our priorities, to participate fully and to
lend all assistance towards a proper outcome to these
deliberations.
164. In this context, we shall work toward a redefinition of, and a recommitment and rededication to,
principles with a view to making a renewed effort to
achieve a new international economic order. The time
has come for some introspection and for a review of
where we are going, at what cost, and for what reasons.
165. EvelY State is preoccupied with the energy question. Island States are in a partiCUlarly difficult position,
since our every communication and contact with the
international community relates to the high price of
energy. We will follow and participate in the considerations leading to the energy conference in 1980, but we
wish to state categorically today that it is our contention
that every region has a responsibility and an obligation
tQ work towards a comprehensive and generally acceptable answer to the energy problem.

166. T

every n
much 01
solution
workabl
proach
temptinl
result il
destrucl
far cant

167. T

concerr
associal
sources

exploit~

lion oft

I
I
f

,

~
ional coJ1'l~Ulltl}
ure of a..,S':~
rovide ~i~J C1
. 'd" .ef:t'P tt·
of fnen.
7(j!hl
excepllO~.I .
tted posit!Of1~
any relalJ~'i
ly counlt'Y
·~t~
roadest l'"
~
single o-tJ'. .
5ime in [fitS t\Jl.
ns currel1dy til:
)f ZimbalY"""et an:
[es, and ~e Mw.
line StatC!irt J,tI~
ference

was -

e, regioJUJ.i1) l't';
zing its qlJlC:)! £1
f any kirid - ~
:to the in"" ~,w,
tte. We f'tIOIc tl1
On of BeJi..t.c. ~:,
being maOe .~"
to overcotUC !ll;
support fOf Jk

.indepe~

ingdom's f'e~\:
lder of the We;
look fOrNard"
lip in the lZMt
the United ~
lltigua, SI. Kili
tlize their prd'

erminat~on jil1l~

ltinuc to

~L

lsize my (;t()\ffi
e achievetll<:~ii
Ve have folkl'llll
'AD, the N~
forums tha,a ~,:
direction. TM
tal to us. \\"e ~
.es permit andl
ipate fullii ~.
Jutcome It,,'l I.M
owarda~
rededica~ I:
enewed tff'(.~ I

: order. T'he t:il!l
I for a re: ..,.ie''l\)
orwhalre~~

','.-

~

~

.. l

.~.

:"(.

'''',. •

,.

• ..... ".

~:.

•

:

1$1 meeting-IS September 1979

166. The solution must have foundations rooted in
every regional arrangement. The focus must be very
much on acceptable regional solutions to the problem,
solutions that can be translated into one internationally
workable formula. To neglect and minimize this approach will leave us at a serious disadvantage in attempting to preserve our domestic stJ1lctures. This will
result in a further weakening-and perhaps in the
destructio~f the international peace we have thus
far contrived to maintain and develop.

167. The fact of being an island State increases our
concern with the law of the sea. Our tradition entails an
association with the sea for communication, for resources, and for food. The riches of the sea-bed and its
exploitation particularly concern us. So does the question of the conservation offishing grounds, of pollution,

....

• • • ..

15

and of indiscriminate fishing methods. We look forward
to a successful conclusion of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea, and at the appropriate time we will indicate our policy on specific
issues.

168. The people and Government of Saint Lucia wish
to convey their specific gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, to the Chainnarl and
members of the Security Council and to all representatives of Member States for their respective roles in
making this occasion possible. We pledge our total and
whole-hearted support and co-operation in the United
Nations quest for continuing peace in the international
community.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

•

•
