S/PV.7046

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7046th meeting

Monday, 21 October 2013, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2013/569)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2013/581)

13-52291 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1352291*

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 am

I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region (S/2013/569)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2013/581)

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kobler,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Entebbe.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mrs. Robinson,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Addis Ababa.
begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/569, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2013/581, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
2/14

Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): It is an honour and
pleasure to address the Council today to introduce the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/581)
following the adoption of resolution 2098 (2013). Before
I address the most recent developments concerning the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I wish to
underscore my regret for being unable to be physically
present in the Council Chamber today, due to the
ongoing talks in Kampala. I am addressing members
from Kampala itself, having participated as an observer
in the talks into the small hours of this morning.
(spoke in English)

The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stablization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

21/10/2013

As the Council has just returned from its visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, let me focus on
three topics:the Kampala talks, the mission Priorities
and the endeavours to align the Mission structures to
the revised Mission priorities.
At the request of the Facilitator, the Ugandan
Minister of Defence, Mr. Kiyonga, I joined the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes
Region, Mary Robinson, as well as the other special
envoys to the region, in the Kampala talks on 16 October.
The previous week, I had extensive exchanges with
the Congolese Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond
Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, as well as other members
of the Congolese Government, asking them to attend
the talks in person. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo ultimately decided to send
a high-level delegation, including Foreign Minister
Tshibanda.
The five envoys, led by Special Envoy Mary
Robinson, closely followed the proceedings of the
negotiations and tried to instil the negotiating parties
with a sense of urgency, given the unique momentum.
Intensive talks on the margin of the plenary sessions
ensued. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
will give more detail.
The objective was to bring the Kampala talks to
an end by concluding a comprehensive agreement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) to end the rebellion,
disband the M-23 and allow its transformation into a
political movement within the limits of the Constitution
and the laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As of this morning, that objective has not been reached.
13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I do not want to conceal my slight disappointment
that, after four long days and nights of negotiations
until the early morning hours of today, it has not been
possible to reach a comprehensive deal despite the
pressure of the five envoys as supportive observers.
A joint meeting with President Paul Kagame on
18 October, the constructive attitude of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and Francophony, Raymond Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo, and the incessant and patient efforts
of the Facilitator, the Minister of Defence of Uganda,
Mr. Crispus Kiyonga.
My main role in the process was to pledge the
support of MONUSCO to any agreement, as such an
accord would enable MONUSCO to fulfil its mandate
to disband the M-23, to the protect civilians and to
bring peace to eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Thus, in outlining any potential MONUSCO
role in the implementation of the Kampala accord, I was
fully aware of the dilemma — one also raised by some
Council members — not to be complicit to an imperfect
agreement or to be part of the negotiations, on the one
hand, while contributing to effectively shape the details
of the agreement on a potential role for MONUSCO is
concerned, on the other. In so doing, I was guided by
the following principles.
First, only a fair agreement — not necessarily a
perfect one — would form the basis for a sustainable
solution and effective implementation. MONUSCO
could not support an agreement at any price.
Secondly, as the implementation of the agreement
would fully depend on the goodwill of the parties, the
overall responsibility had to remain with the negotiating
parties.
Thirdly, MONUSCO’s role would mainly consist of
providing support to the four phases of the transitional
security arrangements and the subsequent disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. Thus, despite
not being party to the agreement, MONUSCO needed
to agree on the practicalities mentioned in the annex
relating to the transitional security arrangements, as
the negotiating parties could not decide on those issues
without MONUSCO’s consent.
Fourthly, the arrangements detailing MONUSCO’s
potential role would remain subject to the approval of
the Security Council.

S/PV.7046

Those guiding principles were communicated to
both the Facilitator and the negotiating parties. With
the permission of Council members, we will continue
in that line during the ongoing negotiations here in
Kampala.
Last night ended with the Facilitator initialling
eight out of the 11 paragraphs with the consent of the
parties. Considerable progress has been made on the
question of amnesty for M-23 combatants and on the
security arrangements. I believe that the remaining
gaps can be bridged; that is why it is all the more
regrettable that this unique opportunity could not be
seized upon to reach an overall deal. I urge the M-23 in
particular to use the dynamics of the past two days to
move more constructively and without delay to resolve
the remaining issues in the next few days in order to
restore peace to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I welcome the assurances of Minister for
Foreign Affairs Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains committed to concluding the remaining
points of the agreement, and that he will be ready to
return to the negotiation table once the negotiation
teams clarify the outstanding issues.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
my heartfelt gratitude to and admiration for the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, and of
his Minister of Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, who
left no stone unturned to make minds and intractable
positions converge. In addition, I would like to thank
in particular Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and the Francophony, Raymond Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo, for his exceptional patience and
unrelenting perseverance in leading the Congolese
delegation towards the peaceful settlement of the
conflict with an illegal armed group.
Regardless of the progress in Kampala, the situation
on the ground remains volatile and of great concern. In
recent days, we have observed a considerable military
build-up on both sides of the front line. At the same
time, the M-23 has fired twice at unarmed United
Nations helicopters, and has strengthened its offensive
positions threatening United Nations peacekeepers.
The Special Envoy and myself have condemned those
military attacks on peacekeepers in the strongest terms.
However, for the sake of safeguarding an environment
conducive to a negotiated settlement, I decided not to
retaliate, in accordance with the rules of engagement.

13-522913/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In an attempt to verify allegations that the M-23
is reinforcing its military positions in areas along the
borders with Rwanda and Uganda, I have requested the
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism to investigate a
suspected ammunition site in M-23-controlled territory.
The inspection was supposed to take place on 18 October.
The military command of the M-23, however, prevented
the inspectors from fulfilling their duties. The mission
had to be aborted. It is not acceptable that the M-23
defies the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, which established the confidence-building
mechanism to reduce potential regional tensions.
Information gathered indicates that the M-23 has also
strengthened its front line in the South, near Goma.
Another issue of deep concern is the persistent
reports on the return of several hundred refugee families
that have crossed the border into M-23-controlled
areas, where apparently they are being constrained to
settle. Reportedly, young men among the returnees
are being recruited for training for the M-23. Since
the emergence of the M-23, the Mission has sheltered
almost 200 surrendering combatants, who consistently
and credibly claim to have been recruited on Ugandan
but mainly on Rwandan territory. I have myself spoken
to those who stay in our disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration camp in Goma.
That and other kinds of external involvement must
stop. Those developments also underscore the urgent
need to seek a viable political solution. That process
has to be accompanied by regional confidence-building
measures. I have gone to Kigali several times in the past
two months since taking up office, and I will continue to
do so. It is important to strengthen confidence-building
between MONUSCO and the Government of Rwanda.
I feel encouraged that it is the view of the Government
of Rwanda that peace and stability and the restoration
of State authority in the east is better for the whole
region than continued military confrontation, human
suffering and illegal exploitation of mineral resources.
I would be grateful if the Security Council could lend
its full support in bringing the Kampala negotiations
to a swift end and foster a sustainable and irreversible
solution to the conflict.
Those situations are never easy, and the
implementation of the agreement depends on the
political will of the parties. But the M-23 is not our
only concern. The Forces dėmocratiques de libėration
du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic Forces, and
many Mayi-Mayi groups that terrorize the population

4/14

21/10/2013

in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo also
continue to represent a significant threat to civilians
and to State authority.
Let me take this opportunity to brief the Council on
the priorities of the Mission as I see them after my first
two months in office.
Resolution 2098 (2013) has given the Mission
new tools and a renewed determination with which to
address those challenges and grasp those opportunities.
The Mission’s organizational structure and core
priorities must be better aligned with the mandate. The
Mission priority must also be aligned to support all
six national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Finally, the military and
civilian structure in the eastern region also have to be
aligned. As we move to redefine priorities, reconfigure
the Mission’s structure and align the resources
needed, the Mission’s senior management and I have
identified the following drivers of change to guide our
decision-making and planning.
First, the restoration of State authority and the
protection of civilians are central to all our efforts to
stabilize eastern Congo. MONUSCO aims to help the
Congolese State reclaim control of areas that armed
groups and criminal networks have dominated, in some
cases for decades. Building on integrated planning, a
new concept is being developed to assist the Government
in restoring State authority and stabilizing areas cleared
of armed groups, known as islands of stability.
Second, the military posture of the force must
adapt to the new realities. The entire MONUSCO force
must be deployed and operate with a proactive stance to
deter violence and ensure the security of civilians, the
core of our mandate. The operations in support of the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) assault on Kibati were a clear illustration of
the approach of “one mandate, one mission, one force”.
We engage all our forces and assets with the
objectives of protecting civilians and maintaining
military pressure in support of reviving the political
process. We aim to increase the force’s flexibility
so that it is able to deter violence by intervening in
advance rather than reacting after events. We are
also improving information gathering in support of
proactive operations. Force Commander General Dos
Santos Cruz, Deputy Force Commander General Jean

13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Baillaud, who is with me today, and I are in contact
with the troop-contributing countries on this threat.
Third, security sector reform (SSR), and especially
army reform, are critical to the Mission, in terms of
the implementation of both resolution 2098 (2013)
and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The benchmarks for security sector reform are clearly
defined. Our approach must be practical. At the national
level, the Mission is focused on providing good offices,
coordination and technical advice. That way, we hope to
advance the implementation of policies, build political
will, and support dialogue between the Government and
partners. During a meeting chaired by Deputy Special
Representative Soumaré on 11 October, international
partners agreed to coordinate their SSR initiatives
via an expanded SSR coordination working group, to
be chaired by the Congolese Minister of Defence and
supported by MONUSCO. That coordination structure
should considerably accelerate defence and security
reforms.
Fourth, the Mission will focus on the benchmarking
of the national commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The Government is
committed to an agenda of progress. In that context,
MONUSCO supports the national oversight mechanism
for the Framework. Stakeholders discussed and
validated benchmarks for three of the commitments:
security sector reform, consolidation of State authority
and decentralization. On 19 September, President
Kabila convened for the first time the steering
committee of the national oversight mechanism to
approve that set of benchmarks. We encourage the
Government to integrate those approved benchmarks
into national planning processes so as to ensure
coherence and full implementation. Despite a boycott
by part of the opposition, the Security Council presence
at the closing ceremony of the national consultations on
5 October emphasized strong support for the process.
Both security sector reform and oversight over the
national benchmarks are among the priorities of my
Deputy, Mr. Moustapha Soumaré.
Fifth, the priority is to stimulate regional
cooperation. As trust is still low, MONUSCO
is working in close partnership with the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Ms. Mary Robinson, to encourage regional
confidence-building. Rebuilding relations of trust
among neighbouring States is paramount to hope for
a prosperous and stable Great Lakes region. Military

S/PV.7046

action and strengthening civilian capacities in the east
will have to be supported by countries of the Great
Lakes region.
Sixth, with the appointment of Abbot Apollinaire
Malu Malu Muholongu at the helm of the Independent
National Electoral Commission, the electoral process
seems to be revived. Consultations with donor partners
and national stakeholders have gradually brought
forward a consensus on a road map and subsequent
sequencing of the different elections. That road map
will pave the way for the adoption of an electoral
calendar and the development of a realistic budget,
which together would be a clear signal that the electoral
process is again on track.
The seventh priority is zero tolerance for sexual
terrorism and child recruitment. Over the past year,
there have been some notable advances in the fight
against impunity for sexual crimes, including cases
involving some undisciplined elements of the national
security forces. Between May and June, Congolese
judicial authorities issued 13 arrest warrants against
senior M-23 officers and political leaders, for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and participation in
an insurrection.
However, a number of important cases remain
stalled. One example is the case of serious human
rights violations, including mass rape, committed
by FARDC soldiers in November 2012 in and around
Minova as the Congolese Army retreated from the front
lines. I recognize the steps taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the military justice investigation has so far registered
limited progress. My colleagues and I are in regular
contact with the Government to provide regular updates.
With regard to child recruitment, in the coming
days I will publicly present our report on child soldiers
of the major armed groups, namely, Mayi-Mayi
Nyatura, the FDLR and the M-23. Almost 1,000 cases
of child recruitment were documented between January
2012 and August 2013. The human misery behind those
statistics remains staggering, moving and unacceptable
under any circumstances. One child soldier is one child
soldier too many.
To better respond to the priorities that I have
outlined, I intend to restructure the Mission along the
following three lines.
First, we need a strengthened operational presence
in the east. For greater impact in stabilization activities,

13-522915/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Council will observe in the near future a major shift
of our civilian staff in the east to deploy them closer to
communities affected by conflict, in tandem with the
force’s deployment. The Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Abdallah Wafy, has already
been permanently reassigned to Goma as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
operations in the east. The operational substantive units
still based in Kinshasa will follow him.
Secondly, we are reconsidering MONUSCO’s
presence in the areas not affected by armed conflict.
MONUSCO’s presence will be reduced. The weight of
the country team should be increased.
Thirdly, the future of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo belongs to the
country team. The cooperation of the Government in
the road map for handing over responsibilities to the
country team is of the utmost importance. To that
effect, the establishment of a joint intersectoral task
force will closely guide and monitor planning and
implementing commitments. Those ideas will become
part of the mission concept in the next few weeks and
will be submitted to Headquarters.
Before concluding, allow me to express my deepest
appreciation and respect to the Governments of all
troop-contributing countries of MONUSCO for their
commitment to peace, stability and the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I met
courageous men and women among the troops. I thank
the stroop-contributing States for their endeavours.
I would also like to present my sincerest
condolences to the families of Major Mshindo Hatibu
Shaaban and Private Munga Hugo Barnabas, members
of the Tanzanian contingent who lost their lives during
the fighting at Kibati.
(spoke in French)
As the Council will have understood, the Mission
is in full swing. It is evolving at this very moment in
order to fully respond to the mandate the Council has
entrusted to it. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank my predecessor, Roger Meese, for his immense
knowledge and for having entrusted to me a well
organized Mission. I am particularly impressed by and
filled with admiration for the Congolese staff, who are
often exposed to security risks greater than what we
experience at the international level. Both men and
women in all sections are working with impressive

6/14

21/10/2013

devotion and expertise. They are the backbone and the
very flesh and blood of the Mission.
The Mission is evolving. It is adapting to the situation
and to the new vision of the international community.
For that change to take place effectively, I am happy
to be able to rely on the support of the Council and
all our partners. I would particularly like to thank all
the Permanent Representatives of the Council for their
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Their determination and energy are important evidence
of the commitment of the international community for
sustainable peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Robinson.
Ms. Robinson: I am pleased for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council today. First, allow me to thank
the Council for its continuous and valuable support to
Special Representative of the Secretary — General
Martin Kobler and myself in the implementation of our
respective mandates. The Council’s recent visit to the
region, on which the Council received a report today,
has sent a strong signal about the Council’s commitment
to supporting the long-term stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
Furthermore, the Council’s participation at the second
meeting of the regional oversight mechanism held on
23 September in New York, preceded by the 25 July
high-level ministerial meeting on the Great Lakes
region, presided over by Secretary of State John Kerry,
are concrete demonstrations of that strong commitment.
My briefing will focus on the following
elements: the Kampala dialogue, the progress on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, as well as the priorities and next steps in
the implementation of my mandate.
I arrived here in Addis Ababa after spending four
days in Kampala, where I led a team of envoys comprising
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Martin
Kobler, United States Special Envoy Russ Feingold,
African Union Special Representative Boubacar Diarra
and European Union Senior Coordinator Koen Vervaeke.
We arrived in Kampala in the wake of alarming reports
of a military build-up around Goma and the areas
held by rebels of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
That situation highlighted the urgency of reaching a
political agreement to prevent a return to hostilities
and the escalation of tensions in the region. It was also

13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

important to conclude the Kampala dialogue in order to
shift the focus towards addressing the deeper and longterm causes of instability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region, including through the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. At my request, the group of envoys agreed
to travel to Uganda to collectively provide assistance in
the conclusion of an agreement among the parties.
We arrived in Kampala on 16 October. Prior to
that, I obtained the assurance of Foreign Minister
Raymond Tshibanda that he would lead the Democratic
Republic of the Congo delegation, which was crucial
for significant progress to be achieved. He also assured
me that the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was willing to negotiate an agreement with
the M-23 in good faith, which was evident during the
recent dialogue process.
In Kampala, we met with the parties several
times on the margins of the talks, to listen to their
views and concerns as well as to encourage them to
adopt a constructive approach. From the outset, we
made it clear that we were not there to convene the
process but to assist the facilitator and the parties to
reach a negotiated solution to the process, which had
been ongoing for far too long. We stressed the need to
adopt of a principled approach towards the issues of
amnesty and integration. As Special Representative
of the Secretary — General Kobler has explained,
we concurred with the parties on the crucial role
that the Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
will have in facilitating the implementation of the
security arrangements and in building confidence
among the parties on the ground, especially during the
disengagement, cantonment and disarmament process
of the M-23. We were also clear that any role envisaged
for MONUSCO in the peace agreement should remain
within the Mission’s mandate and should receive the
consent of the Security Council.
The facilitator of the talks, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga,
Minister of Defence of Uganda, very much welcomed
our presence. I think we provided him with morale
and a certain backup that up to then he had in a way
been lacking in his approach as a one-man facilitator.
On the margins of the process, we worked closely
with him, advised him and reinforced his facilitation
efforts, including in reducing the gaps among the
parties, keeping the talks alive and the parties present
at the negotiation table, and in generating regional and

S/PV.7046

international pressure on the parties in support of the
conclusion of an agreement.
While in Kampala, I spoke by telephone to
President Kabila, who demonstrated goodwill and
agreed to extend the presence of his Foreign Minister
and Head of Intelligence for several additional days in
order to increase the chances of reaching an agreement.
Furthermore, on 18 October, the group of envoys went
to Kigali to speak with President Kagame and provide
him with an update on the ongoing negotiations. We
wanted to seek his support for a quick conclusion of an
agreement.
We told President Kagami that the Kampala process
had run its course and that it was now the moment to
conclude in order to provide the required attention
to the broader challenges at hand in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. We emphasized
that a peace agreement would enable the Force
Intervention Brigade to deal with other armed groups
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and
the Allied Democratic Forces.
President Kagame saw the presence of the envoys
in Kampala as very useful. The President believed
that while the M-23 was not Rwanda’s issue, a peace
agreement between the rebel group and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would benefit
the entire region. He further assured the envoys of
his support and commitment to encouraging a peace
agreement. He issued a public statement and privately
communicated his strong support for an agreement.
Let me now provide a brief overview of the
negotiations and content of the draft agreement, to
supplement that provided by Special Representative
Kobler.
Despite a very difficult resumption on 17 October,
the talks gained some speed on 18 October. On
19 October, the parties reached consensus on eight
out of the 11 articles of the draft agreement under
discussion. These are the release of prisoners; the
end of M-23 as a rebel movement, and the possibility
to re-establish itself as a political party; the return
and resettlement of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs); the question of the properties that were
extorted and looted during the M-23’s brief occupation
of Goma in November 2012; the establishment of a
national reconciliation commission; governance and
socioeconomic reforms; the implementation of the

13-522917/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

provisions of the March 23 2009 peace agreement that
were partially or not implemented and are still relevant;
and the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms of the Kampala Agreement.
However, regrettably the parties found it difficult
to agree on certain contentious and difficult issues that
had remained problematic throughout the talks, namely,
the amnesty, disarmament and integration of M-23.
As will be evident to experts, several articles
discussed and agreed upon in Kampala are similar — at
least in spirit — to those of the 2009 peace agreement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government and the Congrès national pour la défense
du peuple rebel movement. In this regard, one should
also be mindful that this process carries with it some
of the limits of the 2002 peace agreement, particularly
with some provisions that could be easily interpreted as
general commitments.
However, I am also glad to stress that the parties and
the Facilitator considered positively our strong message
that the Kampala Agreement should be based on certain
principles, including sustainability, accountability and,
related to that, there should be no amnesty for those
who have committed crimes against humanity or war
crimes. I believe it is the big picture that we should have
in mind, including the fact that continuous direct and
indirect pressure on the M-23, and the determination
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
and the Facilitator to draw lessons from the 2009 peace
process, resulted in a principled approach in negotiating
the provisions on amnesty and integration.
In the draft under consideration, amnesty and
integration would be granted to
“all members of M-23 for all acts of war and
insurrection covering the period from 1 April
2012 to the date of signature of the Agreement,
except for individuals indicted for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide or
gross violations of human rights, including sexual
violence, recruitment of child soldiers”.
Moreover, amnesty would “be subject to each
beneficiary making a written personal commitment to
permanently refrain from acts of rebellion”. It would
also “be automatically withdrawn in the event of the
commitment being violated”.
The integration or reintegration process of
commissioned officers, non-commissioned officers and

8/14

21/10/2013

troops of M-23 would take place on a case-by-case basis
and be subject to conditions. Key among them would
be to “swear allegiance to the state and Constitution of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo” and to “commit
themselves, individually and unconditionally, to serve
in any part of the country”.
While the parties have made progress in the
negotiations, they have not been able to reach an
agreement on the issues of amnesty, integration,
disengagement and security arrangements. They have
agreed to reconvene soon in order to overcome their
differences. It will be critical that the parties and the
Facilitator remain committed to a swift conclusion of
the Kampala process. The E-Team will continue to be
helpful with the view to achieving that goal. I join with
Special Representative Kobler in also looking for the
support of the Security Council for the finalization of
the Kampala Dialogue.
The conclusion of the Kampala Dialogue will pave
the way for the end of the conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I know that some Council
members have expressed doubts about the usefulness
and legitimacy of these talks. I am also aware that some
have expressed concerns about United Nations support
to this process, for fear of being associated with a bad
deal. I fully understand and share these concerns.
But as we all know, there is no perfect agreement.
There is also no certainty that even with the best
possible peace agreement there will be lasting peace
and stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes Region. Sustainable peace,
development and justice in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region require the political will of all
stakeholders, including the international community, to
make it happen.
For the first time in years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the region and the international
community have decided to tackle the root causes of
instability in this part of the word in a genuine and
concerted manner. The Kampala talks are not meant
to address all the root causes of the conflict, but if an
agreement is reached it would have immediate value in
ending the fighting and the unacceptable sufferings of
the people in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and it would pave the way for progress in our collective
work to fully implement the commitments made under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I would like to pay tribute to the Facilitator,
Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, for his tireless efforts in support of
the process. I would also acknowledge the commitment
shown by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and in particular by Foreign Affairs
Minister Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, who
has demonstrated a great sense of leadership and
patience throughout the process, despite other pressing
commitments. Obviously, the progress in the talks
would have not been possible without the good faith
and political will of Presidents Kabila, Museveni and
Kagame, who have on several occasions assured me of
their determination to do whatever would be possible for
peace in the region. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Kobler, my Special Adviser Modibo
Touré, who are still in Kampala on my behalf, for the
support that they have provided to the peace talks.
As much as we all look forward to the rapid
conclusion of the Kampala talks, we should also
acknowledge that peace should not be achieved to
the detriment of justice. As I have said privately and
publicly, and as former High Commissioner for Human
Rights, that we should no longer tolerate impunity in the
Great Lakes Region. There should be accountability,
not only for the M-23 members, but also for those of
other armed groups found responsible for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide, or gross
violations of human rights, including sexual violence
and the recruitment of child soldiers. The minimum we
can do for the memory of the millions of victims and
their families is to ensure that a fair judicial process is
carried out against the perpetrators of those atrocities
at the appropriate time.
Let me now say a few words on the progress in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
regards to the National Dialogue, which was opened by
President Joseph Kabila on 7 September and ended on
5 October, a list of recommendations was developed,
focusing on the six reform areas outlined by the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. President
Kabila presented these recommendations to the two
houses of the Parliament on 15 October, and Special
Representative Kobler has provided the Council
with further details on this issue. I feel increasingly
conscious that we will have to somehow match progress
at the national level with progress at the regional level.
The two are connected under the Peace, Security and

S/PV.7046

Cooperation Framework, and we will have to ensure
that we make progress at both levels.
At the regional level, the Chiefs of Defence Staff of
the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) met in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, on 7 October
and agreed on the modalities to strengthen existing
security mechanisms, in particular the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism (EJVM) as decided at the last
extraordinary Summit in Kampala on 5 September. The
EJVM will now include MONUSCO and the African
Union representatives, which will significantly help
overcome some of its current shortcomings. Although
a divergence of opinions exists among Member States,
the security mechanisms of the ICGLR remain useful
confidence-building tools and are essential to advancing
collective security efforts in the region. The support of
the international community to the strengthening of
those mechanisms is crucial, and I count on its support
in that regard.
I would like now to highlight some of the next steps
and outline the priority areas that I plan to focus on
in the next few months in the context of the need to
address a mediated high-level political process.
At the regional level, the regional oversight
mechanism has tasked its technical support committee
with preparing a plan of action for the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
committee will meet on 24 and 25 October in Nairobi
to discuss, and hopefully finalize, a plan of action. I
will personally go to Nairobi and take part in those
discussions in the coming days.
Furthermore, it is my intention to propose modalities
for the monitoring and evaluation of the plan of action
upon finalization by the technical support committee.
In addition, I will follow up with the committee on the
establishment of a multi-donor trust fund to support
the implementation of regional priority programmes
and projects as requested by the regional oversight
mechanism at the meeting in New York in September.
The establishment of the trust fund will be essential for
the implementation of the Framework.
I also plan to engage the international partners
in the coming weeks, with the view to finalizing the
international benchmarks. In that regard, I would
also like to discuss areas of collaboration between
international partners and the member States of the
Great Lakes region.

13-522919/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

21/10/2013

I intend to use the platform offered by the upcoming
joint summit between the ICGLR and the Southern
African Development Community to promote the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. I also plan to use existing political
platforms, such as the Oyo quadripartite process and
the tripartite framework between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa and Angola to
support peace initiatives in the region.

commitments at the national level where I shall, in
close coordination with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kobler, engage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government on critical followup actions to the recently concluded national dialogue,
including monitoring the progress on national structural
reforms and decentralization, electoral reform and the
calendar for local elections, security sector reform and
the national economic development agenda.

I would like to conclude by outlining elements of
the road map that should guide my engagement for the
period of 2013 to 2014.

At the regional level — and I emphasize again that
both levels must be seen to be making progress and
are inexplicably linked under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework — I shall work with regional
Governments in order to achieve progress in enhanced
cooperation on justice matters, joint security strategy,
strengthening the EJVM and other security mechanisms,
joint measures to curb the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, and regional economic integration.

In line with my mandate and with resolution 2098
(2013), the road map seeks to, first, address the immediate
obstacles that could hamper the implementation of the
Framework; secondly, encourage measures to address
the root causes of instability in the region; and, thirdly,
continue advocacy to promote confidence-building and
regional cooperation, as defined by the Framework. The
sequenced political approach I propose is articulated
around six priorities.
The first priority is to continue supporting the
Kampala dialogue. Since July, I have been supporting
the facilitator, in close collaboration with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and now
with the other envoys. We will continue to encourage a
quick conclusion of the process and continue to assist
in that regard.
Secondly, in order to rebuild trust and confidence
between countries in the region, I will continue to
work with Governments, particularly the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, to bolster the
ongoing peace process with the inclusion of active
participation by civil society and international partners.
I also plan to use my good offices and those of my fellow
envoys to consolidate relations between the countries
by identifying potential flash points and proactively
initiating mitigating measures, in close coordination
with regional leaders and other key high-level officials.
Thirdly, in support of the development of a plan
of action for the implementation of the commitments
under the Peace and Security Council Framework,
my office will continue to support the technical
support committee and will develop modalities for
an independent monitoring and evaluation capacity.
In that regard, our attention will focus on a set of
priority benchmarks against which I will assess the
implementation of the key commitments. Those include

10/14

Fourthly, I shall work with regional Governments
and partners on comprehensive measures to enable
the reduction and strength of armed groups operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including through the development of a regional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiative.
Fifthly, I shall continue to provide leadership and
coordinate the international community’s support for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework agenda, which is a shared responsibility
that requires unity of purpose and actions. To that end,
I will encourage greater collaboration among partners
to ensure a convergence of agendas. I will also support
efforts, which I believe are incredibly important, to
create immediate peace dividends on the ground.
Furthermore, it is my intention to seek the support
of bilateral and multilateral donors to fund specific
activities, such as those included in the action plan for
the implementation of the Framework. In addition, I will
work closely with other guarantors of the Framework
to ensure that the Great Lakes region remains high on
their agenda. I will also continue to pay close attention
and support to women and youth interests in the region.
We are working on a platform for communication and
funding for women’s groups in the region, following the
Bujumbura meeting of women’s groups in July, and I
hope to share that very shortly with members of the
Security Council.
Sixthly, I will work in close collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for Refugees and the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and countries in the region to
support efforts to alleviate the conditions of refugees
and internally displaced people, by ensuring that the
conditions for voluntary return are in place.
Those ongoing and anticipated actions are based on
the assumption that national, regional and international
actors will remain willing and focused on implementing
the commitments made under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. In that connection again,
I look very much to the Council’s support and to the
engagement that the it has shown, which needs to
continue.
The momentum that was generated by the signing
of the agreement must be sustained by all means. That
will require the determination of all concerned. Let me
conclude by warmly thanking the Council again for its
very visible, very tangible and, I believe, very needed
support.
The President: I thank Ms. Robinson for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession of your
country, Azerbaijan, to the presidency of the Security
Council, and to express the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over
the Council during the month of October. Allow me
also to pay tribute to the work of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Australia, and to express
our gratitude for the outstanding way in which he led
the work of the Security Council in the past month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, firstly, for the efforts that he
continues to make towards resolving the Congolese
crisis in particular and, beyond that, the problems
affecting the Great Lakes region in general. I also thank
him for his personal involvement in the negotiations
on, and the conclusion and implementation of, the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, an
agreement reached in Addis Ababa on 24 February.
Finally, I thank him for the publication of two
important reports (S/2013/569 and S/2013/581) dealing

S/PV.7046

with the situation in my country, which the Council is
considering today.
At the outset, I would like to extend to the Council
the apologies of His Excellency Mr. Gata Mavita wa
Lufuta, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United
Nations, who wished to personally participate in
this morning’s meeting but who, unfortunately, had
to remain in our country as a result of developments
there since his most recent trip there accompanying the
Security Council’s delegation.
The Security Council has just heard two briefings
on the reports of the Secretary-General. Allow me to
fully acknowledge the thoroughness of those reports
and to express to him my full appreciation.
I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson,
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Martin Kobler, as well as to express my delegation’s
gratitude to them for both their valuable statements and
their tireless efforts to restore peace to the eastern part
of my country.
The publication of the two reports by the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/2013/569 and S/2013/581) and our meeting
today demonstrate our shared desire to reaffirm our
humanity and jointly evaluate, without complacency, the
progress achieved in implementing the commitments
undertaken under the important Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region of 24 February 2013. Those
commitments were undertaken with a view to ending
the tragic situation of the people living in the eastern
part of my country and identifying the challenges that
remain for lasting peace to be established and for the
region to be able to devote its energy and intelligence
to the key issues of fighting poverty and improving the
population’s living conditions.
To that end, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls on the States in the region
to implement in good faith the commitments they freely
entered into. Among other things, we call on them for a
change in policy, behaviour and attitude. According to
the Framework, they are committed to not interfering
in the internal affairs of other neighbouring States,
not condoning or providing assistance or support to

13-5229111/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

any armed groups and respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring States.
I would like to reiterate, on behalf of the Congolese
people, our thanks to the Secretary-General and the
entire international community. I would also like to
assure you, Sir, of the unshakeable determination of
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, to work
for lasting peace in the Great Lakes region, together
with you, the Secretary-General, his peers from the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and all our other bilateral and
multilateral partners. Indeed, without peace, no progress
will be possible. Without minimal safety for persons
and property, any development remains hypothetical.
We cannot today evaluate the impact that
repeated armed conflict in the eastern provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has had on my
country’s development. I would remind the Council
that, as a result of those conflicts, my country has lost
more than 6 million lives over two decades of war, with
thousands of women raped and abused; millions of
children unable to go to school because they have had
to constantly move to escape the war; approximately
3 million people displaced and forced to abandon
their fields, livestock and small-scale economic and
subsistence activities; thousands of men, women and
children infected through no fault of their own with
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections
or suffering from malaria; and many deaths due to
childbirth in inappropriate circumstances. That list is
not exhaustive.
We welcome the progress noted at the regional
level in the implementation of commitments taken
under the Framework, including the adoption of
regional monitoring criteria and progress indicators by
the Heads of State gathered under the auspices of the
“11+4” mechanism, on 23 September, on the margins of
the general debate of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session. However, the security and humanitarian
situation in the region remains fragile and is cause for
concern.
As we meet today, the populations of Goma and
Rutshuru still live in fear and uncertainty due to the
sporadic attacks that the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), with the help of its well-known external allies,
has been launching against the defensive positions

12/14

21/10/2013

of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) since the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013) and despite its provisions. Moreover, the
volatile security situation extends into many areas
of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo due to the activities of several other negative
forces, both domestic and foreign, including the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), the Ugandan Allied
Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda, Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki and others,
the Nduma Defence for Congo and others, as so well
described in the two reports of the Secretary-General.
That is why no country in the Great Lakes region
has campaigned more vigorously than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the establishment of an
intervention brigade tasked with neutralizing all
negative forces, including the FDLR, and endowed with
an offensive mandate. It is for the same reason that the
Democratic Republic of Congo, whose population, more
than any other, suffers under the presence of foreign
armed groups on its territory, would never collaborate
in any way with such forces, whose hallmark is killing,
rape, abuse of all kinds and the looting of public and
private property and natural resources.
The deployment on the ground of the Intervention
Brigade established by resolution 2098 (2013) is an
undeniable step forward, and we fully appreciate it. We
would like for all States concerned to trust the Brigade
to carry out the responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Security Council, namely, monitoring and securing
the border between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours to the east on the one hand;
and, on the other hand, neutralizing all negative forces
without exception. The strengthening of the Brigade’s
operational capacities, including through the provision
of additional attack helicopters and unarmed drone
systems, is a step that should be taken in all urgency and
that would allow the Brigade both to fulfil its mission
to protect civilians and fight all armed groups as well
as to defend itself against the recurring provocations by
the M-23.
That said, we recognize that military force alone
cannot solve the complex equation needed to achieve
peace in the Great Lakes region of Africa, where the
causes of conflicts and disputes overlap and are both
internal and external in nature. Given the extremism
espoused by all of the negative forces, force is necessary
but not sufficient. To be sustainable, the solution must

13-52291

21/10/2013

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

also come about through a sincere dialogue among
all the internal and external parties and a good faith
implementation of the conclusions reached among
them.
Therefore, for its part, the Congolese Government
remains committed to the Kampala talks, thus putting
to the test the good faith of the M-23 leaders and all
stakeholders involved. Unfortunately — and we have
all witnessed this — it has not been possible to date
to achieve a just and balanced agreement. In the same
vein, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo encourages other States in the region to
follow its lead in this respect.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is shouldering
its share of responsibility so that peace and harmony
can be rapidly restored to the region. My country has
taken on that task, with significant progress having
been made noted in the conflict area in terms of
reducing the threats to the security of the population
and improving the Government’s management of that
security. As evidence of that, following the signing of
the Framework, the Congolese Government undertook
to fulfil its obligations, which, incidentally, correspond
to tasks that it identified 11 years ago and which it treats
as important and priority tasks.
In that context, we have both accelerated and better
systematized our reform of the security sector. The
housecleaning of the structures and staff in the army,
security services and police; the recruitment within the
defence forces of young Congolese from every province
of the country; the reopening of military training
academies; and the training of special forces and
support units with assistance from bilateral partners
and with the primary objective of operationalizing the
Rapid Reaction Force are all concrete actions recently
undertaken to make the defence of our territory more
effective to better ensure State authority.
In order to strengthen that authority, in particular in
the east of my country, starting with Goma, the national
police, public authorities and courts have been provided
on a priority basis with capacity-building programmes,
allowing them to progressively regain control of the
situation.
The decentralization provided for in the Constitution
has come a step closer to becoming reality, in particular
through the adoption of the necessary implementation
laws and the organization of a number of meetings
devoted to managing decentralized territories.

S/PV.7046

The reforms to the management of public
finances — which have been under way for several
years and whose positive results are evident in a stable
macroeconomic framework — continue to be pursued
and have just been successfully complemented by the
launching of measures to improve the business climate
and a national certification mechanism for mineral
resources, which will strengthen economic growth.
Furthermore, the Government recently completed
an in-depth review of the poverty reduction strategy
paper with the aim of ensuring more inclusive growth,
partially overcoming the delay in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and strengthening
the credibility and effectiveness of the fight against
poverty.
The Grand Inga project is based on the same
rationale. It should be noted that the project should
eventually lead to the production of sufficient electricity
to satisfy the needs of nearly half of Africa — clean
and renewable energy, in line with the requirements of
sustainable development.
At the political level, reconciliation and
strengthened national unity are more urgent than ever
before. The coordination of the Framework’s Expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism has been entrusted to
a competent and experienced team from the political
opposition.
The Independent National Electoral Commission
has been completely reformed. A new team that is
more focused and inclusive has assumed the leadership
of that important institution in support of democracy.
The priority of the new Commission is to prepare
the upcoming electoral process to ensure optimal
conditions for local, municipal, provincial, senatorial
and provincial gubernatorial elections.
Moreover, national consultations initiated by
the President took place from September to October
to seek ways and means of strengthening national
cohesion among all the Congolese people, with a
view to strengthened efforts in dealing with all of the
challenges facing the Congolese nation. That forum,
which was intended to be inclusive, brought together,
in addition to the national and provincial political
institutions, political parties of all stripes and all facets
of civil society, including significant representation by
women and youth. Its preparation and leadership were
entrusted to a presidium made up of the President of
the Senate, a well-known leader of the opposition who

13-5229113/14

S/PV.7046

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

was elected to that post as such, and the President of the
National Assembly, who is a member of the presidential
majority.
I cannot conclude without thanking all of those who
have committed themselves to working side by side
with us for lasting peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I am thinking particularly of SADC,
ICGLR, the African Union and the European Union for
their essential roles in maintaining peace in our region.
I am thinking of all of the United Nations Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives to ensure that peace returns to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We pay tribute
to their memory.
I also thank the United Nations and, in particular,
the members of the Council, who have recently been
willing to travel to my country to improve their
understanding of the profound realities of the war in
my country. We are most grateful to them, as they
are participating in the work towards the post-2015
development agenda, which would respond to the calls
for a better world for all.
The Secretary-General’s reports before the Council
today propose a gamut of measures to be undertaken at

21/10/2013

national and regional levels. They indicate conclusions
and recommendations that my country endorses.
In conclusion, when the members of the Council
soon retire to the consultations room to discuss the
issues, they should bear in mind the suffering of the
Congolese people, the children separated from their
families, the women who daily suffer from rape. It must
not be forgotten that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, more than in any other conflict zone in the
world, thousands of individuals continue to fall victim
to war every day.
With more than 6 million killed in two decades
of successive wars, the massacres of civilians in my
country represent one of the grimmest pictures facing
humankind since the end of the Second World War. It is
high time to find the ways and means to enable millions
of individuals not only to stay alive, but to live with
dignity in a world where peace, security and justice
represent reality for one and for all.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

14/14

13-52291
