S/PV.9264

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9264th meeting

Monday, 20 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05231 (E)
*2305231*

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to resume dialogue leading to sustainable peace and
the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: According to its official news agency,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducted
what it described as an intercontinental ballistic
missile launching drill on 18 February. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea announced that the
ballistic missile, which it designated as Hwasong-15,
flew a distance of 989 kilometres and to an altitude
of 5,768.5 kilometres. It impacted in the sea within
Japan’s exclusive economic zone. The last time that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducted
a test of a missile of intercontinental range was on
18 November 2022. Earlier today, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducted what it termed a
launching drill involving two “tactical nuclear” rockets.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea again did
not issue airspace or maritime safety notifications.
Unannounced launches represent a serious risk to
international civil aviation and maritime traffic.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
launch of yet another ballistic missile of intercontinental
range by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as
well as its subsequent launches using ballistic missile
technology. The Secretary-General reiterates his calls
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
immediately desist from taking any further provocative
actions, to fully comply with its international obligations
under all relevant Security Council resolutions and
2/15

20/02/2023

As per our earlier briefings to the Security Council,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
implement its five-year military plan unveiled during
the eighth Party Congress, in January 2021. That plan
provided for the development of new solid propellant
intercontinental-range ballistic missiles, multiple
warheads, better warheads, tactical nuclear weapons, a
military reconnaissance satellite, new unmanned aerial
systems, a 15,000 kilometre-range intercontinental
ballistic missile and a hypersonic gliding flight warhead.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has repeatedly warned of so-called counteractions
to military exercises carried out in the region. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Foreign
Ministry described the Security Council meeting of
16 February on non-proliferation and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as a “hostile act that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is bound to
take due counteraction”. Today’s meeting reaffirms
that the Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. This meeting also provides an opportunity
to discuss practical measures for achieving a peaceful,
comprehensive, diplomatic and political solution to the
situation on the Korean peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
greatly increased its missile launch activities in 2022,
including approximately 70 launches using ballistic
missile technology. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea characterized those launches as involving
systems with nuclear-weapon roles, including so-called
tactical nuclear weapons. Most of the systems it tested
are capable of striking targets on the Korean peninsula.
It also tested systems capable of reaching parts of
North America on two occasions last year and again on
18 February.
In September 2022, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea approved a new law that set out
conditions in which it could use nuclear weapons,
including pre-emptively in certain circumstances.
A seventh nuclear test would be a flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and undermine the
international norm against nuclear testing. The
Secretary-General remains firmly committed to
achieving the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Looking ahead, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has clearly stated its intention to continue
to pursue its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes in violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. During the sixth plenary meeting
of the eighth Central Committee of the Workers’ Party
of Korea, held from 26 to 31 December 2022, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea reiterated that
it would exponentially increase its nuclear weapons
arsenal, develop another intercontinental ballistic
missile system and launch its first military satellite.
During the military parade to commemorate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the Korean
People’s Army on 8 February, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea unveiled a new apparently solidfuelled intercontinental ballistic missile and at least 11
intercontinental ballistic missiles of previously known
Hwasong-17 type.
The situation on the Korean peninsula continues
to head in the wrong direction. Tensions continue to
increase due to the negative action-reaction cycle,
with no off-ramps in sight. The Secretary-General
deeply regrets the divisions that have prevented the
international community from acting on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as well as on other threats
to peace and security around the world. The Korean
peninsula must be an area for cooperation.
As previously stated, as the Council considers its
options, there are several practical steps that could
reduce tensions.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
needs to take immediate steps to resume dialogue
leading to sustainable peace and the complete and
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
That should include the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea refraining from carrying out further launches
using ballistic missile technology or nuclear tests.
Secondly, a comprehensive approach is needed.
We welcome the Security Council’s commitment to
a peaceful, comprehensive, diplomatic and political
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula,
as well as the importance the Council has placed on
working to reduce tensions. Diplomacy, not isolation, is
the only way forward.
Thirdly, it is critical to avoid an unintended
escalation. Communication channels must be
enhanced, particularly military to military. Avoiding

S/PV.9264

confrontational rhetoric will help to lower political
tensions and create space to explore diplomatic avenues.
Separately, I wish to highlight once more our
concerns regarding the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations is ready to assist the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in addressing medical and other
humanitarian needs. To allow for a timely and effective
response, we reiterate our call for the unimpeded
entry of international staff, including the Resident
Coordinator, and humanitarian supplies.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the unity of the
Security Council on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is essential to ease tensions and overcome the
diplomatic impasse. As the Secretary-General has said,
while the primary responsibility for international peace
and security rests with the Council, the Secretariat is its
partner in that effort.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing.
The United States condemns, in the strongest
possible terms, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s 18 and 19 February launches of three
ballistic missiles, which included the country’s ninth
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch since
the start of 2022. The ICBM was launched at a lofted
trajectory and landed in the Sea of Japan. That sustained
pattern of flagrant violations by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of Council of resolutions
explicitly prohibiting ballistic missile launches by the
country demands a response from the Council.
There is no dancing around a simple fact: the
resolutions that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is violating are ours; they came directly from the
Council. We are charged with maintaining international
peace and security. But in the face of unprecedented
launches last year, two permanent members forced us
into silence in spite of countless Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea violations. On this vital matter,
silence leads to irrelevance. I call on the Council to
condemn these ballistic missile launches. I call on the
Council to urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply with its international obligations under

23-052313/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

all relevant Security Council resolutions. And I call
on the Council to encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage in meaningful dialogue.
At a minimum, those three points should be agreeable
to everyone in the Chamber. After all, we are tasked
with preserving international peace and security, and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated
ballistic missile launches, coupled with its threatening
rhetoric, is undermining just that. Our repeated failures
to respond emboldens the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to conduct these destabilizing and escalatory
launches without fear of consequences.
But this failure is not collective; it is specific. It
stems from the two veto-wielding members of the
Council who have repeatedly shut down all efforts at
a meaningful response. They have blocked all of our
attempts at robust responses, instead condemning any
move by the Council to stand behind its own resolutions
as provocative. As a result, the Council is failing to do
its job.
It may be tempting to see this weekend’s launch as a
rebuke from Pyongyang, a warning to the Council that we
ought to remain silent about its openly declared campaign
to build an arsenal of nuclear weapons. The reality is that
the last time the Council sent a strong, united message
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was in
December of 2017, more than five years ago. When we did
that, Pyongyang refrained from any major provocations
for nearly five years. It also engaged in dialogue.
The reality is that those who shield the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea from the consequences of
its escalatory missile tests put the Asian region and
the entire world at risk of conflict. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea showcased several ballistic
missile systems, the development of which is banned
by Security Council resolutions, at its recent military
parade. Pyongyang paraded short-range ballistic
missiles, Hwasong-17 ICBMs and an ostensibly new
solid-propellant ICBM system. The regime also touted
its tactical nuclear units. If two Member States continue
to prevent the Council from carrying out its mandate,
we should expect the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to continue to defiantly develop and test these
weapons. The Council’s lack of action is worse than
shameful; it is dangerous.
Now is the time for the Security Council to work
together towards a peaceful solution on the Korean
peninsula, before it is too late. The Council must
speak with one voice, as we did in 2017, to condemn
4/15

20/02/2023

this escalating pattern of reckless provocation. To that
end, the United States will again propose a presidential
statement. We call on each member of the Council
to join us in strongly condemning the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful activities and
encouraging the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to engage in diplomacy.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing today.
As we know, on Saturday the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea launched an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) without warning. That is the
third ballistic missile test this year and the ninth test
of an ICBM since 2022. It reached an altitude of just
under 6,000 kilometres, landing in Japan’s exclusive
economic zone. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea quickly followed that test with two additional
short-range ballistic missiles today.
We condemn, in the strongest terms, this serious
breach of Security Council resolutions, which clearly
threaten international peace and security. We continue
to call upon Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
cease its illegal activity and to engage meaningfully
with the offers of dialogue that the United States and
the Republic of Korea have repeatedly made.
We believe the Security Council has an important
role to play in addressing the international community’s
very serious concerns about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear weapons and in supporting
peaceful dialogue. That is despite the disagreements
within the Council that have left us unable to respond
to the worsening situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in recent years. It is the Council’s
responsibility to act when the resolutions adopted by
it are ignored. We therefore welcome the United States
proposal for a presidential statement on this issue and
look forward to working with other Council members
on the text.
We know that, while new missiles are displayed on
the streets of Pyongyang, the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to face a serious
humanitarian crisis. The investment in each of those
missiles could feed many thousands of people. Despite
that, there is international aid available. We urge the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to provide access for United Nations staff, to
allow aid to flow freely into the country and to invest
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

in food and medicine for its people, rather than in its
illegal weapons programme.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his updated information.
Here we are again at square one, a few days after our
last meeting on Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
At that meeting, some of our colleagues maintained
that there was no reason to meet. The regime in North
Korea, faithful to its notorious reputation, proved
them wrong.
We strongly condemn the recent intercontinental
ballistic missile launches. They seriously threaten
regional and global peace and security. The fact that
they flew into Japan’s exclusive economic zone shows
the lack of respect the regime has for anything, be
it international law, rules, civilian aviation or its
neighbours. By doing so, the regime is telling the world
that it has decided to continue the same policies and
actions of last year, to continue with provocations
and escalatory measures and to develop an even more
capable tactical weapons of mass destruction system
and a more sophisticated ballistic missile programme.
What else would we need to agree and conclude
that Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a clear,
present and growing threat to the Korean peninsula
and beyond? That its policies are a serious concern
for the international community? That they must stop
and be met with the right proportional response? The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has resolved
to remain on the totally opposite path the Security
Council has called for and is rushing on in its reckless
behaviour. It is clear the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has chosen its attitude; it is now up to the
Council to demonstrate if it has chosen its own.
We are left with the choice of acting, as we should,
or continuing to tolerate a regime stubborn in its open
defiance of agreed rules and in blatant disregard of
Security Council resolutions. The dictator in North
Korea must be laughing and proudly parading before
his generals given that, even after more than 70
launches — all provocations — the Security Council
has been muted and has not been able to utter a single
word to condemn its reckless and dangerous policies.
We have said it before, and we reiterate it: the silence
of the Council to the growing illicit activities is wrong,
dead wrong. Because the Council has the responsibility
act; not doing so erodes its credibility. Because the
silence of the Council is counterproductive, as it only

S/PV.9264

emboldens the regime in its attitude. And because
remaining silent means shielding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and encouraging similar
rogue behaviours elsewhere in the world. It is high
time, past due time, that we came out clear on this issue.
We also deplore the fact that the regime continues
to starve its people by devoting its meagre resources
to armaments, not to help millions of citizens in need,
not to help the economy and support development. We
also deplore the illegal cyberactivities the regime has
continuously deployed, stealing money from anywhere
they can to support its weapons of mass destruction
programme. Today such illegal and unacceptable
activities would have been under sanctions, had there
not been a veto to save them.
The regime continues to reject talks and negotiations
on the full, transparent and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. But we must not stop our
efforts and continue to call on Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to engage into an unconditional
and meaningful dialogue, for their benefit and their
future. One day they will understand how wrong they
have been in their paranoia, how much time they have
unnecessarily lost and how backwards they will find
themselves when the open-air prison comes to an end.
Because, like every other of its kind, it will end.
Meanwhile, it is time for the Council to do its job,
come together, be united and speak with one voice.
Any other attitude does a disservice to the Council, its
role and peace and security on the Korean peninsula
and beyond. It also does a great disservice to North
Korea and its people because it keeps them isolated and
harbouring false illusions.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his informative briefing. I also thank the President
for convening this meeting at the request of several
countries, including Ecuador, in the context of the new
launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which reached
Japan’s exclusive economic zone.
In that regard, I wish to express Ecuador’s strongest
condemnation of this new launch, which defies the
provisions of the Security Council and threatens
regional and international peace and security by
exacerbating tensions in a complex context.
We are alarmed by the signals from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that it could be continuing

23-052315/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

this year the same trend as last year, in which it
launched at least 73 ballistic missiles, eight of which
were intercontinental.
By its resolution 2397 (2017), adopted unanimously,
the Council expressed its determination to take
significant new measures in response to any new launch
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
Council must therefore take urgent action at all levels
to compel the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to halt its nuclear and ballistic missile programme in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
I wish to recall that in the light of paragraph 1 of
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council acts on behalf of the members of the
Organization. I also recall that in the General Assembly
meeting held on 8 June 2022 (see A/76/PV.77), the
Member States, including Ecuador, sent a strong and
targeted message of concern to the Council regarding
the launching of ballistic missiles by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and encouraging the
Council to prevent the lack of response to continued
violations of international law and its own provisions
from affecting its credibility.
In conclusion, I reiterate Ecuador’s call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
fully with all its obligations under international law
and Security Council resolutions and to put an end to
its launches, which undermine the disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
France condemns in the strongest terms the
resumption of ballistic missile launches by North Korea.
The launch of a Hwasong-15 intercontinental missile
towards Japan’s exclusive economic zone last Saturday,
as well as the firing of two new ballistic missiles
yesterday, constitute an unacceptable provocation.
Never before has North Korea fired so many
missiles, including intercontinental missiles. Never
before has North Korea developed such powerful and
sophisticated delivery systems, as demonstrated by
the 8 February parade. Never has it displayed such
aggressive nuclear rhetoric. Relentless enrichment
activities continue at Yongbyon, and a seventh nuclear
test is reportedly being prepared at Punggye-ri. Let us
face it. The current escalation is dangerous. And the
question is very simple: can the Council accept North
Korea becoming a nuclear State?
6/15

20/02/2023

Every launch defies the authority of the Council
and violates its resolutions. Nevertheless, we remain
disunited and silent. This has become the norm on this
issue. I say this in all seriousness: our division provides
North Korea with a cover to continue its provocations.
Not acting today means risking the destabilization of
the peninsula, allowing violations of international
law to take place and running the risk of proliferation
becoming commonplace and resurfacing tomorrow in
other regions of the world.
In the face of such provocations, it is imperative
to enforce the sanctions regime. It is unacceptable that
North Korea continues to steal industrial secrets and
hundreds of millions of euros in cryptocurrencies to
strengthen its weapons programmes at the expense
of its own people. We urge all Member States to
fully implement all international sanctions adopted
unanimously by the Council.
France calls for a resumption of political dialogue
without preconditions. All actors in the region must
be involved. North Korea must take up the proposals
made in that regard and return to the negotiating
table in good faith. Our goal remains unchanged: the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of North Korea.
These new provocations require a united and
resolute response from the international community.
France will not resign itself to North Korea becoming a
nuclear Power. It will spare no effort to ensure that the
Council responds to this unprecedented escalation.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Mr. Khaled Khiari
for his briefing.
I must begin by expressing my greatest regret that
North Korea once again launched an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) followed by two ballistic
missiles yesterday. The ICBM impacted in the Japanese
exclusive economic zone, just 200 kilometres from
Hokkaido, as was the case on 18 November and 24 March
last year. As has been reported by the media, ordinary
Japanese citizens could visibly see the ballistic missile
falling from the sky. I assume we can all imagine how
terrifying it must have been for people to see a missile
flying towards them. It also endangered vessels in our
exclusive economic zone and exposed aircraft in the
surrounding area to great risk. These actions are totally
unacceptable and violate multiple Security Council
resolutions. Japan strongly condemns these dangerous
and outrageous actions.
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

All of us are aware that, unfortunately, North Korea
publicly articulated its intention to continue its unlawful
development of weapons of mass destruction, including
the mass production of tactical nuclear weapons and an
exponential increase of its nuclear arsenal, meant to be
delivered via ICBMs. All such measures are violations
of Council resolutions. These are the core problems we
are supposed to deliver on.
Let me make three important points.
First, the Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. No
one can disagree that firing an ICBM into the exclusive
economic zone of another State is a matter of peace and
security. It is not a matter of self-defence, as claimed by
Pyongyang, but an act of intimidation and threatening
by force.
Secondly, the Council should be responsible for
observing its own established rule — the Security
Council resolutions. Silence should not be the answer for
violations of resolutions. The Security Council should
fulfil its own obligations and should not undermine
its credibility.
Thirdly and lastly, North Korea says that the
Council should stop discussing this issue. It clearly
stated that it has never recognized such resolutions of
the United Nations and will also not accept them in
the future. Some also argue that the discussion in the
Security Council provokes North Korea, and hence
we should remain silent. That is wrong. If we remain
silent for fear of further provocations, that will only
encourage rule breakers to write the playbook as they
like. We need to think about what we can and should
do. Is that not the task of this organ mandated by the
Charter of the United Nations? We are meeting here
because it is our duty to deal with the clear threat to
international peace and security.
Let us make it crystal clear: responsible Council
members should not reward such unlawful and
unjustifiable attempts to force the Council to stop
doing its job. Through the discussions that we had
recently, an increasing number of Council members
shared concerns over what was happening and wished
to take proactive action. It is time that the Council be
united and firmly stand against the challenge to its
credibility. In that regard, Japan strongly supports the
draft presidential statement proposed by the United
States as a step forward, while standing ready to work
with colleagues to adopt more robust actions.

S/PV.9264

In conclusion, Japan once again urges North
Korea to immediately and fully comply with all the
relevant resolutions, engage in diplomacy towards
denuclearization and accept the repeated offers of
dialogue by the countries concerned. Let us, the
Council members, continue to fulfil our responsibility.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has been closely following the development of the
situation on the Korean peninsula, in which tensions
and confrontation have once again become prominent
and may escalate in an upward spiral. That does
not serve the interests of any party, and neither is it
something that China wishes to see. We call on all
the relevant parties to remain calm, exercise restraint
and stay committed to the right direction of a political
settlement, while refraining from any action that may
further exacerbate tensions and lead to miscalculation.
To facilitate progress on the Korean peninsula
issue, we should first focus on the crux of the issue,
which is in essence about security. In the absence of
a transition from the armistice to a peace mechanism
on the peninsula, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has long faced tremendous security pressure,
challenges and threats. Since the beginning of this year,
the United States and its allies have stepped up joint
military activities around the peninsula, targeting the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
States announced an increase in the level and scale of
joint military exercises and the timely deployment of
strategic assets. The NATO Secretary-General paid a
high-profile visit to countries of the region, where he
promoted a Cold War mentality and bloc confrontation.
Such moves are highly provocative to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and exacerbate its sense of
insecurity. The countries concerned should seriously
reflect on the relevant causality.
China calls on all the relevant parties to squarely face
up to the history and reality of the peninsula issue, draw
lessons from past experiences and remain committed to
the right direction of dialogue and consultation. Under
the current circumstances, it is all the more vital to
prevent a vicious cycle of repeated escalation, thereby
driving the situation out of control. Certain countries
in particular should give up geopolitical manipulation,
stop the clamour about war and refrain from resorting
to pressure at every turn through military exercises
and sanctions, among other things, in order to create
a conducive environment for a political settlement.
Since the United States has repeatedly expressed its

23-052317/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

willingness to unconditionally engage in dialogue with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it should
take concrete steps to start and maintain the dialogue.
The Security Council should play a constructive role
in promoting a breakthrough on the peninsula issue The
current situation on the peninsula is extremely sensitive
and complex. The actions and discussions of the Council
should help to ease the situation and enhance mutual
trust. The words and deeds of Council members should
help to maintain stability, prevent chaos on the peninsula
and help to restart dialogue and negotiation and resolve
the real humanitarian and livelihood difficulties faced
by the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Regrettably, in the absence of consensus, some
Council members have recently continued to push for
meetings on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nuclear issue and to call for more sanctions and pressure
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That
neither embodies the constructive role of easing the
situation nor brings about new ideas that are conducive
to resolving the problem. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also issued a statement expressing
its strong dissatisfaction.
I wish to reiterate that Council resolutions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are an
integral part of the process, which not only provides
for sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea but also clearly calls for resuming the sixparty talks, preventing an escalation of tensions and
promoting solutions through political means and
dialogue. Implementing sanctions and promoting the
resumption of talks are both ways to implement the
Council’s resolutions. One should not outweigh or
replace the other, and neither can they be implemented
only selectively. The unilateral pursuit of sanctions and
their constant increase will only ultimately result in a
dead end.
In order to facilitate a way out of the predicament
regarding the Korean peninsula issue, all parties
should adopt the right approach to non-proliferation
and avoid double standards. The United States and the
relevant countries push for discussing the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea nuclear issue, while
shirking their responsibilities by blatantly engaging in
nuclear cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, which
contravenes the purposes and objectives of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and will lead
to the proliferation of weapon-grade nuclear materials.
They even seek to replicate nuclear sharing in the
8/15

20/02/2023

region. Are such acts not blatant nuclear proliferation?
Such a selective approach to non-proliferation will
not only cause a serious and negative impact on the
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula, but will
also significantly increase the risk of triggering
military confrontation in the region, which merits our
extreme caution.
The peninsula is right on China’s doorstep. China
sincerely hopes for stability, rather than chaos, on the
peninsula, and does not wish to see the peninsula issue
descend into a vicious cycle. On this issue, China has
always stood for maintaining peace and stability on the
peninsula, achieving its denuclearization and resolving
the issue through dialogue and consultation. China calls
on all parties to exercise reason and restraint, take into
account the overall situation of maintaining regional
peace and stability, follow the dual-track approach and
phased and parallel principle and jointly promote the
political settlement of the peninsula issue. China stands
ready to play a constructive role in that regard.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing. I
welcome the participation of the Republic of Korea in
today’s meeting.
Two nights ago, the people of Hokkaido were put
in grave danger by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s most recent illegal intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) launch, which landed off the coast of
Japan. Since then, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has launched another two ballistic missiles.
The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns those
most recent provocations by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
In less than one year, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has launched more than 70 ballistic
missiles, including nine ICBMs, each in violation of
Security Council resolutions. We stand in solidarity
with the people of Japan and the people of the Republic
of Korea, who continue to suffer first hand the fear
and anxiety resulting from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s reckless and provocative behaviour.
The Democratic People’s Republic’s behaviour is not
only threatening its neighbours; its reverberations are
global, as proliferation anywhere undermines stability
and security everywhere.
As the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to choose the path of escalation, the
United Arab Emirates remains deeply concerned at
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the heightened nuclear rhetoric in the region and the
prospects that the Democratic People’s Republic will
conduct a seventh nuclear test. We call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to respect international law,
abide by the Security Council’s resolutions and return
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The Security Council must protect the global
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture from
further erosion and flagrant violations. Despite the
establishment of a stringent sanctions regime by the
Council, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has continued in its development of an illegal nuclearweapons programme. The Council must address and
combat the new methods by which the Democratic
People’s Republic finances its illegal weapons
programme and must simultaneously ensure that all
Member States faithfully implement the sanctions
already in place.

S/PV.9264

Council resolutions. Ghana firmly deplores this present
launch and others before it, and we reiterate our call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
with its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, refrain from further ballistic-missile
launches, and return to compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
We must acknowledge that the instruments of
influence that the Council has wielded thus far,
particularly its existing resolutions on the matter and
sanctions, have not been fully successful in stopping
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons
programme or eliciting its cooperation. As a Council,
we must recommit to our common objectives and
pursue the goals that are required to achieve concrete
progress in furtherance of peace and security on the
Korean peninsula.

Regrettably, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea continues to prioritize proliferation and
escalation over the urgent humanitarian needs of its
population. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic to
cooperate with the United Nations and the international
community to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation
affecting its people and allow humanitarian assistance
to resume within the country.

Throughout the Council’s meetings last year on this
issue, and particularly during the two consultations this
year, there have been very strong calls by all Council
members for the Security Council to be unified. We
must therefore aspire to respond to the developments
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a
different manner by modifying our approach and
unifying our efforts.

It is time for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to abandon its threats and intimidation and return
to dialogue, and it is time for the Security Council to
speak with one voice on this file. The status quo is both
dangerous and unsustainable.

In that regard, we reiterate our call for the Council,
together with all the relevant stakeholders, to begin the
important task of rebuilding trust, solidarity and mutual
respect through dialogue and diplomacy. We hope that
the paths of mediation, which the Secretary-General
also has at his disposal, will not be closed but rather
prioritized for the objective of the complete, general and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing to the
Security Council and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea.
We continue to be gravely concerned by the
escalating tensions on the Korean peninsula and
the wider North-East Asia region following the
latest launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM) and two short-range ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which it claims
was in response to the ongoing joint military exercises
between the United States and the Republic of Korea.
The current ICBM launch, which is reported to be
a Hwasong-15, comes on the heels of the launches last
year alone of another 8 ICBMs and at least 73 ballistic
missiles and missiles combining ballistic and guidance
technologies, all in clear violation of several Security

On sanctions, we note that they are an important
tool in the toolbox of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, sanctions are not an end in themselves. We
must address the unintended consequences of sanctions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a
swift and all-around manner. It is also important to
thoroughly evaluate the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea sanctions regime to better understand the gaps
that have enabled sanctions override and facilitation of
its nuclear-weapons programme without hindrance.
In conclusion, we must be reminded of the strength
that lies in the unity of the Council. Collectively, we
have been entrusted with a powerful mandate by the

23-052319/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

architects of the present order to act on behalf of all
Member States to maintain international peace and
security. This places a unique and heavy responsibility
on all members of the Security Council, not to only
reflect immediate national interests, but to work
collectively in the global interest. We urge that we
remain bound together by this objective as we pursue
the business of working collectively in the global
interest in furtherance of durable peace and security on
the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to join others in thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing. The launch of
intercontinental ballistic missiles and the remarks of
the Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the
Workers’ Party of Korea are particularly disturbing
developments. They add to the escalating rhetoric and
security tensions in the region.
The steady pace of North Korea’s nuclear
programme and its impact on non-proliferation
and international security are a threat to the entire
international community. The catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons must spur
us to redouble our efforts to promote non-proliferation,
disarmament and the maintenance of the nuclear taboo.
It is in the interest of all of humanity that nuclear
weapons are not used under any circumstances. We
welcome the reminder by the five permanent members
of the Security Council that a nuclear war cannot be
won and must never be fought, as Director Wang Yi
reaffirmed at the Munich Security Conference.
Switzerland has followed with concern the increase
in ballistic-missile launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in recent months, as the country
develops an increasing number of nuclear delivery
systems. It is important that the Council is meeting
today on this subject. We reject any characterization of
our meetings and deliberations as a provocation to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We cannot shirk
our duty and responsibilities in the following areas.
First, in the area of nuclear non-proliferation, it is
our collective duty to condemn the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ballistic-missile tests. These
launches are in violation of Security Council resolutions
and therefore of international law. Switzerland urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to implement
its obligations under the Council’s resolutions and take
concrete steps to abandon its nuclear weapons, ballistic
10/15

20/02/2023

missiles and related programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.
We call upon the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to rejoin the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a
non-nuclear-weapon State and to return to International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards as soon as possible.
We also call upon the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, as well as all other Annex 2 States, to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. We recall that while the obligations under the
relevant resolutions apply primarily to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, they also apply to all States
insofar as they are required to ensure and enforce
effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council sanctions.
Secondly, in the area of sanctions implementation,
Switzerland welcomes the Council’s increasing
attention to ensuring that humanitarian assistance
remains possible. The Council demonstrated its
commitment and unity two months ago by adopting
resolution 2664 (2022), which must be implemented.
The Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) plays an essential role in
facilitating humanitarian assistance through a system
of exemptions. This mechanism is now complemented
by a humanitarian exemption applicable to all
sanctions regimes. We therefore hope that once the
severe restrictions on international humanitarian
support related to the pandemic are lifted by the
Democratic People’s Republic, humanitarian support
can resume quickly.
Thirdly, the Council has a role to play in encouraging
dialogue, de-escalation and the quest for diplomatic
solutions. For now, its prolonged silence is not only a
cause for concern but is preventing progress on political
action on the Korean peninsula. However, as we have
all heard in various statements, the collective and
individual will to lead and support a dialogue with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea does exist. We
encourage the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to engage with the Council constructively. The call
for dialogue would be stronger if it were anchored in a
united position. Switzerland will support every effort
to achieve unity within the Council, which must stick
to its initial ambitions and shoulder its responsibilities.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing and for his tireless work on this file.
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Brazil condemns the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) on Saturday morning in the strongest
terms. Not only was the test in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, it posed unacceptable
risks to maritime and air safety due to the lack of
appropriate warnings. Moreover, any miscalculation
or malfunction could have had lethal consequences
for people in Japan, including the significant Brazilian
community in that country.
We are gravely concerned about the situation on the
peninsula. The security situation has been deteriorating
in the last few years, but the past year has been of
especial concern. We have witnessed a spiral of distrust
and a negative action-reaction cycle that have greatly
increased the risk of escalation and made every country
in the region less safe. It is no exaggeration to say that
this may be the period of greatest risk since 2017. Then
as now, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
rapidly advancing its missile programmes and testing
its first ICBMs. Then as now, shows of military force
and escalating rhetoric increased the risk of unforeseen
consequences and made all of us less safe.
How did we interrupt that negative cycle then? We
stepped back from the brink by acting on two fronts.
First, we showed Council unity. As has been pointed
out here before, we were able to adopt resolutions
reinforcing the Council’s authority and condemning
actions that violated international law. Secondly,
diplomatic efforts were driven and supported by several
countries. Brazil was a vocal supporter of that process,
and we believe that a new process of engagement is at
least as urgent now as it was at the end of 2017. Only by
acting on those two fronts were we able to defuse a cycle
of escalation and interrupt one of the most dangerous
periods in the history of this file. Once again, we must
be able to condemn unlawful action and to support
initiatives that could lead to a resolution of the issue. A
sustained, comprehensive political process remains the
best chance of delivering on our goal of a peninsula that
is peaceful, stable and free of nuclear weapons.
Starting a new process is never easy. All the parties
will have to exercise self-restraint, and restraint involves
costs. Yet the costs of not engaging are unacceptably
high and growing higher by the day. Doing nothing,
or believing that pressure alone can solve the problem,
means resigning ourselves to a spiral of nuclear
escalation with truly global implications. I urge all

S/PV.9264

members of the Council to find the political will that
can enable us to step back from the brink once again.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
Russia is opposed to any military activity that
threatens the security of the Korean peninsula and the
countries of North-East Asia. Our position on the matter
is well known. Time after time we have underscored the
need for all parties to show restraint and take practical
steps affirming their willingness to resume a dialogue
in line with the agreements already reached and the
commitments already made. Instead, however, we
are witnessing a sharp increase in military activity in
North-East Asia that will only aggravate the situation
and make the prospects for a political and diplomatic
settlement of the issues on the Korean peninsula more
distant. We have consistently supported a holistic
consideration of the issues and believe it is essential for
the Security Council to take every factor into account
in its discussions and consider the steps that the States
involved are taking if it is to have a complete picture of
what is happening.
Today, for example, we have heard a lot about the
missile launch, but there has been no attention to the
fact that on the eve of the launch the authorities of the
Republic of Korea and the United States announced the
holding of staff exercises, which according to media
reports included a visit to a port where American
nuclear-equipped submarines are stationed, as well as
the Freedom Shield field exercises, to be held in March.
The very day after the launch, the United States and the
Republic of Korea organized joint air drills involving
strategic bombers.
Those are just a few examples of the continuing
evolution of the situation in the subregion as a vicious
circle. Last week, in a new edition of its defence doctrine,
its so-called white paper, South Korea’s Ministry of
Defence termed the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea an “enemy”, with reference to a similar definition
for the Republic of Korea announced in December
2022 by the Central Committee of the Workers’ Party
of Korea. In response to the unprecedented and clearly
anti-Pyongyang military manoeuvres by the countries
of the region under the umbrella of the United States, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is conducting
missile tests. Any further ratcheting up of the spiral
of escalation will take us ever closer to a dangerous
point beyond which events could get completely out of
control. We deplore the fact that the United States and

23-0523111/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

its allies ignored the steps that Pyongyang undertook in
2018 and 2019 and whose implementation could have
brought about a major improvement in the situation in
the subregion. The position of a number of countries at
that time also prevented the Council from assisting the
process of detente. Pyongyang’s subsequent repeated
calls on Washington to cease its hostile activity and
refrain from ramping up the pressure were also ignored
and various opportunities for dialogue missed.
We have repeatedly pointed out the special
responsibility that Washington and its allies bear in the
current situation. The desire to force the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea into unilateral disarmament
with the help of sanctions and high pressure based
on the concept of so-called extended deterrence will
not yield the results that Washington is apparently
expecting. As a result, we are hearing only increasingly
belligerent rhetoric that is unfortunately being backed
up with real-world actions.
This is clearly a dead end that presents a direct
threat to international peace and security. We continue
to hope that the quest for a path to de-escalation
through negotiations will replace the current escalatory
trend. Once again, we want to remind the Council that
there can be no alternative to a multilateral political
and diplomatic process aimed at creating a framework
for peace in North-East Asia that takes account of the
legitimate concerns of all the States in the region and
aims to provide them with reliable security guarantees.
We are ready to work for that and would like to point out
once again that Russia and China have developed a plan
of action for a comprehensive settlement of the situation
on the Korean peninsula that involves concrete steps by
the States concerned in one direction or another.
I would like to also recall that Security Council
resolutions on the issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also sought a political and diplomatic
solution. We are disappointed by the fact that every
time those resolutions are mentioned, we hear only
about their sanctions-related aspects, even though it
has long been obvious that the policy of increasing
sanctions pressure on Pyongyang is futile in form
and inhumane in nature and must end. The negative
cumulative effects of international and unilateral
restrictive measures, which exacerbate the difficult
situation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
are growing exponentially.
Furthermore, the constant Security Council
meetings on issues related to North Korea that are held
12/15

20/02/2023

when some Council members are not ready to engage
in constructive dialogue and want only to criticize
the country do not help to resolve the situation. Those
countries show extreme selectivity with regard to what
the Council supposedly should or should not discuss.
The objective of defining the steps that the Security
Council could take to facilitate the search for a peaceful
solution through negotiations is totally absent from the
agenda of the meetings on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea those countries request. We call on
Security Council members to finally pool their efforts
to pursue that objective. We underscore once again that
the Russian-Chinese political and humanitarian draft
resolution (S/2022/431) is on the table, and its adoption
could help us attain that objective.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing. I
also wish to welcome the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Throughout history, humanitarian catastrophes
have compelled us to take action to prevent further
suffering, deaths and atrocities. Just to take one
example, the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the subsequent
banning of chemical and biological weapons was a
direct response to the use of poison gas in the First
World War. However, nuclear weapons are, for lack of
better words, in a league of their own when it comes
to their destructive power and the scale of human
suffering they can unleash.
We are all too familiar with the catastrophic and
long-lasting consequences for human health, the
environment, the climate and food production, as well
as the social upheavals those weapons can cause. We
are concerned by the growing number of States having
such weapons and the real threats that could arise one
day should non-State actors acquire such weapons of
mass destruction.
We live today in a world confronted with the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. An
estimated 1,800 nuclear warheads remain on high
alert status, ready to be launched, further amplifying
such risks. Moreover, persistent competition among
producers of nuclear weapons exacerbates the
precarious situation the world finds itself in, owing to
the number of crises we face currently.
Mozambique is deeply concerned by the escalation
of tensions on the Korean peninsula and in the northeastern region of Asia as a whole. We call for the
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

strengthening of collective actions to ensure the total
elimination, if not eradication, of nuclear weapons.
We owe it not only to ourselves and our own common
security, but also to future generations. What the world
needs right now is more political compromise, dialogue
and negotiations, not more weapons of mass destruction.
The maintenance of peace and security was
the main reason behind the creation of the United
Nations. Mozambique, as a peace-loving nation,
supports all initiatives under the aegis of the United
Nations conducive to reducing or eliminating nuclear
weapons globally.
Tensions on the Korean peninsula are the highest
they have been in years because of the shadow of the
threat of nuclear weapons. We face a real risk of conflict
on the peninsula if we do not take measures to prevent
a nuclear disaster.
We wish to recall that the year 2016 was a watershed
moment. The Security Council, including China and
Russia, unanimously adopted two resolutions, namely,
resolutions 2207 (2016) and 2321 (2016) in March
and November 2016, respectively. Those resolutions
imposed the most comprehensive sanctions on North
Korea in response to its fourth nuclear test. Therefore,
Mozambique calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to comply with those Security Council
resolutions. We also request other actors to refrain from
producing and potentially using nuclear weapons. In the
same vein, we call on the Security Council to engage
robustly in serious and credible dialogue aimed at the
de-escalation of tensions on the Korean peninsula.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Mozambique’s
firm commitment to pursuing all measures and policies
that defend and promote global peace and security.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his briefing, and I welcome the participation
in this meeting of the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea.

S/PV.9264

challenge to the Council’s ability to use all mechanisms
at its disposal to stem that large-scale threat to security
on the Korean peninsula and in the world.
Every Council meeting must be viewed as an
opportunity to consider viable and lasting consensus
solutions for de-escalation and to ease tensions on the
Korean peninsula. Common ground must be found
to bring the parties back to the negotiating table.
Maintaining the status quo means taking the risk that
a catastrophe or potentially disastrous consequence
could occur. No country should live under the constant
threat of a nuclear accident.
The parties must show their commitment to resume
negotiations in good faith. We remain convinced that
the solution can be found only through dialogue.
Pursuing the current logic would send the wrong
message, namely, that there is no alternative to sanctions,
and we know that is not the case. My country urges
countries in the region and those with any influence
whatsoever to do everything possible to renew the path
of dialogue and to remove the obstacles standing in the
way of a return to calm on the Korean peninsula.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his insightful and sobering briefing.
Malta is deeply concerned by the launch of
an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) on
18 February, which landed in the waters of Japan’s
exclusive economic zone and was even visible from the
Japanese mainland.
Malta is also deeply concerned by the further launch
of two short-range ballistic missiles early this morning.
Malta condemns those launches, which show that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
develop and improve its ballistic missile capabilities in
open defiance of Security Council resolutions.

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea carried
out a new intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
launch last Saturday and two medium-range ballistic
missile launches this morning. We condemn those
missile launches.

We recall that the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2397 (2017) in response to a single
ICBM launch. At the time, the Council rightly
considered that even one ICBM launch constitutes a
threat to regional and international peace and security,
and it had responded accordingly.

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
regular launches are a challenge to the Council’s role as
a guardian of international peace and security, but also a

That resolution states that we would take action to
place further restrictions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Regrettably, the Council was unable

23-0523113/15

S/PV.9264

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to respond to any of the ICBM launches in 2022 and
has instead been forced to remain silent. The Council’s
sanctions are also being violated by actors who are
supporting the illicit programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. That must stop.
Some have argued that Council action, and even
Council meetings, in response to such actions will provoke
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. However,
after resolution 2397 (2017) was adopted, no further ICBM
launches took place for almost five years. That shows the
effectiveness of the Council when it is united.
The most recent launch is part of an unprecedented
pattern of dangerous behaviour witnessed over
the past two years, undermining the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and global
non-proliferation efforts. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has continued to develop its ballistic
missiles and nuclear programme, with a record number
of ballistic missile launches in 2022. That is in parallel
to the adoption by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of a new doctrine setting out conditions in which
that country could use nuclear weapons, including
pre-emptively. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea announced that it would exponentially increase
its nuclear weapons arsenal, including tactical weapons,
and that it would also develop another ICBM system
and launch its first military satellite.
The situation is serious and indefensible, and our
inaction is only enabling that behaviour. The Council
cannot continue to stand by while its decisions,
encapsulated in several resolutions, and credibility are
consistently undermined. As members of the Security
Council, we have the duty and responsibility to discuss
and act on threats to international peace and security. It
is for these reasons that Malta supports the proposal of
the United States for a presidential statement.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to engage in meaningful dialogue towards
denuclearization and adhere to its obligations under
Security Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must completely, verifiably
and irreversibly abandon its nuclear and ballistic
missiles programme and return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and safeguards
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We also
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
14/15

20/02/2023

Malta remains concerned about the plight of the
population living in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, as acute humanitarian needs go unmet.
According to the World Food Programme, an estimated
10.7 million people are undernourished and require
emergency relief, yet humanitarian access remains
highly constrained. In that regard, Malta calls on the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to fully engage with the United Nations and the
international humanitarian system, as well as to enable
and facilitate humanitarian assistance to reach those in
greatest need across the country.
In conclusion, I reiterate that everyone at the table
has a shared objective — peace and the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. Our division and silence only
pushes that further out of reach. Now is the time to
speak with one voice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
urgent meeting of the Security Council. My gratitude
also goes to Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
terms, the continued ballistic missile launches of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
its intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch
on 18 February and two additional ballistic missile
launches on 20 February local time, which clearly
constitute flagrant violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has once again squandered its scarce resources
by dangerously blowing up ballistic missiles in the sky,
despite the severe and ongoing suffering of its own
people, as a result of the deteriorating situation with
regard to food shortages.
I need not remind the Council of the fact that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched
approximately 70 ballistic missiles in 2022 alone and
has continued its nuclear activities thus far, as rightly
pointed out by Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
and in the multiple reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. In fact, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea held a massive military parade on
8 February and showcased a new type of ICBM, as well
23-05231

20/02/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

as at least 11 Hwasong-17 ICBMs, which have a range
of approximately 15,000 kilometres. Yesterday, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea even threatened
to use the Pacific Ocean as its firing range. In that
sense, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
highly likely to engage in more provocations in the
near future.
It is appalling to witness how the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, a Member State of the United
Nations, can completely disregard its international
obligations by undermining and denouncing the
Council. Just after the Council’s meeting last Thursday,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea released a
statement that threatened additional actions in protest
against the Security Council itself. After the ICBM
launch, Kim Yo-jong issued a statement to justify
the country’s unlawful provocation by criticizing
the Council’s mandate operations. There is no other
Member State that blatantly mocks and menaces the
functioning of the Security Council and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea does.
Against that deeply disturbing backdrop, I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, it is deplorable that the Council has failed
to properly respond to the repeated violations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of multiple
Security Council resolutions owing to the vetoes
wielded by two permanent members last May, despite
the support of all of the other 13 Council members.
Those vetoes were indeed self-contradictory in the sense
that those two permanent members were the very same
actors who voted in favour of the 10 substantive and
binding Security Council resolutions on the unlawful
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programme of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from 2006
to 2017. Among them, the most recent, resolution 2397
(2017), even explicitly decided to take action to restrict
the further export of petroleum to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the event of additional
ICBM launches. That resolution was virtually nullified
by the two permanent members.
Secondly, we must close loopholes and ensure the
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. Our united action is essential in leading the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to diplomacy
and dialogue. Some argue that sanctions are ineffective.
Of course they are ineffective, if some important

S/PV.9264

countries do not fully implement them. All of us here in
the Chamber should completely fulfil our obligations,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
Thirdly, we must strengthen our cooperation to
cut off the revenue sources of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for its WMD programme. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea increasingly
profits from its malicious cyberactivities and overseas
information technology workers all around the world. It
is estimated that, since 2017, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has stolen more than $1.2 billion
through cyberattacks and approximately $600 million
by hacking a single online game last year. That is a
rather conservative estimate.
Lastly, my delegation listened carefully to what
Council members had to say today. Let me be clear
again. There are no excuses for the illicit nuclear
and missile provocations of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has recklessly developed its WMD programme
for decades — I repeat, for decades — according to
its plan, regardless of our military exercises or policy
towards the country. Any attempt to blame so-called
both sides for the current tension on the peninsula is
illogical and groundless, and therefore unacceptable.
Speaking on behalf of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea or attempting to justify its behaviour
only contributes to emboldening Pyongyang and
further building up the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear arsenal.
At the same time, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s unlawful provocations, unchecked
by the Council, simply result in further solidifying our
alliance and strengthening extended deterrence, as well
as our defence capabilities, in cooperation with regional
partners and beyond. And the repeated failures of the
Council in taking action to respond to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s recurrent provocations
only forces the parties directly involved, including
my country, to establish other unilateral measures that
some Security Council members do not want to see.
The Republic of Korea would like to reiterate that
the door for dialogue remains wide open, including sixparty talks, with no preconditions attached. We strongly
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop
endangering the world and to return to diplomacy.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

23-0523115/15
