A /78/PV.16

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-eighth session

16th plenary meeting

Thursday, 5 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Francis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Trinidad and Tobago)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/78/383)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Fifth Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of position.
May I remind members that, in accordance
with decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far as
possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in
the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee, and that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same

manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Alyakin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation does not object to
restoring the vote to the Comoros, Somalia and Sao
Tome and Principe.
At the same time, Russia would like to disassociate
itself from paragraphs 108, 113 and 122 of the report of
the Committee on Contributions (A/78/11), in which the
war in Ukraine is mentioned as a factor that affected
the ability to pay of the countries that are currently in
arrears. The economic problems that led to the arrears
are systemic in nature and appeared long before the
special military operation in Ukraine.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of
the Charter”, which was recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 78/2).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned
to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected
records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations
(http://documents.un.org).

23-28938 (E)

*2328938*

Accessible document

Please recycle

A/78/PV.16

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda items 13, 122 and 123 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Note by the Secretary-General (A/78/258)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The President: I have been informed that no
Member State has requested to take the floor under
this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 13, 122 and 123.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Specific meeting focused on development
(resolution 60/265)
The President: I have been informed that no
Member State has requested to take the floor under this
item. The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 125
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolutions (A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3 and
A/78/L.4)
The President: Before we proceed to take action on
the draft resolutions, I should like to remind members
that the Assembly will hold a debate on this item on
29 November.
As indicated in my letter dated 26 September 2023,
in accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 75/315 and
paragraph 5 of resolutions 77/274 and 77/275, I have
submitted the political declarations approved by the
high-level meetings and annexed to the present draft
resolutions, for adoption by the General Assembly at
this morning’s meeting.
2/23

05/10/2023

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3 and A/78/L.4. Delegations wishing
to make a statement in explanation of position before
adoption on any or all of the draft resolutions are invited
to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of
the United Nations, the members of which associate
themselves with the statement to be made shortly by
the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
Today once again, we will fail. Once again, we will
knowingly and willingly flout our pledge to leave no
one behind. We will adopt not one, nor two but three
documents that deliberately disregard the negative
impact of unilateral coercive measures on more than
a third of humankind. As we said in this very General
Assembly Hall about a week ago (see A/78/PV.13), that
is one of the reasons that our peoples feel frustrated
with the United Nations and fail to understand why,
despite its convening power and authority, our decisions
do not have an impact on, or genuine influence over,
their daily lives.
Under those conditions and with such a disastrous
approach, seeking to carry on as normal with business
as usual, how can we hope for a different and truly
meaningful outcome? If we continue along the same
path, allowing the same supremacist mentality to
prevail in these venues, we ought to clearly say that we
are doomed to keep failing.
The issue of unilateral coercive measures can no
longer be ignored or brushed aside, especially amid
the current situation, in which we see an increasing
trend of resorting to the ongoing, methodical,
relentless, unprecedented and ever-increasing adoption,
implementation and even expansion of those so-called
sanctions. That is having an impact on not only targeted
nations, but also on the global economy, as well as
supply chains and food and energy security, among
other areas. As a result, unilateral coercive measures
deliberately exacerbate the global multifaceted crisis
facing humankind today.
23-28938

05/10/2023

We wonder whether the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which just officially ended less
than five months ago, has taught us anything. Have we
not learned the hard way, with more than 7 million lives
lost, that we are as strong as the weakest link? Have
we not understood that we live in an interconnected
world, in which the realities and challenges faced by
any given nation have repercussions on the other side
of the world?
It is therefore rather alarming that the three
documents that we are to adopt this morning omit such
a critical issue as the question of unilateral coercive
measures, which, as the facts show, and as even United
Nations independent experts have established, have
negative impacts on the realization of the very right to
health. It would seem that we have not learned anything
from the tragedy that we just experienced during the
most recent pandemic, in which countries subjected to
those illegal, cruel and inhumane measures were not
able to have timely or effective access to vaccines,
medicines and medical equipment and supplies, among
other basic goods and services, in order to fight not
only the COVID-19 pandemic, but also other diseases,
including tuberculosis.
The moral compass of the General Assembly, we
must say, seems to be lost and clearly does not seem
to be in tune with the hopes of millions of people
around the world, including the aspirations of the very
peoples whom the United Nations claims to safeguard.
It is therefore all the more disappointing to note how
short the memory of the General Assembly is regarding
issues that threaten the very right to life of millions of
people in more than 30 countries around the world.
Since the very beginning of this process back in
June, our delegations stressed, both individually and as
a Group, the critical importance that they attached to
including the issue of unilateral coercive measures in
the draft political declarations to be formally adopted
this morning. We say that it is of critical importance
because many of the States members of our Group
of Friends are subjected to the illegal application of
such measures and know first-hand the negative and
indiscriminate impact that they have on their peoples.
As has always been the case, we resolved to
participate in an active and constructive manner
throughout the negotiations, while being committed
to reaching compromises that would ultimately allow
us to achieve a consensus outcome. We engaged at all

A/78/PV.16

times in good faith and, as usual, demonstrated a great
deal of flexibility.
Across the table, however, we never found the same
spirit and eagerness to reach compromises — quite the
opposite. From the beginning, there was an attempt
to impose a kind of veto on any sort of discussion on
including the issue of unilateral coercive measures
in the draft texts under consideration today. We must
emphatically stress that that is not the way in which
to conduct intergovernmental negotiations within the
United Nations. We regret, on the one hand, that the
co-facilitators failed to discourage such an approach
throughout the negotiations and, on the other hand,
that the Office of the former President of the General
Assembly even attempted to impose a non-existent
consensus in relation to those documents.
Throughout the almost four months of extensive
negotiations, we proposed various options, alternatives
and innovative formulations, even apart from the
consensus language itself previously agreed in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development on the matter,
which should have been the easiest to incorporate in
the draft text. Yet, with the exception of the process
regarding universal health coverage, there was not a
single attempt to include the issue of unilateral coercive
measures in the draft text.
Despite that, owing to our flexibility and desire to
ensure the success of the important high-level meetings
held last month, we then put forward the possibility of
working on a political package that could serve as a
basis for reaching compromises that would ultimately
lead us to adopting all those documents by consensus.
However, we regret that that option was not considered
in a meaningful manner either, which resulted in the
concerns of a large number of delegations, including
those of our Group of Friends, being ignored once again.
Finally, we conclude with the following points.
First, we regret that we were unable to achieve
consensus on any of the political declarations on which
we will shortly take action despite our many efforts to
that end. The draft texts to be adopted, needless to say,
remain incomplete, as they lack a crucial element for
the realization of the right to health, namely, the urgent
call for the elimination of unilateral coercive measures.
Secondly, we would like the shortcomings in those
three processes, both on substance and on procedure,
to be urgently redressed, including to ensure greater

23-289383/23

A/78/PV.16

transparency and prevent undue exclusions, particularly
of key stakeholders, such as those that may have broken
the silence on the draft documents under negotiation.
We underscore the fact that imposing political agendas
or consensus cannot be the norm, neither can it become
the new trend or, much less so, be assumed as an
accepted practice by this organ.
Thirdly, we reiterate our steadfast support and
unwavering solidarity with nations and peoples
subjected to unilateral coercive measures, while
reiterating our strong call for their complete, immediate
and unconditional lifting.
Fourthly, in strict adherence to the Charter of
the United Nations and the rules of procedure of this
organ, we reserve the right to carry out the actions that
we deem appropriate in order to prevent that such a
situation ever repeats in the General Assembly.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba): I have honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China in explanation of position on the adoption of
draft resolution A/78/L.4.
Throughout the negotiation process of that draft
text, the Group engaged in a constructive spirit and
demonstrated great flexibility and a willingness to
compromise. Regrettably, despite having been clear in
its legitimate concerns and priorities, the Group was
put in the unfortunate situation of having to break the
silence twice. In that regard, the Group recalls its letter
dated 1 September 2023, addressed to the President of
the General Assembly.
The Group notes that most of the issues on which
it broke the second silence procedure remain unsolved.
Particularly on the most substantive of the Group’s
concerns, there was not even an attempt to find a
compromise solution, and the elements objected to were
pushed forward when the lack of overall consensus was
crystal clear.
The Group of 77 and China comprises more than
a two-thirds majority of the United Nations — 69 per
cent of it, to be precise. The aspirations, priorities and
legitimate concerns of developing countries should not
be blatantly neglected, which is what happened when
the same draft text on which our Group broke the
silence was put forward as the outcome of a negotiation
process that unfortunately had its shortcomings. That
take-it-or-leave-it approach does not reflect the spirit
of multilateralism and cooperation that should prevail
4/23

05/10/2023

in the United Nations if it is that we truly want to leave
no one behind.
It is also unacceptable and discriminatory that the
co-facilitators decided to weaken agreed language of
the previous political declaration on tuberculosis (TB)
in an effort to accommodate one single delegation when,
at the same time, they took the deliberate decision to
ignore the concerns and proposals of the largest Group
of the United Nations, most of them based on agreed
language. That way of proceeding is not acceptable
and should not create any precedent or practice in
future processes.
In that regard, the Group would like to put on
record its dissatisfaction with the shortcomings of the
negotiation process and outcome of the 2023 political
declaration on the fight against tuberculosis. That process
was not conducted in a balanced and fair manner, and the
delegations of developing countries were not taken into
consideration on the same footing as others.
On substance, the Group would like to mention
the following shortcomings of the political declaration
to be adopted. First, there is no reference to unilateral
coercive measures and the need to refrain from applying
them against developing countries, despite it being
agreed language of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Secondly, there is no reference to the
need for developing countries to have unhindered
access to necessary resources and measures to address
tuberculosis. Thirdly, the language on sufficient
financial support for developing countries is rather
weak and heavily caveated, and there is no debt
dimension to the draft text. Fourthly, the language
on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights is weaker than the one contained in the previous
political declaration. Fifthly, the language on technology
transfer is insufficient and excessively caveated.
The Group came to this process in good faith,
believing that our partners were interested in an outcome
document that reflected the interests and aspirations of
all. Their actions during the negotiation process, even
trying to delete references to the special situation of
developing countries, the disproportionate impact
of TB that many in our Group face, and their uneven
capacity to respond to that disease, have demonstrated
that, for some, leaving no one behind is just a slogan.
Regardless, our Group reiterates its commitment to the
fight against TB as part of the overall efforts towards
implementing the 2030 Agenda.
23-28938

05/10/2023

(spoke in Spanish)
In addition to what has already been said on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China with regard to document
A/78/L.4, I would like to add the following in our
national capacity, while associating ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of Venezuela.
My country is fully committed to the efforts of the
Organization to realize the right to health for all human
beings. Cuba’s contribution in that regard is recognized
in developing countries and in forums dealing with
the topic. In that spirit, my delegation was involved
in its national capacity and in a very constructive and
flexible manner in the three negotiating processes,
the outcomes of which (draft resolutions A/78/L.2,
A/78/L.3 and A/78/L.4) are to be adopted today.
My delegation wishes to register its dissatisfaction
with the outcomes of the three political declarations and
the way in which those processes developed towards
their final outcomes. What happened around those
three processes in recent weeks is of concern. Those
draft texts should have been used as an opportunity
to unite the efforts of the international community
towards better outcomes regarding access to health for
all. However, they exposed the inequities of the current
international order.
The lack of political commitment on the part of
some developed countries to address core issues for the
South, such as issues of access to resources, knowledge
and technologies or the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, which violate the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, with a direct impact on
the health of populations and hindering socioeconomic
development, has been evident.
It is unacceptable that none of those draft texts
include even a minimal reference to unilateral coercive
measures, an issue of an existential nature for many
developing countries, despite the fact that the language
proposed time and again was even weaker than the
consensus of the 2030 Agenda.
How are we to believe that it is true that no one
should be left behind if the basic demand of many
countries, representing the voices of millions affected
by those measures in their daily lives, is completely
ignored? How can we trust that there is a genuine will
to move forward together with regard to health if great
efforts are made to accommodate the interests of rich
countries, while the legitimate concerns of developing

A/78/PV.16

countries, or even the Group of 77 and China as a whole,
are underestimated and silenced?
The lack of transparency, balance, impartiality and
fairness in the way in which some of those processes
have developed has also been evident, as has the lack
of activism from the Office of the President of the
General Assembly. There has been everything — from
facilitators who took advantage of their position to
favour their own agendas and refused to include
developing countries’ demands, to attempts to
accommodate specific countries, weakening the agreed
language of interest to the South.
The facilitators of the universal health coverage
process deserve special mention and recognition. They
made huge efforts to include and preserve to the end
language of great importance to the developing world.
We understand that the facilitators, appointed by the
Office of the President of the General Assembly, serve
under the authority of the General Assembly and are
accountable to it. In any case, the Office is responsible
for the draft texts submitted for consideration by the
Assembly after such facilitation processes, and it has
full authority to find political or compromise solutions
in the absence of consensus.
My delegation would like to recall that, both in
its national capacity and on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, it conveyed to the Office a willingness to
continue negotiations towards a political solution to the
situation arising around all those draft texts. We held
meetings with the previous and the current Office and
made clear our concerns and priorities. We proposed the
option of exploring a compromise package. However,
it became clear that, in today’s United Nations, some
countries are more listened to and accommodated than
others regarding their priorities, which is unacceptable.
It is also unacceptable to impose consensus that
has not been reached, to limit negotiations to issues
of interest to developed countries and that such
countries have a certain veto power over issues that
are not addressed in the negotiations. There should
be no selective and discriminatory treatment in an
Organization founded on sovereign equality.
Moreover, my delegation recalls that, on
17 September, 11 Member States sent a letter to the
President of the General Assembly, outlining concerns
regarding those processes and requesting that it be
circulated as an official document under agenda items

23-289385/23

A/78/PV.16

19 and 127. It is of concern that, 18 days later, that letter
has not been circulated.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to indicate
that it does not endorse the way of proceeding with the
draft texts, or does it consider it a precedent or practice
for the future.
Mr. Manyanga (Zimbabwe): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement just delivered by the
representatives of Cuba, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, and of Venezuela, on behalf of the Group
of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United
Nations. Allow me to make a few further remarks in
my national capacity.
In that regard, let me start by expressing the
appreciation of my delegation to the co-facilitators of
the three health-related political declarations (draft
resolutions A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3 and A/78/L.4), to
be adopted by the General Assembly today, for their
leadership of the processes that culminated in the
adoption of the political declarations of the three highlevel health-related meetings. The subject matters
under consideration, namely, pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response, universal health care and
the fight against tuberculosis (TB), are very relevant
and timely.
While joining the consensus on the adoption
of those important draft resolutions, which express
the commitment and dedication of the international
community to address the ever-increasing global
health-related threats, my delegation wishes to express
serious concern over the exclusion from the three
political declarations of language that acknowledges
and recognizes the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of the right to good
health and, ipso facto, to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The language
was overwhelmingly supported by Member States from
across the regions and is agreed language in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That omission is
of profound consequence, given that unilateral coercive
measures affect a significant proportion of the global
population, and undermines our shared commitment
to leaving no one behind. The economic hardships
caused by unilateral coercive measures hinder the
ability of Governments to mobilize adequate resources
to provide essential health-care services, depriving
vulnerable populations of critical medical care,
including access to vaccines, medications and medical
6/23

05/10/2023

equipment. Unilateral coercive measures undermine,
and constrain, the ability of the countries concerned
to adequately prepare for, prevent and respond to
pandemics, to achieve universal health coverage and,
of course, to win the fight against tuberculosis.
Unilateral coercive measures have an impact on the
rights and lives of a third of the world population, mainly
innocent civilians in countries that are victims of the
heinous, illegal and unwarranted measures. To testify to
that reality, the General Assembly appointed a Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights. In that
regard, contrary to claims by those that resort to unilateral
coercive measures, the United Nations recognizes that
the measures indeed impact the human rights of victim
populations. The principle of leaving no one behind
will remain a mere slogan if we relegate the issue of the
negative, multidimensional impacts of unilateral coercive
measures to the periphery of what we do.
The political declarations are an opportunity to
address all major issues militating against the global
efforts to achieve universal health coverage, fight
against tuberculosis and prepare for, prevent and
respond to future pandemics. The related high-level
meetings were an opportunity to review progress on
the commitments made in the 2019 political declaration
on universal health coverage and in the fight against
TB, with a view to addressing gaps, taking corrective
action to restore progress in that regard. Unilateral
coercive measures are an impediment to the attainment
of the SDGs by design, as they are meant to cripple the
targeted Governments.
The commitment of the United Nations to leaving
no one behind is a core principle of our collective efforts
to achieve the SDGs. Unilateral coercive measures
have deepened inequalities and exacerbated health
disparities, directly contravening that commitment. In
an interconnected world, it is imperative to recognize
the importance of global health security, as pandemics
respect no boundaries. The exclusion of millions of
sanctioned populations undermines our collective
capacity to respond effectively to pandemics and other
health crises. Suffice to recall that no one is safe until
everyone is safe.
Health is a fundamental human right, as affirmed in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Therefore,
the imposition of unilateral coercive measures is a
serious violation of those rights. In that regard, we
23-28938

05/10/2023

A/78/PV.16

reiterate our call for the unconditional removal of all
illegal unilateral coercive measures, especially in the
context of global health emergencies, to ensure that
no nation or its citizens are left without the necessary
resources to respond effectively to health crises.

in many instances twice. The statement delivered on
behalf of the G-77 and China regarding the political
declaration on tuberculosis is demonstrative of the extent
of frustration and discontent suffered by two thirds of
the United Nations as a result of that circumstance.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our commitment
to the principles of solidarity, cooperation and the
protection of human rights. We sincerely hope that
the international community will not miss another
opportunity to be inclusive. To truly leave no one
behind, we must address the impact of unilateral
coercive measures on global health and take decisive
actions to alleviate the suffering of those affected.

As a case in point, and of particular importance to
my delegation, I would like to refer to the unilateral
coercive measures, of which the deleterious and
severe negative impacts on the health of people are
axiomatic, are reflected in many relevant United
Nations documents and, more importantly, are felt
directly on a daily basis by innocent people who lack
access to medicine, medical products and vaccines
as a result of such unlawful measures. As evinced
by the Special Rapporteur on the negative impacts
of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of
human rights, unilateral coercive measures result in
the violation of all categories of economic, social and
cultural rights, including the rights to life, health, food,
an adequate standard of living, education and the right
to development.

Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations and the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Group of 77 (G-77) and China. We would like to present
our statement in our national capacity in explanation
of position on draft resolutions A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3
and A/78/L.4, and the three health-related political
declarations annexed thereto, under this agenda item.
The United Nations, as per the Charter, is based
on the sovereign equality of all its Member States.
The views and priorities of Member States matter and
should be highly respected. Nonetheless, during the
negotiation of the political declarations and the onward
processes we witnessed that that very fundamental
principle was frequently disregarded. The priorities of a
few were accommodated to the detriment of many other
Member States and even large groups of developing
countries. Agreed language was altered for the benefit
of a few, while the proposals of developing countries
were ignored. In general, one-sidedness, deliberate
obscurity and ignorance unfortunately prevailed over
neutrality, transparency and inclusiveness.
My delegation engaged in the negotiation of the
health-related draft political declarations in good faith
and in a spirit of flexibility, expecting that there would
be transparent, inclusive and fair processes that would
allow an outcome with which every delegation would
be generally satisfied. Nevertheless, the results, in
particular given the exclusion of one of our important
priorities, proved otherwise. Those circumstances
made many Member States, including large groups
of developing countries, break the silence procedure,

Such detrimental impacts affect the lives, health
and physical and mental well-being of the affected
people, including women, children and the elderly. In
addition, unilateral coercive measures undermine the
ability of targeted States to meet their obligations and
commitments in the area of health, while diminishing
the resources and capacities in the health sector
and beyond. Therefore, a progressive, concise and
action-oriented text on health should indeed address
thit pressing challenge, which, above all other external
impediments and barriers, has a dramatic and obvious
negative impact on the health of people.
To just mention an instance of such impacts, I
would like to refer to the situation caused by unilateral
coercive measures for patients with epidermolysis
bullosa, a chronic skin disease that also affects
children, causing the skin to be fragile and to blister
very easily. A certain medical products manufacturer
stopped all exports to the Islamic Republic of Iran as
a result of unilateral coercive measures in 2018. As
reflected in the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
negative impacts of unilateral coercive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights, the halt in exports
“including bandages made only by that company
which were vital for patients with epidermolysis
bullosa, a horrendous chronic skin disease. This
led to greater suffering and even deaths among

23-289387/23

A/78/PV.16

those children, compromising their rights to health
and to life” (A/HRC/51/33, para. 26)
Many similar barriers to accessing, procuring and
delivering life-saving medicines and medical devices
to treat other rare and severe diseases exist due to the
unilateral coercive measures.
Unilateral coercive measures violate human rights
and, unfortunately, continue to inflict immeasurable
harm on the health of people. Nothing can ever justify
such horrific measures against people. Nothing can
justify the death of a child who could simply not have
a medical product due to unilateral coercive measures.
Yet again, during the negotiations we visibly observed
a few States justifying such unlawful measures, while
trying to avoid any discussion that would reveal how
inhumane such measures are. My delegation, along
with many other delegations that favoured the inclusion
of language addressing that acute challenge in the three
draft political declarations, constructively engaged
in the negotiations and proposed relevant language
on the topic, with the idea of improving the text of
the declarations by giving due regard to one of the
major health challenges resulting from such unlawful
measures. But even the agreed language on the unilateral
coercive measures, derived from relevant documents
that had been accepted by all States Members of the
United Nations, was not respected.
The extent of frustration among many Member States
on the way in which the three health-related processes
have been handled is visible. But, unlike a certain few
Western countries that are the reason for that frustration
and situation, we do not intend to be part of the problem;
rather, given the underlying status of the three political
declarations in the health context, we have decided to
join the consensus on the present draft resolutions on
the understanding that such unfair, non-transparent and
one-sided processes will not set any precedence in future
and will not happen again. With that in mind, allow me
to touch upon a few points as to the substance of the
three political declarations, respectively.
We reaffirm the importance of national ownership
and the primary role and responsibility of Governments
at all levels to determine their own path towards
achieving universal health coverage and pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, as well as in the
area of tuberculosis, in accordance with their national
laws, contexts and priorities. We further emphasize
international cooperation, in particular in supporting
8/23

05/10/2023

and strengthening the capacity of developing countries,
including through enhanced financial development
assistance, as well as financial and technical support,
upon request, as well as ensuring unhindered access
for developing countries to quality and affordable
medicines, medical products and health technologies.
In conclusion, we would like to clarify a position
regarding the present draft resolutions and the political
declarations on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response, universal health coverage and tuberculosis
annexed thereto, which will be adopted by the General
Assembly today under this agenda item. In that respect,
we would like to reiterate that the consideration and
implementation of the provisions of the political
declarations by the Islamic Republic of Iran are subject
to, and contingent upon, its national laws, regulations,
policies and priorities, as well as its religious, cultural
and social specificities and values.
Mr. Baghdadi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my country’s delegation aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the representatives
of Cuba and Venezuela on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations, respectively.
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
My country’s delegation supports the convening
of the high-level meetings on health in the light of
the increasing health challenges in our world. Those
meetings are timely, since we need to enhance health
systems and ensure their ability to deal with emerging
challenges. We also need to continue to work on
achieving the Sustainable Development Agenda.
My delegation engaged in the negotiation process
from its inception in an effective and constructive spirit
in order to reveal the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the health sector. We expressed
our concerns, and we requested the co-facilitators to take
them into account. However, some Western countries
insist on politicizing the work of the Organization and
refuse to engage with us owing to their destructive
approach and political unilateralism. Unfortunately,
the concerns of several delegations were not taken
into account during the negotiation process. Despite
our repeated demands, although we showed maximum
flexibility and later broke the silence procedure, all
that was not enough to achieve a genuinely inclusive
process. Our rightful demand was ignored, and no
23-28938

05/10/2023

language pertaining to unilateral coercive measures and
their negative impact on the health sector was included.
We cannot consider that such declarations are
consensual. They leave a large part of populations
behind because they cannot receive sustained health
care due to unilateral coercive measures. In my country,
Syria, the health sector was greatly affected, and a large
number of our medical devises are no longer operational
because we cannot import the spare parts to repair
them or because the foreign companies manufacturing
those devices are afraid of being sanctioned. They do
not agree to repair or maintain such devices. Those
measures also make us unable to provide vaccinations
and medicine. That has increased the plight of the
Syrian people, especially after the terrorist war that is
imposed on my country and the destructive earthquake
that happened on 6 February.
The unilateral coercive measures imposed on the
Syrian people, the most recent of which was adding to
the list of sanctions several Syrian hospitals that provide
free services to the Syrian people, prevent access to
the necessary preventive diagnosis, treatment devices
and spare parts. The lack of morality and inhumanity
also led to imposing sanctions on child-care centres.
Today Western companies cannot export the necessary
medical devices to treat children. The health sector in
Syria is under strain owing to a decade of terrorist war,
health emergencies and natural disasters.
The catastrophic consequences of unilateral
coercive measures spare no sector. Today we also
lack energy resources, which are negatively affecting
electricity and the provision of power for hospitals
and medical clinics. That makes it difficult to provide
various sectors in need with basic health care and also
affects the water and sanitation sectors, increasing the
possibility of the outbreak of diseases and pandemics
due to the lack of clean water.
It is therefore important to highlight the plight of
the populations targeted by such unilateral coercive
measures, especially in the health sector. To that end,
my delegation requested that such language about
unilateral coercive measures be added to at least one
of the three political declarations. Unfortunately, the
facilitators did not take the concerns of a great number
of countries into account, while Western countries
still ignore the catastrophic impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the daily lives of the peoples of
targeted countries.

A/78/PV.16

Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation aligns itself with the statements made in
explanation of position by the representative of Cuba,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and by the
representative of Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
The lack of good faith and will in relation to the
draft texts to be adopted in the Assembly today is
regrettable. Through pressure, Western aggressor
countries obstructed and excluded the language of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
paragraph on illegal and terrorist unilateral coercive
measures in those texts. No less than a week ago, we
witnessed a similar scenario, in which the positions of a
significant group of countries were repeatedly ignored
throughout the negotiation process of those declarations.
The countries of the global South continue to
be hostage to the pressure and blackmail policies
of imperialist and neocolonialist countries so that
unilateral coercive measures are not included in issues
of the utmost importance to our developing countries.
We reiterate that those three declarations remain
incomplete and exclude millions upon millions of
people who are being affected by such illegal measures.
Let the aggressors, those that impose the illegal
terror sanctions, explain how the international
cooperation and solidarity that is so touted towards
achieving universal health coverage are furthered
under blockades, sanctions and other aggression, and
how our countries can prevent, prepare for and respond
to a pandemic when, during the very recent coronavirus
disease, countries affected by such terrorist measures
could not access vaccines, medicines, instruments and
medical equipment to deal with that disease, which
continues to cause so many deaths.
Health is a right that should be exercised in its
entirety by all the peoples of the world, without
exclusions of any kind. We reiterate that unilateral
coercive measures are incompatible with, and contrary
to, the Charter of the United Nations and the joint
efforts of the United Nations for the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda. We will therefore not cease in
our call and our efforts for those illegal measures to
be eliminated.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian);
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.

23-289389/23

A/78/PV.16

We would like to make the following statement in our
national capacity.
Universal health coverage is fundamental to the
achievement of all the Sustainable Development Goals,
while the fulfilment of all the Goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development determines
the prospects for healthy lives and well-being for all.
That interdependence requires the capacity-building
of all countries, especially developing countries, in
order to build effective national health systems and
ensure that the world’s population has access to quality
health care.
Belarus regrets that the political declarations to
be adopted today do not reflect the negative impact of
sanctions policies on the functioning of the national
health systems of affected States. Countries under
the pressure of sanctions face shortages of medical
supplies, equipment and medicines, which cannot but
affect the quality of care provided to the population.
Unilateral coercive measures limit their access to the
medicines and medical equipment needed to treat
serious diseases, including the tuberculosis infection.
In the context of a pandemic, sanctions have literally
become a lethal weapon of Western countries, limiting
access for affected States to medicines, vaccines,
medical technology, research and development
and significantly reducing their ability to provide
quality health care for their populations. Today, with
the coronavirus disease pandemic having receded,
leaving scars in terms of serious social and economic
consequences, the prospects for the long-term recovery
of States are clouded by the burden of the pressure
of illegal sanctions in addition to the impact of other
contemporary crises.
Belarus condemns in the strongest terms the
practice of unilateral coercive measures and calls for
their elimination, which, among other things, would
help to strengthen the global capacity to prevent and
combat pandemics. We advocate strengthening the
central role of the World Health Organization in the
global health architecture. We expect the World Health
Organization to take into account the negative impact
of sanctions in its work and to focus its efforts not only
on mitigating the severe humanitarian consequences
of unilateral coercive measures, but also on actively
countering them.
In the face of unprecedented pressure on the health
system, Belarus will continue to ensure universal health
10/23

05/10/2023

coverage and access to quality health care, medicines,
vaccines and medical devices in order to strengthen
global efforts to build a healthier world.
Mr. Zhang Tianhao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the statements made by the
representatives of Cuba, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, and of Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has once again
demonstrated the importance of strengthening global
public health. China welcomes the convening of the
three high-level meetings — on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response, universal health coverage
and the fight against tuberculosis, respectively — by
the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session,
supports the Assembly’s adoption of the political
declarations by consensus under the relevant draft
resolutions (A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3 and A/78/L.4)
and is willing to join the consensus on those three
political declarations.
Throughout the process of consultation, together
with like-minded countries, China advocated for
the inclusion of the elements of unilateral coercive
measures in the political declarations. Those measures
contravene international law and the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, severely
undermine the advancement of public health and harm
the people’s lives and health in the sanctioned countries.
The latest report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on unilateral coercive measures
(A/HRC/51/33) once again makes clear the serious
negative impact of those measures on the right to health.
However, due to the opposition of some countries, the
relevant elements could not be included in the outcome
documents, which China deeply regrets.
China will continue to work with like-minded
countries on the platform of the United Nations to highlight
the serious harm caused by unilateral coercive measures,
and we will continue to strongly urge the countries
concerned to abolish such measures as soon as possible.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation will join the
consensus on the three political declarations on health
(draft resolutions A/78/L.2, A/78/L.3 and A/78/L.4).
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the
coordinators of the consultations on universal health
coverage, the Permanent Representatives of Guyana and
23-28938

05/10/2023

Thailand, who helped to achieve a balanced text. The
outcome document contains many elements important
to our common future that will truly contribute to
ensuring the provision of a wide range of health care
to everyone.
The world continues to move steadily towards
a more equitable multipolar system, based on the
principles of trust and equal opportunities for the
free development of all countries and peoples. During
the consultations, the majority of States clearly
demonstrated their rejection of the policy of involving
them in serving Western interests, including through
attempts to politicize the negotiations by means of the
Ukrainian issue.
Russia fully supports and associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations. Our Heads of State
and Government have repeatedly reaffirmed their
commitment to the ideas contained in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, with a view to its full
realization. That was also reflected in the discussions
at the high-level meetings of the General Assembly on
health. In that regard, we are disappointed that today’s
documents are to be adopted without paragraph 30 of
the 2030 Agenda, calling for the lifting of unilateral
sanctions, being included in their texts.
We are concerned about attempts to silence or
simply dismiss the plight of millions of people in
developing countries under sanctions. It is clear that
it is not so much the crises currently being widely
discussed as the illegal unilateral measures, especially
extraterritorial measures aimed at depriving people
of their basic needs and the right to health, that are
blocking the development of States that are among the
authors of the texts.
I would like to say a few words on the negotiation
process. We are compelled to note the lack of neutrality
and impartiality shown by the facilitators. For example,
in the declaration on the fight against tuberculosis, at
the request of some delegations, an entire paragraph
on a comprehensive family-centred approach to the
treatment of that disease was suddenly deleted. That
paragraph was taken entirely from agreed language in
the 2018 first political declaration on tuberculosis. It
is very important and is still relevant today because it
takes into account the vulnerable situation of children
suffering from that infectious disease. For that reason,

A/78/PV.16

it garnered significant support in the consultations
room from developing States.
It was also significant that no silence procedure
was successful. Ultimately, the texts were simply
handed over to the President of the General Assembly
for further endorsement in the Assembly. The final
document of the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response requires serious
revision. I emphasize that only about 19 per cent of the
text was agreed by Member States.
Despite the shortcomings that we have noted in the
process and substance of the documents to be adopted
today, Russia believes that their implementation, with
the joint efforts of the entire international community,
will be of considerable benefit to global public health.
At the same time, to further improve the effectiveness
of multilateral cooperation, among other things, the
lessons learned from the processes that have been
completed should be taken into account.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position before adoption. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/78/L.2, entitled “Political declaration of the General
Assembly high-level meeting on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. The present
statement was distributed to Member States.
Under the terms of paragraphs 77 and 78 of draft
resolution A/78/L.2, the General Assembly would
“[r]equest the Secretary-General to provide, in
consultation with the World Health Organization
and other relevant agencies, a report including
recommendations on the implementation of
the present declaration towards strengthening
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
during the seventy-ninth session of the General
Assembly, which will serve to inform a high-level
meeting to be convened in 2026;
and
“decide to convene a high-level meeting on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response

23-2893811/23

A/78/PV.16

in 2026 in New York, aimed at undertaking a
comprehensive review of the implementation of
the present declaration, the scope and modalities
of which shall be decided no later than the seventyninth session of the General Assembly, taking
into consideration and in full coordination with
the outcomes of other ongoing related processes
to strengthen pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response.”

05/10/2023

Draft resolution
(resolution 78/3).

A/78/L.2

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/78/L.3, entitled “Political
declaration of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

The request contained in paragraph 77 of the
draft resolution would constitute an addition to the
documentation workload for the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management of
one pre-session document with a word count of 8,500
words in all six languages in 2025, and entail additional
non-recurrent resource requirements in the amount of
$24,500 in 2025.

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. The present
statement was also distributed to Member States.

With regard to the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response in 2026 in New
York, mentioned in paragraph 78 of the draft resolution,
in the absence of modalities for the high-level meeting,
it is not possible at the present time to estimate the
potential costs implications of the requirements of the
high-level meeting. When information on the format,
scope and modalities of the high-level meeting becomes
available, the Secretary-General will assess the
budgetary implications and advise the General Assembly
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedures.
Furthermore, in accordance with established practice,
the date of the high-level meeting would be determined
in consultation with the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.

“decide to convene a high-level meeting on
universal health coverage in 2027 in New York,
aimed at undertaking a comprehensive review on
the implementation of the present declaration to
identify gaps and solutions to accelerate progress
towards the achievement of universal health
coverage by 2030, the scope and modalities of which
shall be decided no later than the eightieth session
of the General Assembly, taking into consideration
the outcomes of other existing health-related
processes and the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly.”

Reference is made to paragraph 11 of resolution
69/250 and subsequent resolutions, the most recent
of which is resolution 77/255, in which the Assembly
invited Member States to include in new legislative
mandates adequate information on the modalities for
the organization of conferences or meetings.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/78/L.2, additional resource
requirements in the amount of $24,500 under section
2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management, would be
included in the proposed programme budget for 2025
for the consideration of the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/78/L.2?
12/23

Under the terms of the operative paragraph 109 of
draft resolution A/78/L.3, the General Assembly would

With regard to paragraph 109 of the draft resolution,
in the absence of modalities for the high-level meeting
in 2027 in New York, it is not possible at the present
time to estimate the potential costs implications of
the requirements of the high-level meeting. When
information on the format, scope and modalities of the
high-level meeting becomes available, the SecretaryGeneral will assess the budgetary implications and
advise the General Assembly in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedures. Furthermore, in
accordance with established practice, the date of the
high-level meeting would be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
In that regard, reference is made to paragraph 11
of resolution 69/250 and subsequent resolutions, the
most recent of which is resolution 77/255, in which
the Assembly invited Member States to include in
new legislative mandates adequate information on
23-28938

05/10/2023

A/78/PV.16

the modalities for the organization of conferences
or meetings.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/78/L.3?
Draft resolution
(resolution 78/4).

A/78/L.3

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/78/L.4, entitled “Political
declaration of the high-level meeting on the fight
against tuberculosis”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/78/L.4?
Draft resolution
(resolution 78/5).

A/78/L.4

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro,
North Macedonia, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia,
Türkiye, Ukraine; the potential candidate country
Georgia; and the European Economic Area countries
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, as well as Andorra,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Monaco and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.
We are pleased to join the consensus affirming
the adoption of the three political declarations by
our leaders at the high-level meetings held under the
auspices of the General Assembly a fortnight ago
(resolutions 78/3, 78/4 and 78/5).
We wish to commend the skilful co-facilitation and
tireless efforts of Morocco, Israel, Guyana, Thailand,
Poland and Uzbekistan, which engaged deeply with
all delegations and brought us together to reaffirm our
commitment to achieving Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 3 and, more broadly, to improving the
global health architecture and global health in support
of sustainable development and the achievement of the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The European Union engaged constructively and
proactively in the negotiations, showing consideration

and flexibility towards other delegations’ positions
and prioritizing the needs of developing countries,
the human rights imperative, increasing global equity
and leaving no one behind. The European Union and
its member States fully participated in the high-level
meetings at both the Heads of State and Government
and the ministerial levels. We make a clear and
unconditional commitment to effectively implementing
those political declarations. They provide us with road
maps for the path to 2030.
On pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response, our leaders underlined the power of solidarity
and collaboration and the fact that we need to urgently
address the serious gaps in equity and the capacity of
all to prevent, prepare for and respond to pandemics.
We recall that the European Union leads by example,
including through increased support for regional and
local manufacturing of medical countermeasures and by
providing funds to the Pandemic Fund. The European
Union has chosen to take concrete steps that help to make
us all safer. In addition, we are committed to another
option — to also strengthen global governance with an
ambitious agreement on pandemics in order to protect
citizens around the world. We led the convening of
negotiations and put forward ambitious proposals in the
belief that such an agreement would be for the common
good. For it to succeed, we must all embrace it equally
as a shared responsibility. We must close the gaps in the
entire cycle of prevention, preparedness and response.
The declaration provides welcome political impetus to
those efforts, but without prejudging the positions that
members have or will have on specific issues.
Universal health coverage is one of the top priorities
of the European Union Global Health Strategy. European
Union leaders highlighted five points at the high-level
meeting: the need to focus on primary health care and
sexual and reproductive health as the basis of resilient
and responsive health-care systems, the importance
of essential public health functions that address the
determinants of health, as well as inequities and gender
equality, and the centrality of an effective health workforce
in reaching the most underserved and those in the most
vulnerable situations, which must be our collective
priority. They stressed the power of digitalization and
voluntary technology transfer on mutually agreed terms,
with due respect for international intellectual property
rules. They underlined that armed conflicts add to the
already daunting challenges that we face today and
challenge the achievement of the SDGs, including SDG

23-2893813/23

A/78/PV.16

05/10/2023

3. Our leaders also recalled that, while the European
Union and its member States have committed significant
funds to support our partners in strengthening their
health systems, that cannot replace sound national health
financing strategies, which depend on priority setting,
robust governance and the mobilization of national public
and private resources. More broadly, all stakeholders
need to be fully engaged to build a social compact that
delivers better health for all.
Although it joined the consensus, the European
Union would ask to put on its dissociation on two
points: first, the paragraph containing non-consensual
references to the right to development and, secondly,
that the technology transfer for which we call must
be voluntary and on mutually agreed terms, which is
long-established and agreed language that we regret
was omitted from the final text, and must comply with
international obligations.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic
Vice-President, took the Chair.

of

Iran),

Our leaders also voiced their full support for
the eradication of tuberculosis. As a long-standing
investor in tuberculosis research and development
and a contributor to the Global Fund and the work of
the World Health Organization, the European Union
is fully committed to reaching the target set out in
SDG 3.3. We believe that we must ensure access to
treatment through primary health care and vital health
services. We must target those in the most vulnerable
and marginalized situations, who are the most affected
by tuberculosis, and end the stigma. We must invest in
early prevention and detection, especially for at-risk
populations, promote testing and improve diagnosis
and surveillance, as well as addressing the scourges
of discrimination and stigmatization that hamper our
best efforts. We also stress the need for new diagnostics
and treatments for drug-resistant tuberculosis, as well
as improving coverage and equity through digital
solutions and innovative service delivery. More broadly,
all stakeholders must be fully engaged.
It goes without saying that, in implementing the
political declarations, the European Union calls for
a strong reflection of the core values of the United
Nations so as to protect, promote and fulfil the human
rights of all, without discrimination of any kind, and to
help to achieve gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls.
14/23

Mr. Larsen (Australia): I take the floor on
behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my own country,
Australia (CANZ) regarding the three political
declarations adopted today on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response (resolution 78/3), universal
health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight against
tuberculosis (resolution 78/5).
At the outset, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Israel, Morocco, Guyana, Thailand,
Poland and Uzbekistan and their teams for their
facilitation of those declarations.
The three political declarations are focused on
advancing positive developments to help to improve
the health of everyone, everywhere. Their objectives
are to ensure that, first, our health systems are
equitable, resilient, sustainable and better positioned
to prevent, prepare for and respond to pandemics and
strengthen our global health architecture; secondly,
that all people can access quality and equitable health
services when and where they need them, without
financial hardship, and consistent with human rights;
and, thirdly, that an effective vaccine for tuberculosis
is developed and efforts are redoubled to eradicate
tuberculosis everywhere. Those objectives all align
with the principles to which we all committed in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals.
The coronavirus disease pandemic had devastating
health, economic, political and security impacts on
our societies. It also made obvious that our systems to
prevent, prepare for and respond to future pandemics
are inadequate. Access to essential services faltered,
including for sexual and reproductive health and for
the detection and treatment of cancer, HIV and other
serious conditions and diseases, including tuberculosis.
Climate change is also having an impact on the
delivery of health services, and increasingly frequent
extreme weather events are causing disasters, death,
disease, poverty and illness.
Non-communicable diseases are rising globally,
and too often people are missing out on health services
due to their gender, ethnicity or disability. That includes
support for equitable sexual and reproductive health
services. Those critical life-saving services are core to
safety, good health and empowerment, particularly for
women and girls in all their diversity.
23-28938

05/10/2023

On such critical issues, I note that CANZ remains
deeply disappointed by the weakened language
on gender, human rights and access to sexual and
reproductive health services in the final versions of the
political declarations.
We trust that the adoption of the political declaration
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
adds political momentum to the negotiations currently
under way in Geneva for a new legally binding pandemic
instrument and to amend our existing International
Health Regulations.
We trust that the adoption of the political
declarations on universal health coverage and on the
fight to end tuberculosis spurs action to address the
uneven impact that health crises have on women,
people in poverty and the most marginalized, as well as
to advance equality and inclusion and meet the needs
of all people.
Mr. Al Rubkhi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): It
is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the delegations of the States members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, namely, the United Arab
Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the State of Qatar, the State of Kuwait
and my country, the Sultanate of Oman.
At the outset, our countries appreciate the efforts
made to facilitate the intergovernmental negotiations
and to reach the final text for the political declaration
of the General Assembly high-level meeting on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
(resolution 78/3). That political declaration is the first
of its kind and is a turning point in the way in which the
international community deals with health pandemics.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
proved that its impact goes beyond health consequences
and actually reaches economic, social and other aspects.
Such pandemics greatly hinder the ability of States to
move forward with the implementation of sustainable
development plans.
The political declaration on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response has addressed a number of
important and vital issues, such as the promotion of
regional and international cooperation and solidarity,
while encouraging multilateralism and addressing
health inequality within and among States. It also
builds on lessons learned and best practices learned
from COVID-19. The political declaration recognizes
the need to support developing countries in building

A/78/PV.16

their national and domestic capacities, as well as
regional capacities in that regard. It also ensures timely
access to, and reasonable and fair prices for, medical
material, including, inter alia, vaccines, diagnostics and
treatment equipment. Moreover, the political declaration
commended the important role of health-care workers
in responding to pandemics, as well as their dedication
and sacrifices. It encourages national, regional and
international efforts to commemorate that role.
Our countries’ delegations joined the consensus on
resolution 78/3, on the political declaration of the highlevel meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response, because we believe in the importance of
the issues addressed in that declaration. However, with
regard to paragraph 52 of the text and the terms used,
such as sexual and reproductive health-care services
and reproductive rights, our countries interpret that
paragraph in line with our cultural and societal
frameworks and in accordance with the national laws
and regulations of our countries.
Mrs. Kuzee (Namibia): My delegation wishes to
make this explanation of position after the adoption of
the political declarations on pandemic preparedness,
prevention and response (resolution 78/3), universal
health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight against
tuberculosis (resolution 78/5), respectively.
We thank the former President of the General
Assembly, as well as the respective co-facilitators and
their teams, for their able stewardship throughout the
negotiation process.
The political declarations represent an opportunity
for the international community to recommit to the
prevention of, better preparation for and more rapid
and equitable responses to future pandemics, including
the mainstreaming of pandemic preparedness. We have
unfortunately fallen short of that goal. We were not able
to reach consensus on important language that speaks
to ensuring equitable access to health-care products,
as well as references to stronger commitments,
among other things, regarding technology transfer,
removing intellectual property barriers and investing
in manufacturing to enable local production in the
global South.
We were also unable to reach agreement on the
inclusion of language urging against the promulgation
of unilateral coercive measures, as outlined in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. My delegation
has long held the position that unilateral coercive

23-2893815/23

A/78/PV.16

measures are a punitive measure that constitute one of
the greatest obstacles to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We would therefore like to emphasize that what
we adopted today is a minimum, and we do not take
it as the limit of our ambition. We emphasize that
particularly as it pertains to the ongoing processes of
the intergovernmental negotiating body to draft and
negotiate a convention, agreement or other international
instrument under the Constitution of the World Health
Organization to strengthen pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. That is also applicable to
the process to consider proposed amendments to the
International Health Regulations in Geneva.
Ms. Carty (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on the political
declarations of the General Assembly high-level
meetings on tuberculosis (resolution 78/5), universal
health coverage (resolution 78/4) and pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response (resolution
78/3). We appreciate the constructive approach of all
three sets of co-facilitators — Poland and Uzbekistan,
Guyana and Thailand, and Israel and Morocco — and
thank General Assembly Presidents Csaba Kőrösi and
Dennis Francis for their leadership in helping us to
reach consensus.
The United States is a proud leader and the largest
donor with regard to global health, with more than
$10 billion of assistance provided annually. Since his
first day in office, President Biden has made a strong
commitment to ensuring that our country is better
prepared for future pandemics. The United States has
repeatedly reaffirmed its long-standing commitment to
strengthening global health security and its recognition
of the need to do more to ensure that our partners
around the world are better prepared to address future
health threats.
Promoting and protecting the human rights of all
persons in all their diversity is fundamental to achieving
universal health coverage, creating a strong pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response architecture
and ending tuberculosis. That includes implementing
laws, policies and programmes that eliminate stigma
and discrimination and provide for the full inclusion of
all persons.
To that end, we must include the voices of all women,
girls, adolescents, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, intersex and asexual plus (LGBTQIA+) persons,
16/23

05/10/2023

persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and other
marginalized and underrepresented populations in our
decision-making. We must meaningfully include all
persons in every aspect of planning, implementation,
monitoring and accountability. We must reject policies
that hinder their access to care because of bias,
discrimination or stigma. Such actions are essential to
meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and to building a more resilient world in the face of
threats such as climate change, future pandemics,
conflicts and crises.
On universal health coverage, the United
States applauds the continued efforts to advance
that priority — an essential building block towards
achieving global health equity and strengthening
global health security, including preventing, preparing
for and responding to future pandemics. We join the
global community in urging action to get back on
track in all critical universal health coverage areas
and in restoring essential health services to levels that
are better than before the pandemic, ideally by 2025.
This year’s universal health coverage declaration has
made some important progress on those elements since
2019, including strong language on health-care workers
and access to universal health coverage for members
of marginalized populations. The declaration also
highlights the shortfalls of achieving universal health
coverage on a global level by 2030, including where
SDG 3 implementation has failed to progress since 2019.
The world has been profoundly impacted by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
with nearly 1 billion people infected and more than
7 million lives lost, along with devastating effects
on economies, livelihoods and health systems. The
pandemic demonstrated that, as a global community,
we were underprepared. We need to address the gaps
exposed by COVID-19 and prepare for the future. The
United States is incorporating the lessons learned from
COVID-19 on an ongoing basis, and we will continue
to do our part to prepare for, and respond to, the next
health emergency. This year’s political declaration, the
first of its kind in the General Assembly, laid down an
important marker and reaffirmed at the Head of State
level the importance of further enhancing political
momentum and commitment towards pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, while
remaining aligned with the Geneva-based processes
on the intergovernmental negotiating body and the
International Health Regulations.
23-28938

05/10/2023

A/78/PV.16

The high-level meeting on fighting tuberculosis
comes at a critical time. While the world continues to
take steps towards universal health coverage and works
to improve pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response, the age-old scourge of tuberculosis (TB) takes
more than 1.6 million lives each year. The United States
remains the largest bilateral donor to the global effort
to end TB, which has saved over 75 million lives to
date. For more than two decades, we have worked with
partners to end TB through surveillance, programmes
and research efforts. We will continue those
collaborations, including through our contributions
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. This year’s political declaration on TB
makes important progress on updating the language
on targets and references to the Global Fund and Stop
TB Partnership and incorporates important additional
language on human rights, including a reference to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

political declarations for their hard work during the
difficult negotiation processes.

We regret that we missed the opportunity to
strengthen prior commitments on some critical crosscutting issues. For example, advancing and respecting
sexual and reproductive health and rights for all remain
foundational to promoting gender equality and global
health, and also protect the human rights of all persons
in all their diversity. The United States is disappointed
that we could not reach agreement to go beyond
previously agreed language.

The three high-level meetings on health were
very timely and took place in the aftermath of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Through
the lessons learned during COVID-19 and its effects, it
is very clear that, when addressing health emergencies
and challenges, due recognition must be given to equity,
unhindered access to quality and affordable medicines,
including diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines
through the transfer of technology, and capacitybuilding in research, development and innovation, as
well as local manufacturing and proper financing.

In addition, we regret that the phrase “multiple
and intersecting forms of discrimination”, as well as
the fully inclusive listing of those most marginalized,
including LGBTQIA+ persons, does not appear in
the final versions of all three documents. However,
we applaud the inclusion of strong language on the
importance of, and challenges faced by, the global
shortage of health workers in all three documents.
As we adopt the three political declarations in the
General Assembly plenary today, the United States
wishes to reiterate its outstanding concerns with the
paragraphs on trade and technology transfer and the
terminology around equal pay for equal work.
Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): South
Africa would like to make the following explanation
of position after the adoption of the three political
declarations on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response (resolution 78/3), universal health coverage
(resolution 78/4) and tuberculosis (resolution 78/5).
Allow me first to thank the co-facilitators of the three

South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Our leaders participated in the high-level meetings
as a demonstration of the commitment that health, and
access to it, is a human right and should not result in
financial hardship or be determined by income levels.
They also demonstrated their commitment to swiftly
tackling pandemics and to ending tuberculosis by
2030. They reaffirmed the importance of health to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Indeed, health is an investment in human capital and social
and economic development towards the full realization
of human potential and significantly contributes to the
promotion and protection of human rights and dignity, as
well as the empowerment of all people.

The pandemic has demonstrated that global
health is inherently unequal and that national interest
is prioritized over global commitments. Vaccine
hoarding highlighted the fact that developing
countries need unhindered access to health products,
financing and technology transfer and capacities so
that they can sustainably respond to any possible
outbreaks, pandemics and other health crises. In
addition, the impact of unilateral coercive measures
demonstrated the lack of humanity during a health
emergency and humanitarian crisis through indirect
limitations on access to life-saving resources and
medical countermeasures.
South Africa participated in the negotiations on
the three health outcomes through the Group of 77 and
China and the Group of African States. We are concerned
that the multilateral processes were undermined when
pertinent issues were raised by the Groups and their
views were largely ignored. It is regrettable that the three

23-2893817/23

A/78/PV.16

political declarations failed to acknowledge the voices
of the countries of the South on important elements. If
it was not deemed necessary to acknowledge unilateral
coercive measures in the three political declarations,
at least the language on unhindered access to quality,
affordable and therapeutic tools could have been
recognized as a matter of compromise.
While we accept the adoption of the three
political declarations, South Africa’s position remains
steadfast that those outcomes remain incomplete and
have failed to recognize the needs and aspirations of
developing countries.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt’s delegation welcomes the General Assembly’s
adoption of the three political declarations of the
high-level meetings held in September, on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response (resolution
78/3), universal health coverage (resolution 78/5) and the
fight against tuberculosis (resolution 78/5), reflecting
international solidarity towards achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 3. Egypt’s delegation expresses its
appreciation for the efforts of the co-facilitators of the
negotiations on the draft texts.
Egypt
remains
committed
to
advancing
international efforts to promote the right to the highest
standard of universal health coverage and overcome
the gaps that have been revealed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic in order to address the
international inequalities exposed by the pandemic. In
that context, Egypt continues its national efforts given
our Vision 2030, which seeks to provide the highest
standard of living for citizens, including health care.
Despite Egypt’s participation, developing countries
were looking forward to references in the three
political declarations to a commitment to overcoming
the obstacles facing countries, especially developing
countries, and ensuring equal and unhindered access
to the relevant necessary medical tools, equipment and
technologies, as stated in resolution 77/275. However,
we believe that the adoption of the political declarations
represents an international commitment to supporting
the efforts of developing countries to strengthen their
national health systems.
With regard to the texts of the declarations adopted
today, Egypt’s delegation would like to place on record
that, with regard to paragraph 52 of the political
declaration on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response and paragraph 62 of the political declaration
18/23

05/10/2023

on universal health coverage regarding sexual and
reproductive health, reproductive rights and sexual and
reproductive health-care services, our interpretation
of both paragraphs is based on the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development, held in Cairo. That interpretation is
consistent with Egyptian national laws and legislation
and with the values of Egyptian society.
Mr. Gaal (Hungary): Hungary welcomes the
adoption by consensus of the three political declarations
of the high-level meetings on health-related matters
(resolutions 78/3, 78/4 and 78/5), held back-to-back in
September during the high-level week of the General
Assembly. We would like to convey our appreciation
to the facilitators of the various processes for their
tireless efforts, ensuring that we, as the international
community, arrived at concise and action-oriented
political declarations.
Hungary is steadfastly committed to the realization
of the Sustainable Development Goals, including
ensuring healthy lives and promoting the well-being
for all at all ages. We are of the view that pandemic
prevention and response should be based on professional
experience. Saving lives cannot be a choice of politics
or ideology. Governments around the world have an
overarching responsibility to prepare their healthcare systems for public health emergencies, including
pandemics, and to ensure the achievement of universal
health coverage.
Concerning the respective political declarations
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
and on universal health coverage, we welcome the fact
that the texts make an explicit reference to the primary
role and responsibility of Governments at all levels to
determine their own path towards achieving the goals
set out in those documents. Therefore, when it comes
to the implementation of those political declarations,
Hungary reserves the right to apply the provisions of
the documents in line with its prevailing national laws
and legislation, in particular with regard to paragraphs
7 and 34 of the political declaration on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response and paragraphs
23, 48 and 65 of the political declaration on universal
health coverage.
We believe that national health-care policies and
priorities must remain a matter for Member States’
Governments to set and regulate. In that vein, access to
national health-care systems for individuals belonging
23-28938

05/10/2023

to different groups of people, for example migrants,
should be based on nationally determined policies
and should be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of international law. It is our firm position
that no provisions of the declarations should be read as
originating any newly recognized rights in that regard.
Ms. Del Águila Castillo (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegations of Poland,
Uzbekistan, Israel, Morocco, Guyana and Thailand
for co-facilitating the three health processes, which
involved several weeks of hard work.
I wish to refer to resolutions 78/3 and 78/4, adopted
at this plenary meeting and containing the political
declarations adopted during the high-level meetings
held on 20 and 21 September, respectively.
My country reaffirms its commitment to continuing
to work to achieve universal health coverage. However,
Guatemala dissociates itself from paragraph 52 of
the political declaration on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response and from paragraph 62 of
the political declaration on universal health coverage,
expanding our ambition for health and well-being in a
post-coronavirus disease world and taking into account
the fact that that the language contained in both
paragraphs of the declarations that I just mentioned
contravenes national legislation and public policy on
the protection of life and the institutional framework of
the family in Guatemala.
Guatemala promotes, defends and protects the
human rights of all persons without any discrimination
based on a principle of conventionality. The country
therefore has reservations about the application of
terms, conditions and provisions that are explicitly or
implicitly contrary to the Political Constitution of the
Republic of Guatemala and its internal legal system,
including, but not limited to, issues related to sexual
and reproductive rights.
We also reserve the right to interpret the term
“reproductive rights”, which for the State of Guatemala
does not include abortion. There is no international
consensus on the interpretation of reproductive rights.
Guatemala has national legislation in place that provides
for only sexual and reproductive health policies, not
reproductive rights, which could be interpreted as a right
to abortion or abortion practices, which contravenes the
country’s national legislation.

A/78/PV.16

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to emphasize
that the States members of the World Health Organization
(WHO) agreed to launch a global process to draft and
negotiate a convention, agreement or other international
instrument within the framework of the WHO
Constitution to strengthen prevention, participation and
response to pandemics, which is still under negotiation.
In that regard, this political declaration should not
undermine the process under way in Geneva, but should
be an element that contributes to it.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): Like other
speakers, I would like to begin by thanking both the
former and current Presidents of the General Assembly
and the co-facilitators for their hard work, which enabled
the adoption of political declarations on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response (resolution 78/3),
universal health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight
against tuberculosis (resolution 78/5) this morning. We
are pleased that, after many months of negotiations,
we were able to reach consensus on our collective
ambition here at the General Assembly following the
endorsement of the declarations at the highest levels
during their respective high-level meetings.
The United Kingdom is committed to promoting
the health and well-being of all and to advancing
progress on Sustainable Development Goal 3. We stand
ready to continue to play our part in implementing the
commitments set out in the declarations.
During the high-level meetings, the United
Kingdom announced a package of almost £500 million
in support for global health. That includes £295 million
to respond to disease outbreaks and improve maternal
and child health in low- and middle-income countries,
£103 million to halt the spread of infectious diseases
and support sexual and reproductive health, £95 million
to tackle deadly diseases in Africa and £5 million to
combat tuberculosis (TB). That funding will contribute
to strengthening health systems, boosting collaboration
on research and development, improving coordination
across human, animal and environmental health sectors
and improving access to safe and effective vaccines,
medicines and tests.
We welcome the increased focus on scaling up
investment in primary health care and TB. We must
reform the international financial system to release more
finance for health systems and pandemic preparedness
in developing countries, including through greater
investments in the Pandemic Fund. However, domestic

23-2893819/23

A/78/PV.16

public resources must be the primary source for
such stronger health systems, alongside enhanced
international support.
We also encourage progress on negotiations on
the pandemic accord in Geneva to agree measures
to improve pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response, while respecting national sovereignty.
The most recent universal health coverage global
monitoring report paints an alarming picture, and we
welcome the commitment to faster global progress to
enable wider service coverage, financial protection and
stronger health workforces.
While TB still kills more people than any other
infectious disease, we welcome the commitment
to redoubling efforts to get back on track to end TB
by 2030, which will also help us in the fight against
anti-microbial resistance (AMR).
We are, however, frustrated that the declarations
did not move us forward on gender equality and sexual
and reproductive health and rights, both of which are
integral to achieving universal health coverage and our
wider health goals for all. Despite that, we hope that the
declarations will act as a platform from which we can
all move forward with renewed ambition, cooperation
and partnership to achieve health and well-being for all.
Finally, next year’s high-level meeting on
anti-microbial resistance will be a landmark
opportunity to tackle AMR on a truly global scale. We
look forward to playing our part in that as we continue
to work together to advance global health.
Mr. Nakagawa (Japan): We would like to welcome
today’s consensus adoption of the political declarations
of the high-level meetings on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response (resolution 78/3), universal
health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight against
tuberculosis (resolution 78/5). We would also like to
extend our deep appreciation for the dedicated efforts of
the co-facilitators — Morocco and Israel, Thailand and
Guyana, and Poland and Uzbekistan, respectively — as
well as the able leadership of both the former and current
Presidents of the General Assembly.
We find ourselves at a pivotal juncture in the wake
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The lessons that
we have learned must not be forgotten. It is incumbent
upon the international community to rekindle the spirit
of its collective goal to leave no one’s health behind and
prepare for the next pandemic.
20/23

05/10/2023

Our journey towards universal health coverage
has been fraught with difficulties. The challenges have
become increasingly complex, with divisions surfacing
within the international community. It is during those
challenging moments that we must return to the core of
our mission, encapsulated in the simple, yet profound
principle of leaving no one behind. We must illuminate
the path forward with the beacon of human dignity,
ensuring that our commitment to those principles
remains steadfast. Yet, in the pursuit of consensus,
we acknowledge that challenges emerged during the
negotiations, particularly concerning specific policy
issues, such as technology transfer. Japan underscores
the importance of addressing such issues in the
forums and institutions specifically mandated for such
discussions, in line with the respective governance
for frameworks.
Today’s adoption of the health-related political
declarations marks a midpoint in our journey towards
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Japan
remains resolute in its commitment to the concept of
human security, and we continue to redouble our efforts
in pursuit of Sustainable Development Goals, leaving
no one behind.
In conclusion, let us remember that our work is far
from over. The challenges ahead may be formidable,
but our dedication to the principles of human dignity,
solidarity and cooperation will guide us towards a
future where all people can access the quality health
care that they deserve.
Mr. Nicolino (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation makes this statement on resolution 78/3 in
its national capacity.
Argentina supports the adoption of that declaration
on the understanding that it represents a step forward
in the preparedness for, prevention of and response to
future pandemics. We stress the importance of equity as
a guiding principle. Cooperation and solidarity are the
two central pillars that will make it possible to tackle
the challenges ahead and prepare for another possible
health emergency.
In that regard, Argentina has supported every
regional and global initiative aimed at facilitating
universal, equitable and free, or sufficiently affordable,
access to key supplies, such as vaccines, medicines
and other technologies, especially in low- and
middle-income countries. For Argentina, medicines,
vaccines, treatments and other health technologies
23-28938

05/10/2023

developed in response to a health emergency are
considered global public goods and an essential
component of the right to health. In that regard, the
principles of transparency and reasonableness should
be followed in agreements in order to contribute to their
universal access and equitable distribution.
Argentina also stresses the need to strengthen
the financing and capacities of developing countries
for future pandemic preparedness, prevention and
response. In that regard, Argentina believes that the
members of the World Trade Organization should
act expeditiously to extend the decision of the
twelfth Ministerial Conference on the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
to cover the production and supply of coronavirus
disease therapeutics and diagnostics for, in accordance
with paragraph 8 of that decision.
Finally, Argentina believes that technology transfer
cannot be considered solely on a voluntary basis and
on mutually agreed terms, as proposed in the current
wording. That would imply that it would be on purely
commercial terms, when it should be on preferential
terms to developing countries in order to allow the
domestic development of technologies by those
countries over the long term.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to congratulate the President on the consensus
adoption of the political declarations on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response (resolution 78/3),
universal health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight
against tuberculosis (resolution 78/5). Furthermore, we
would like to also appreciate the work of the co-facilitators
in navigating and leading the deliberations on the three
political declarations.
As a country of more than 275 million people
spread across more than 17,000 islands, the three
political declarations play an eminent role in boosting
the implementation of sustainable development in the
health sector in Indonesia. While each of the specific
topics holds significant importance, we also believe that
the political declarations are interlinked one to another.
With that understanding, Indonesia played an
active role in contributing its views to the formulation
of the political declarations on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response, universal health coverage
and the fight against tuberculosis. We are ready to
support the implementation of those three political

A/78/PV.16

declarations at all levels, including within the United
Nations environment.
In that regard, Indonesia is also pleased to share
that, together with Nigeria, the Philippines and Poland,
we have initiated the alliance of countries on the fight
against tuberculosis. We would like to invite countries
to join that collective fight against tuberculosis.
Mrs. Birrer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland attaches great importance to the political
declarations. They represent an important step
towards our shared vision of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. We thank the co-facilitators for
their tireless work.
In our view, the declarations are not perfect. In
particular, Switzerland considers that the political
declaration on pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response (resolution 78/3) should not prejudge
the outcome of the discussions still under way in
Geneva. The outstanding differences in the wording
of paragraph 43 on access and benefit sharing will
have to be negotiated in an appropriate and legitimate
manner in the processes under way at the World
Health Organization for Switzerland to support its
content. Nevertheless, Switzerland supports the current
consensus, as we attach great importance to the overall
objective of succeeding in formally adopting the
political declarations. We regret that that objective was
not achieved before the high-level week.
Attempts to modify texts after they have been
approved by Heads of State and Government seem to
us to be very worrisome. Reconsidering fundamental
aspects of a declaration after the text has already been
submitted to our leaders is extremely problematic.
In conclusion, we wish to express our concern over
this process. We call on Member States not to allow this
situation to set a new precedent, and we hope that such
an approach will be avoided in our future negotiations.
Mr. Sahraoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Algeria expresses its great satisfaction over the
consensus among members of the General Assembly
on the adoption of the three relevant resolutions 78/3,
78/4 and 78/5 without a vote, although we did not
reach consensus on them during the negotiations. That
highlights the deep gap among the various countries,
especially the countries of the North and the South.
The adoption of the draft resolutions takes place
in the wake of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)

23-2893821/23

A/78/PV.16

pandemic, which served to reiterate the importance of
the need for the international community to give the
utmost priority to health, which is pivotal to achieving
sustainable development and building sound societies
and a better world. Today, after concluding the
negotiations, with all their complexities, it is time to
unite our efforts in order to live up to the commitments
that we agreed and turn them into a reality in order to
achieve universal health coverage in a way that would
strengthen our national health systems and ensure the
right of all to health, while rendering the world more
prepared to deal with such pandemics.
The negotiations on the health resolutions
during the past period represented a challenge to all
delegations, especially the delegations of developing
countries, owing to the pressure to which they were
subjected and the need for a comprehensive approach
to all the negotiation tracks, which required greater
organization and coordination among all stakeholders
in the negotiation process.
That was emphasized by all delegations, even before
starting the negotiations. The sixteenth preambular
paragraph of resolution 77/275 highlights the importance
of ensuring coordination in the organization of the highlevel meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response with the high-level meetings on universal
health coverage and on tuberculosis. That was reflected
in paragraph 6 of resolution 78/4, adopted today,
which acknowledges the importance of coordination
across health-related processes taking place during the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
However, unfortunately, my country notes that
resolution 78/4, on universal health coverage, and
resolution 78/3, on pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response, are not consistent in terms of transfer of
technology. Therefore, Algeria dissociates itself from
paragraph 39 of resolution 78/3 and stresses that the
consensual language is that of paragraph 74 of resolution
78/4, which should be adopted in all other resolutions,
especially those pertaining to health. The same applies
to paragraph 52 of resolution 78/3, which is not in line
with paragraph 62 of resolution 78/4, which reflects
the consensual language used. Algeria therefore also
dissociates itself from paragraph 52 of resolution 78/3
and rejects redrafting the language of the 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development.
The family is the main unit of the society, and most
national health systems are based on programmes that
22/23

05/10/2023

take the positive role of the family into consideration.
In that regard, Algeria regrets the deletion of the
language on the role of the family in resolution 78/5,
on tuberculosis, although it was consensual language.
We hope that that will be avoided in other resolutions.
Algeria also deeply regrets the non-consensus on
adopting language from decision SSA2(5) of the World
Health Assembly, on the availability of some medical
procedures without any obstacles. We believe that that
would have ensured fairness in dealing with pandemics
and would guarantee the rights of developing countries,
free from unilateral protectionist policies, which
increased during COVID-19.
In that context, Algeria is surprised that none of
the three resolutions include language on the negative
impacts of unilateral coercive measures, although
several negotiating countries and groups requested that,
in particular the Group of 77 and China and the Group of
African States. We emphasize that the agreed language
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should
be the basis for any future negotiations to achieve a
consensus that takes into account the positions of all
countries and their interests.
In conclusion, we hope that the resolutions adopted
today will represent a new starting point towards
further cooperation so that everyone can enjoy highquality health services free of any severe financial
impacts, particularly in developing countries. That
requires greater cooperation by increasing funding
and accelerating the transfer of technology towards
countries of the South in order to promote their
capacities and strengthen their national health systems.
Ms. Matos Menéndez (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I should first like to refer to the
negotiation process on the political declaration on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
(resolution 78/3). In that regard, the Dominican
Republic would like to express its sincere gratitude
to the co-facilitators of the political declaration,
the Ambassadors of Morocco and Israel, for their
unwavering commitment and leadership, which led to a
successful outcome to that clearly challenging process.
Negotiations lasted over approximately four
months, with prolonged days of dialogue, requiring
many hours of the day in talks, both with our teams in
Geneva and in our capital. However, given the newness
of the topic, we found ourselves up against many
challenges, including ensuring greater coordination
23-28938

05/10/2023

with other related processes. However, we managed to
achieve a document that largely reflects the interests
of all members, gradually overcoming the obstacles
with perseverance.
It is essential to highlight the challenges that we
faced during that process in order to promote better
coordination in future negotiations, particularly
regarding agreed language, using parallel negotiations,
in which we also are involved. Despite the fact
that we would have hoped for a better balance
being struck regarding some of the elements in
the declaration, particularly concerning matters of
priority, the Dominican Republic was in favour and
fully supported it. The text provides recommendations
to improve a holistic, cross-cutting approach to the
necessary measures to strengthen health systems and
the institutions involved therein, making pandemic
preparation a fundamental requisite.
I would like to take this opportunity to also express
our thanks and congratulations to the Ambassadors of

A/78/PV.16

Guyana, Thailand, Poland and Uzbekistan, who guided
the drafting of the political declaration on universal
health coverage (resolution 78/4) and the fight against
tuberculosis (resolution 78/5). The Dominican Republic
fully supports those declarations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
On behalf of the President of the General Assembly,
I would like to convey my sincere appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Morocco, Israel, Guyana,
Thailand, Poland and Uzbekistan and the respective
teams of experts, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on the political declarations. I am sure
that members of the Assembly join him in extending
sincere appreciation to them.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 125.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-2893823/23
