UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
14 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING (Resumption 1)
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 14 February 1994, at 3.55 p.m.

President:
Members:

Mr. OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

Argentina
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
France
New Zealand
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. CARDENAS
Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. CHEN Jian
Mr. KOVANDA
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. KEATING
Mr. GAMBARI
Mr. AL-KHUSSAIBY
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. BIZIMANA
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO
Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

94-85179 (E)

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
68

The meeting resumed at 3.55 p.m.
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Brunei
Darussalam, Estonia, Greece and Kuwait, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I

propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdul Momin (Brunei
Darussalam), Mr. Jaakson (Estonia), Mr. Exarchos (Greece) and
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now continue its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
Mr. CHEN Jian (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Recently, with the aggravation of the armed conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the humanitarian situation is worsening and the people
there are being subjected to greater suffering.

On 5 February, a

mortar-shelling incident occurred in Sarajevo, resulting in the
killing or wounding of more than 200 persons.

This incident has

caused shock and indignation in the international community.
Chinese delegation strongly condemns this atrocity.

The

We are in

favor of a speedy and thorough United Nations investigation into
the incident.
The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has long remained
unsolved and continues to worsen.

It is the common aspiration of

the international community that this disastrous crisis should be

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
69

(Mr. Chen Jian, China)
brought to an early end.

In this regard, we fully understand the

concern and anxiety shown by the numerous non-aligned and Muslim
countries over the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We

believe that the fundamental solution to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
conflict is a political settlement, which depends, in the final
analysis, on the people in Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves.

We

also agree that heavy weapons should be withdrawn from areas
surrounding Sarajevo or put under the control of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), for the purpose of protecting the
safety and security of the people in Sarajevo and ensuring the
smooth conduct of humanitarian-relief activities.

We have noted

that an agreement has recently been reached between the Bosnian
Serbs and the Bosnian Government forces on a cease-fire in Sarajevo
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons.

We welcome this new agreement

and hope that the international community will continue to urge and
encourage the parties to implement in earnest the agreements
already reached so as to create a favourable atmosphere and
conditions for peace talks.
The eventual settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
continue to be sought within the framework of the principles set
forth by the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia and
the relevant Security Council resolutions and through peaceful
negotiations, so as to ensure a lasting, fair and reasonable
settlement that can guarantee the fundamental interests of the
various parties and can be accepted by all.
The parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina recently held
several rounds of talks.

We hope that the endeavours of the

international community will truly help promote the peace process
towards a political settlement.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
70

(Mr. Chen Jian, China)
China always advocates the peaceful settlement of conflict
through dialogue and negotiation.
threat of force.

We are opposed to the use or

At present, the peace process in Bosnia and

Herzegovina is at a crucial juncture.

To take further military

actions there will by no means help achieve a political settlement.
On the contrary, it will only entail negative consequences.

With

regard to the use of air power in Bosnia and Herzegovina, our
understanding is that it should be limited to self-defence by
UNPROFOR.

As for the possible serious consequences that the use of

air strikes could have for the safety of UNPROFOR personnel and
that of the humanitarian relief organizations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we cannot but express anxiety and concern.

One should

therefore act very prudently and refrain from taking any hasty
action.
Peaceful coexistence is the common aspiration of the various
ethnic communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We strongly urge the

parties to the conflict to act in the people’s fundamental
interests, bury the hatchet and bring the war and conflict to an
end through negotiation, and achieve genuine national
reconciliation so as to lift the people in Bosnia and Herzegovina
from the abyss of war.
Mr. BIZIMANA (Rwanda) (interpretation from French):

The

Security Council is meeting today to share the bitterness we feel
about the way the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has evolved,
and to consider the ways and means that could lead to the end of
the disaster horribly perpetrated for motives that prompt people to
flout, without the least concern, the most elementary principles of
international law, morality and ethics, the human values that serve

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
71

(Mr. Bizimana, Rwanda)
as the foundation of the right to life.

That is mankind’s

raison d’être.
For about two years now, day by day the international
community has observed the human tragedy brought about by the
hateful practice of "ethnic cleansing", the objective of which is
to eliminate an entire people, an entire nation and a Member State
of the United Nations.
The ignoble, abominable acts perpetrated against innocent
people in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina reached an apogee
with the terrible slaughter, on 5 February 1994, of civilians in
the central market of Sarajevo, which resulted in numerous losses
of human life and hundreds of injuries.

This odious act was

preceded by the criminal attack on 4 February 1994 which cost some
civilians, including children, their lives, and wounded many
others.
My delegation believes that more than ever before the time has
now come to put an end to this carnage and to stop these atrocious
acts.

To achieve this, we believe that the Council - rather than

adopting new resolutions which are not implemented - must first
consider the necessary measures to ensure the complete
implementation of the whole arsenal of resolutions that have
already been adopted.

We are deeply convinced that if these

resolutions had been implemented, in particular resolutions
824 (1993), 836 (1993) and 844 (1993), the "safe areas" in Bosnia
and Herzegovina would have been protected.

These resolutions are,

for us, a legal framework that is ample enough to cover all actions
aimed at ensuring the security of innocent lives in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
72

(Mr. Bizimana, Rwanda)
To achieve this, we welcome the action of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and the swift follow-up by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) of his request regarding
the recourse to air strikes to deter perpetration of barbaric acts
and shelling, which my country vigorously condemns.
In this context, my delegation supports the actions considered
by NATO to ensure the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo.
My delegation would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the need to consider that in this exercise we must act
most carefully, bearing in mind the special situation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is subject to an arms embargo even as it
confronts acts of aggression and therefore needs to exercise its
right of self-defence as laid down in Article 51 of the Charter.
We deplore the fact that events in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
proved right those, including my delegation, who have always felt
that the refusal to lift the embargo against Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a refusal with which the great majority of members of
the international community do not agree - has been taken by the
Bosnian Serbs and their allies as a sign of support for their use
of weapons and for their continued acts of aggression against a
Member State of the United Nations which has been stripped of all
means of ensuring the survival of its people.

It is high time that

the Security Council proceeded to a reconsideration of this
question.
My delegation believes that efforts to ensure complete
implementation of Security Council resolutions should make it
possible to restore the balance that has been lost and to generate
a new willingness in the parties concerned to act by means of
negotiations in order to reach a negotiated settlement of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
73

(Mr. Bizimana, Rwanda)
conflict, ensuring the integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Here, we would invite the parties concerned to let themselves
be influenced by the ideal of peace, to negotiate in good faith
within the framework of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia and to refrain from any act which might harm the
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force or that of the
organizations working in the field to distribute the humanitarian
aid that is needed to relieve the suffering of the people.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of Djibouti.
After an excruciating and gruesome 22-month war, catastrophic
in both human and material terms, the powers that be seem to have
determined that enough is enough.

At least, that is the reading

of my delegation, this time around.

After the many golden

opportunities squandered in the past, the time is again ripe for
decisive and far-reaching action on all fronts, because it no
longer makes any sense merely to present the appearance of a common
front.

We are too familiar with the hollow threat, "We rule

nothing out!".

The attack on a Sarajevo open-air market on

Saturday, 5 February, now acknowledged as the deadliest since the
aggression started, may, after all, prove to be the proverbial last
straw.

Its provenance has never been doubted, given its timing and

deadly accuracy.
Over the last two years, the crimes and atrocities perpetrated
in Bosnia, while the world watched with an indignation that was
often unmatched with decisiveness, caused tens of thousands of
deaths, fatal injuries and maimings, rapes, mass expulsions and
untold human misery.

The international community not only failed

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
74

(The President)
to prevent the aggressors from unleashing this war in the first
place, but, worse, also failed miserably to contain the savagery of
this abominable war which continues to this day.
The question is, will the fallout from that deadly mortar
attack change the future course of events in Bosnia?

We are

encouraged by the swift decision and the coordination of actions
between the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) on possible air strikes by next week, unless
the artillery besieging Sarajevo is pulled back and taken out of
range and the heavy weapons in the area are handed over to the
United Nations.
Through its resolutions, particularly resolution 836 (1993),
adopted in June 1993, the United Nations has always had sufficient
authority to use all necessary measures to deter attacks against
Sarajevo and the five Muslim enclaves designated as "safe areas".
The guns around Sarajevo may be silent for now, but the other
Muslim enclaves, in eastern Bosnia, remain under tight siege and
are vulnerable to retaliatory attacks.

In those areas as in

Sarajevo, water, power and access to supply lines are under tight
Serb control.

Surely this can no longer be tolerated.

We strongly

urge that the twin issues of the shelling and siege of Sarajevo and
the other "safe areas" be addressed concurrently.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
75

(The President)
Throughout the war, the Serbs have consistently tested the
resolve of the international community, whose empty threats and
indecision undoubtedly added to the lingering suffering and
continued loss of property as well as territory of the war’s chief
victim - the Bosnian Muslims.
Serb defiance set the tone.

Western policy has changed quite

often in response to events on the battlefield, and policy
differences among the major countries have only exacerbated the
uncertainty about any political and territorial settlements.
We have come a long way, mired, as it were, in confusion,
division and inaction.

We therefore welcome the current ultimatum

as a right move and the first, perhaps, in a series of firm lines
that have to be drawn to show our determination to end the war.
That brings me to venture to answer the loaded question "What do the Bosnian Muslims want?"

More than anything else, they

want the right to defend themselves; they want guaranteed peace, a
fair and realistic territorial settlement, contiguous territory,
secure borders, free and unimpeded access to both the Sava River
and the Adriatic sea, and independent supply lines.

What is at

stake, however, is the viability of the State that will finally
emerge from the ashes of a once-proud multi-ethnic society.
Whatever its basis, such a settlement must not smack of "ethnic
cleansing", appeasement or undue pressure to accept an unjust deal.
In the attempt to cut and run, the weakest party - Bosnia’s
Muslims - should not be unjustly pressured and obliged to settle
for far less than what is, in the final analysis, an acceptable
minimum to them.
Finally, we wish to express our sincere appreciation and
gratitude to the Secretary-General, his Special Representatives,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
76

(The President)
NATO, the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) Commander in
Bosnia, UNPROFOR personnel, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the multitudes of non-governmental organizations, for
their devotion, determination and sacrifices and their commitment
to mitigating the humanitarian tragedy and bringing about a durable
peace, coupled with an honourable settlement, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Germany.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. GRAF ZU RANTZAU (Germany):

It is an honour for me,

Mr. President, to speak today in the Security Council under your
able guidance.

Your vast experience as a seasoned diplomat will

serve you well in ensuring progress in the work of the Council
under your able guidance.
The massacre of innocent civilians in Sarajevo has profoundly
shaken the international community.

These crimes must be stopped.

The siege of Sarajevo must be lifted.
Germany, ever since the outbreak of fighting in the former
Yugoslavia, has given full support to the efforts of the Security
Council and of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to put
an end to hostilities and achieve a peaceful settlement.

Germany

has also actively contributed to the European Union’s peace
efforts.

Most recently Germany, together with France, initiated

the European Union’s Action Plan.
On 9 February 1994 the North Atlantic Council took decisions
of great importance.

It called for the withdrawal or regrouping

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
77

(Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau, Germany)
and placing under the control of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), within 10 days, of the heavy weapons of the
Bosnian Serb forces located in an area within 20 kilometres of the
centre of Sarajevo, and excluding an area within 2 kilometres of
the centre of Pale.
The decision of the Council of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) is balanced because it also calls upon the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, within the same period, to
place under UNPROFOR control its heavy weapons within the Sarajevo
exclusion zone and to refrain from attacks launched from within the
current confrontation lines in the city.

If, after the 10-day

deadline, non-authorized arms systems have not been withdrawn, the
use of force will become inevitable in order to restore peace.
Attempts by the Bosnian Serbs to undermine the deadline by
obstructing negotiations will and can no longer be tolerated.
This is NATO’s concrete answer to the Secretary-General’s
request of 6 February 1994.

My Government has from the beginning

supported the French and United States initiatives on which NATO’s
decision is based.

My Government warmly welcomes the NATO

Council’s decision.
Let me emphasize:

the decisions taken by the NATO Council and

by the Council of the European Union cannot be seen as retaliation
or as a desire for military action.

They are part of the political

process towards a negotiated settlement.

Only when a political

solution proves impossible is the use of force permitted to achieve
the aims set out in Security Council resolutions 824 (1993) and
836 (1993).
My Government favours a political solution.

So does NATO.

The decision of the NATO Council is aimed at demilitarizing

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
78

(Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau, Germany)
Sarajevo and placing it under United Nations administration through
negotiations and in agreement with the European Union’s Action
Plan.
The decision commends the European Union’s political plan of
action.

This plan is based on the conviction that for moral and

humanitarian reasons everything possible must be done to put an end
to the bloodshed and suffering in the former Yugoslavia, and
especially in Sarajevo.
We cannot accept this brutal aggression against innocent
people.

Germany has done its utmost to alleviate the suffering of

these victims.

Almost 400,000 refugees have found shelter in my

country, more than twice as many as in all other European countries
together.

A total of 612 million Deutschmarks have been spent on

humanitarian aid.

It is not acceptable that delivery of

humanitarian assistance is constantly hindered, that aid workers
are threatened and attacked.
My Government has always supported the Bosnian Muslims in the
search for a solution which secures the physical and political
survival of the Muslims as a nation in their home State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

This implies above all a satisfactory territorial

solution, including access to the Sava River and to the sea.

Also,

the city of Mostar should be placed under the administration of the
European Union.

My Government has offered to provide an

administrator for Mostar.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
79

(Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau, Germany)
My Government hopes that the NATO Council’s decision will
bring the political process forward.

Towards this end my

Government supports continued close cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union.

Germany also welcomes an active,

strong role for the United States of America.

The support of the

peace efforts by the Russian Federation will be of great
importance.
The peace talks in Geneva continue.

Without the necessary

political will of the three conflicting parties they cannot be
successful.
hands.

The key to an end to the suffering lies in their

Against the will of the conflicting parties, a political

solution cannot be found.
My country will spare no effort to help restore peace and
stability in the former Yugoslavia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Germany for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia, whom I now
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. RAZALI (Malaysia):

I thank you, Mr. President, and

the other members of the Council for convening this meeting.

I am

very happy, Sir, to see you presiding, knowing very well your sense
of fairness and commitment to the issues that have to be properly
addressed in this Council.
The decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Council to give a clear ultimatum to the Serbs to withdraw their
heavy artillery was long overdue.

That it has finally been taken

and that it provides the promise of some respite for the
beleaguered Bosnians in Sarajevo must be welcomed.

Yet the next

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
80

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
few days will be critical.

The Serbs have broken promises and

pledges before, so what can be expected of this one?

And how does

one ensure against actions of subterfuge or partial compliance?
NATO has hemmed and hawed and threatened before about possible
air strikes,

but they have never taken place.

The slaughter of

the Bosnians has not stopped, nor has the "ethnic cleansing",
because the Serbs have not taken NATO threats seriously.
can one make of the new NATO resolve?

So what

Are we at last seeing NATO

authority living up to responsibility and action, with the
necessary political will to carry out the strikes, or are we to be
disappointed again?

Will the new resolve not be diluted and

fudged, mired in the interplay of European power politics in the
Balkans that has brought to grief so many tens of thousands of
Bosnians?
My country, Malaysia, continues to have serious doubts about
the commitment to bring about a just and honourable peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, even when at every turn and opportunity we insist
and plead for one.

At a previous Council meeting on the subject of

Bosnia and Herzegovina the Malaysian delegation appealed for moral
and political leadership.

No such effort has been forthcoming so

far, unless this ultimatum is new evidence.
see.

In a few days we shall

We have our doubts, but we accept that the ultimatum is an

important, if small, step that can provide some semblance of
justice to the Bosnians, if the air strikes follow upon
non-compliance.
Also, the ultimatum is but a small part of a larger need for a
comprehensive and just settlement of the conflict.

There are at

least five "safe areas" other than Sarajevo that must be protected
from Serbian assault.

NATO’s readiness to use force must apply to

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
81

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
these areas, too.

Of special concern is Bihac, where, with all

eyes on Sarajevo, the Serbs threaten, at great peril to the people
of Bihac.

There is also the opening of Tuzla airport and the

Srebrenica troop rotation, bogged down by Serbian intransigence.
These objectives have to be pursued urgently, backed by the
necessary firmness of authority that will make the Serbs calculate
that it is in their best interest to comply.

Given this first

step, the countries of NATO must proceed even further for a just
settlement.
The Malaysian Government has always maintained that firmness
of authority and commitment are necessary to make the Serbs respond
positively or comply.

The Malaysian Government would appeal to the

United States and other members of NATO that the recourse to
credible threat of force should not apply only to Sarajevo.

The

stiffening of NATO authority can be used as a weapon to bring about
genuine negotiations.

One is made aware of the argument that if

NATO should undertake the air strikes there will be retaliation
against troops of contributing countries, which may mean some
countries’ pulling up stakes and leaving the scene, as the lives of
their soldiers are far too precious, even if there are others that
will stay behind.

If that is the fear, and if some countries are

prepared to abandon commitments made in the Council, and pack up
and go away, then why not give the Bosnians the right to defend
themselves with arms that they desperately require to take on the
Serbs in a more equal combat?
countries to contribute troops?

Why not allow more Muslim and other
Malaysia already has troops in

Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we do not intend to abandon our
commitments.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
82

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
My delegation gives little respect to such arguments and
manifestations of timidity.

They only feed the Serbian war

machine, making the Serbs appear invincible and unstoppable,
intimidating the United Nations and threatening the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR).

This is a notion of which we must all

be disabused, especially in the Security Council, or else this
Council goes down the road of appeasement.

If UNPROFOR is

threatened, it must be sufficiently geared to resist and defend
itself.

If UNPROFOR cannot do the job, the Bosnians must be

allowed to arm themselves and apply the right to self-defence and
collective defence.

There will be countries that will come to the

aid of Bosnia and Herzegovina in that instance.
My delegation is aware of certain efforts to question the
ultimatum given to the Bosnian Serbs.

The Malaysian Government

strongly opposes such a position, including the idea of a United
Nations administration in Sarajevo.

Sarajevo is the political

capital, symbol and heart of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s resistance
against genocide and aggression.
undermine that.

Nothing should be done to

The tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the tens

of thousands that have died are to a large measure attributable to
the actions of partisan European countries pushing and promoting
one-sided interests, outside and inside the Security Council.
Also, there can be no justification for preventing NATO from
striking if the Serbs do not comply.

The Secretary-General is

fully armed and charged by resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) to
proceed forthwith in the event that the Serbs do not comply within
10 days from the issuance of the ultimatum.
equivocation on that score.

There can be no

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
83

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
We must not forget that many people from all over were
outraged by what happened in the market-place in Sarajevo.

It was

this outrage in the United States, Europe and elsewhere that
galvanized public opinion, bringing about the ultimatum.

People

are, in fact, passing verdicts on Governments for inaction and
political callousness and are demanding that wanton acts of
terrorism in Bosnia be stopped.

The massacre in Sarajevo is a

clear act of terrorism, and one would have wished that there had
been immediate punitive action against those that committed that
massacre.

There have been terrorist bombings elsewhere when

important countries have retaliated immediately and in full rage,
but this time the perpetrators are being spared unless they strike
again.
There is an unpalatable element of inconsistency in this
situation, which, with all the earlier sins of inaction, makes the
tragedy of the Bosnians even more distressing.

An independent,

multi-ethnic Member of the United Nations has been raped and
mutilated.

Furthermore, to say now that the massacre gives more

reason to negotiate is to pervert the overall negotiating process,
especially if there are going to be actions and pressures to force
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to come to the table to
accept an unjust peace.

At this point, all pressure should be

directed at the Serbs, who hold 70 per cent of Bosnian territory.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
84

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
The Malaysian Government has always maintained that the
central authority and responsibility for bringing about a
comprehensive and honourable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina lies
with the Security Council, not the efforts in Geneva.

It is our

contention that the efforts in Geneva have deviated from the
various relevant resolutions of the Council.
At a recent meeting that took place during the non-aligned
conference in Jakarta, the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference in the Contact Group called for the
convening of an appropriately restructured international conference
on Bosnia and Herzegovina in conformity with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly.

It

is their conclusion that the Geneva Conference has run its course
and has deviated from the provisions of the resolutions of the
Council.

It is time for the negotiations to be held directly under

the auspices of the Council, in New York.
It is also the position of the Malaysian Government that the
efforts so far have not taken fully into account the serious
implications of the provisions of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

The International Court

of Justice, on 13 September 1993, declared itself
"... not satisfied that all that might have been done has been
done to prevent the commission of the crime of genocide in the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ." (Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, Provisional Measures, Order of 13 September 1993,
I.C.J. Reports 1993, pp. 348-9)
This raises the question again of whether the Security Council
arms embargo on Bosnia and Herzegovina remains valid in the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
85

(Mr. Razali, Malaysia)
presence of evidence that maintaining the embargo favours or
contributes to the commission of genocide.

Resolution 713 (1991)

of the Council cannot apply to Bosnia and Herzegovina in these
circumstances.

The most pressing issue before the Council, despite

the obstacles placed by certain countries, is the lifting of the
arms embargo on the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Malaysia for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Croatia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement
now.
Mr. NOBILO (Croatia):

My delegation believes that the

decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to
relieve the siege of Sarajevo follows the Security Council’s logic
of peace and is mandated by the Council’s existing resolutions.

We

also believe that the Bosnian Serb side will abide by this decision
if it is indeed ready for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is to be regretted that this decision was not made much
earlier; if the international community had issued so firm an
ultimatum to the Serbian side at the time when Vukovar, Dubrovnik
and other Croatian cities were under brutal Serbian gunfire,
hundreds of thousands of lives could have been saved and a peaceful
settlement to the region’s problems could have been secured much
earlier.

Yet we warmly welcome the consensus between the United

States, the Russian Federation, the European Union and other
countries finally to act together.
In fact, a number of measures against any side in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that chooses not to abide by the peace logic on the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
86

(Mr. Nobilo, Croatia)
ground should be considered.

What is needed in Bosnia and

Herzegovina is a carefully balanced policy of a credible threat of
force and straightforward support for the peace plans at present
under discussion.
principle:

This approach must be founded on one essential

it is the Serbian aggression against Croatia and Bosnia

and Herzegovina that started the biggest European crisis in the
last 40 years and that remains the core of regional instability.
This aspect of the conflict must guide all possible actions
with respect to the balance of power in the region.

It must also

guide all humanitarian efforts and all proposals for a political
settlement in the region.

If Belgrade’s aggression is allowed to

go unchecked, even in political terms, it is bound to return and to
spill over, probably at even greater cost to the international
community.
The Government of the Republic of Croatia, aware of the fact
not only that the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina would come at
enormous cost in human life, but also that the security and
stability of Croatia would be seriously affected by it, has always
advocated a peaceful, political settlement of the conflict.

We

firmly believe that continued warfare and human suffering can lead
only to a permanent polarization between the nations of the former
Yugoslavia, the type of polarization that neither outside force nor
international law can overcome.

This is why my Government accepted

the Vance plan for Croatia, and this is why my Government advocated
first the Cutiliero plan, then the Vance-Owen plan and the
Owen-Stoltenberg plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and now the
European Union Action Plan for Croatia and for Bosnia.
We believe that accepting international mediation is the best
policy under the circumstances.

Of course, there were better

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
87

(Mr. Nobilo, Croatia)
solutions.

After what has happened, however, there are no longer

any ideal solutions for Bosnia and Herzegovina:

there are only

least painful solutions.
The Bosnian conflict is doubly tragic, first because of the
lack of appropriate international response in the beginning, and,
secondly, because, as the Council is well aware, the victims in
this war have been, primarily and overwhelmingly, Bosnian civilians
and not military personnel.

My Government, particularly because of

the latter fact, will continue to support a political settlement of
the conflict, and in this regard stands firmly behind the European
Union Action Plan of 22 November 1993.
Furthermore, it is the view of my Government that the Council
should also give its unequivocal support to the European Union
Action Plan.

The Council must be aware that the parties have been

negotiating for more than a year now, and that this process must
reach fruition quickly, despite some local political opposition,
for the benefit of the innocent people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The longer we allow the settlement to be delayed, the more likely
is a permanent polarization of the three communities.

Such a delay

would be more costly not only for the civilian population in the
region, but also for the international community.
My Government has not only supported the international
community’s intermediation in the region, but has also been at the
forefront of promoting bilateral political solutions, beginning
with President Tudjman’s peace initiative of 2 November 1993, and
it has been at the forefront of contributing towards the
international community’s humanitarian policy in respect of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Croatia has already spent an estimated

$832 million in direct financial outlays for the care of 280,000

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
88

(Mr. Nobilo, Croatia)
Bosnian refugees - mostly Muslim - in Croatia, and has provided
logistic support for other operations essential for the functioning
of the Sarajevo Government.
My Government’s 19 January 1994 joint declaration with the
Belgrade authorities should be viewed in the same way as my
Government’s 7 February 1993 agreements with Slovenia and the
10 January 1993 treaty proposal to the Bosnian Muslim side.

None

of these documents can be viewed as an alliance against the
non-participating States, but as an alliance for peace with all
sides.
Tuesday’s joint statement by the Foreign Minister of Croatia
and the Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a further step
in the direction of an alliance for peace.

The agreement, reached

in a friendly and constructive atmosphere, requests international
control of the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 787 (1992) and resolution
838 (1993).

It also calls for a cease-fire agreement between the

Bosnian Croat army and the Bosnian Muslim army within seven days.
Further, it was agreed to intensify the talks regarding the
unconditional exchange of all detainees; to secure the return of
all refugees after the establishment of peace, irrespective of
future political arrangements; and to intensify negotiations on all
models for future relations between the constituent nations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and between the two States.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
89

(Mr. Nobilo, Croatia)
This agreement, like the Declaration with Belgrade, follows
the logic of peace and not the logic of war.

That logic, we firmly

believe, will also lead to an acceptable resolution of the issue
relating to the presence of elements of the Croatian army on the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I am pleased to inform the

Council today that my Government has already approached the
Secretary-General to consider a mechanism that would meet the
demands of the Security Council’s presidential statement of
3 February 1994.
In conclusion, I must emphasize that it is very much in the
interests of Croatia that the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should come to an end.

Croatia may be a hostage to the war in

Bosnia and Herzegovina in more ways than one.

Consider, for

instance, that Croatia is pursuing a peaceful dialogue with the
Serbs in Croatia, while some promote more war between Serbs and
Croats, on behalf of Muslims, in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Consider,

too, the plight of Croatian citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under siege by the Bosnian Muslim army in the encircled enclaves of
Vitez, Kiseljak, Zepce and Usora.

In those enclaves there are

about 150,000 civilians whom the Security Council cannot protect,
even though it is equally obliged to do so under its humanitarian
mandate, while Croatian public opinion and basic moral law demand
that they be provided for.
These paradoxes are two of many about the Bosnian conflict
that make a solution so difficult.
through negotiation.

But a solution must come -

A military solution to the hundreds of

similar paradoxes would lead to an abyss of despair.

The Council

can avoid that abyss at this critical time by remaining determined
to stay the course set forth in the 9 February 1994 decision of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
90

(Mr. Nobilo, Croatia)
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and by giving its full
and unconditional support today to the European Union Action Plan
of 22 November 1993.
The PRESIDENT:
Austria.

The next speaker is the representative of

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. SUCHARIPA (Austria):

Mr. President, I am glad to see

these important Security Council proceedings taking place under
your most able guidance and leadership.
The brutal shelling of innocent civilians in Sarajevo, to
which most previous speakers have referred and which culminated in
the horrible massacre we all had to witness on our television
screens, has sent shock-waves throughout the world.

We can only

concur with the statement of the Chairman of the Commission on
Human Rights that this deliberate and indiscriminate killing is
part of a pattern of despicable and outrageous violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
On 25 September 1991 the Security Council met for the first
time to discuss the situation in the former Yugoslavia, and, deeply
concerned by the ongoing fighting, it appealed to all parties to
settle their disputes peacefully and through negotiations.

Since

then the Security Council, after careful consideration, has adopted
a great number of resolutions and statements which, again and
again, emphasize basic principles such as the need to respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, the condemnation of the practice of "ethnic
cleansing" and the need for an immediate cessation of all
hostilities and for the unhindered flow of humanitarian assistance.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
91

(Mr. Sucharipa, Austria)
Most of these important decisions have been ignored.

Thus,

fundamental principles of international conduct as enshrined in the
Charter of this Organization have been gravely and repeatedly
violated.

This unfortunate tendency to disregard basic norms of

international law is also seen with regard to other crises, a fact
which only underlines the seriousness of the situation.
The horrible images of the Sarajevo massacre, combined with
the knowledge of tragedies caused by war and internal strife in
other regions of the world, remind us forcefully of the need to
restore the credibility of the international system to which we all
adhere.

This can only be achieved through full implementation of

and compliance with all relevant decisions adopted in competent
international forums.
As a first and vital step in this direction, the Security
Council’s decision designating Sarajevo and other Bosnian towns as
safe areas should be enforced.

This would at last give a sign of

hope to the suffering people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Events over recent months have proved beyond any doubt that it
is simply not enough to adopt resolutions and declare safe areas,
but that a concrete and firm willingness to follow up on those
resolutions is necessary.

The siege of Sarajevo and other towns

and villages, and the constant attacks on them, resulting in tragic
loss of civilian life - for which the Bosnian Serbs undoubtedly
bear primary responsibility - must be brought to an end.
The now apparent resolve actually to enforce previous
resolutions, if necessary through concrete measures taken in
conformity with those resolutions, inaugurates a new phase of
active involvement by the international community to stop the
carnage in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Austria supports this new

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
92

(Mr. Sucharipa, Austria)
stance of the international community, and we fully acknowledge the
major role played in this regard by the Governments of France and
the United States, as well as the clear position taken by the
Secretary-General.
We hope that this resolve will convince the parties concerned
that they all stand to gain from a process of serious negotiations
leading towards a political solution.

This political settlement

must be based on all the fundamental principles of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Any other course of action would

only engender further conflicts in the future.
The humanitarian assistance which has been provided by the
international community under the most difficult circumstances, as
essential as it is, must not become a fig leaf for our conscience.
The political endeavours that have been undertaken so patiently
over the past months must now yield results if they are not to
become an end in themselves.
The peoples of former Yugoslavia have endured untold
suffering.

In this eleventh hour, a determined effort towards

peace is called for.

Thus we would hope that the current cease-

fire arrangement, as well as the concentration of heavy weapons
under the control of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), which has at least begun to be implemented, are signs
of a sincere change of attitude.

Otherwise, military force exerted

in the name of the international community will be the only
recourse remaining.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
93

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Austria for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. HUSLID (Norway):

Let me say at the outset, Sir, that

we are very glad to see you in the presidential chair of the
Security Council.
My Government strongly regrets that it has not yet been
possible to achieve peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
is a deep political and human tragedy.

The situation

We have seen naked

aggression, and situations in which village has turned against
village and where ethnocentrism has replaced tolerance.
Fundamental principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been violated, and continue to be violated.
From a humanitarian point of view, the world community is deeply
shocked at the number of dead and wounded, the more than 3 million
refugees and the even larger number of innocent civilians who are
now suffering through their second winter.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
94

(Mr. Huslid, Norway)
The recent tragic events in Sarajevo, resulting in the death
of numerous innocent civilians, tell us that our common
responsibility to reach a political solution in the former
Yugoslavia is more obvious than ever.

We reiterate our strong

support for the negotiating process and for the two co-chairmen,
Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg.

There is no viable alternative

to a negotiated settlement.
The initiative by the Secretary-General, followed by the
response of the North Atlantic Council on 9 February, must be
regarded as part of a political strategy to induce the parties
involved to reach peace through negotiations.

It is a positive

factor that the situation on the ground has improved since.

The

demobilization continues, but there are examples of breaches in the
cease-fire that worry us.
Norway associates itself with the decision by the North
Atlantic Council taken on 9 February.

There are limits to what the

international community can accept in terms of human suffering
before concrete action must be taken.

It is ultimately the

responsibility of the Secretary-General to decide on the steps that
may be taken, as the overall political authority rests with the
United Nations.

Knowing that he can ultimately request air

strikes, it is now up to the Secretary-General to monitor the
situation, and to build on this political signal in order to
further the peace process.
The decisions that have been taken demand strict respect for
the safety of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
personnel and for the humanitarian relief workers throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

As a large troop contributor to UNPROFOR, and as

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
95

(Mr. Huslid, Norway)
one of the largest contributors to the humanitarian relief
operations, my Government would like to emphasize this point.
On behalf of the Norwegian Government, I reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General’s initiative and express my deep-felt
sympathy for the children, women and men whose lives are endangered
by war, hunger and the extreme living conditions in the former
Yugoslavia.

Their plight makes it incumbent upon all of us to

support the peace process and to end this meaningless war.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Norway for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.

I invite him

to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ELARABY (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):

First,

I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

There is no

doubt that your great experience and well-known wisdom, not to
mention the fact that you are a seasoned diplomat, will guide the
Council towards acceptable outcomes with regard to the current
crisis.

I would also like to thank your predecessor, Ambassador

Karel Kovanda, Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, for
his efforts during his presidency last month.
The Security Council is today examining the continuing
military aggression against Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There can be

no doubt that the sudden attack against the city of Sarajevo on
5 February is just one further episode in a long succession of
armed acts of aggression - arbitrary and genocidal acts against the
Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina before the eyes of the world.
The Egyptian delegation has frequently had occasion to warn
the Council about its lack of firmness in adopting measures under

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
96

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
by the Charter to bring an end to the aggression in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

It is now clear that the Security Council must act

immediately and adopt the necessary measures in order to bring an
end to this loathsome humanitarian tragedy.

If the Security

Council fails in this its credibility and the credibility of the
international community as a whole will be seriously threatened.
International legitimacy has been undermined, and there can be
no doubt that procrastination in the face of aggression will have
serious effects throughout the world.

This is why the Security

Council must base itself on the experience of the last two years.
Indeed, it has adopted more than 40 resolutions on this crisis,
many of them under Chapter VII of the Charter.
resolutions have remained dead letters.
cases they contradict one another.

Yet these

What is more, in many

It has also been noted that

over the last six months the Council has procrastinated in its
examination of the problem and has tended to fall back on
international mediation within the framework of political
negotiations which have, of late, exhibited a new tendency towards
sanctioning what has been gained by aggression and legitimizing
military occupation, despite the fact that its resolutions do not
accept such occupation or this tendency.

The political

negotiations under way in Geneva are currently at an impasse, and
the international community cannot accept that the only means of
settlement still open should be the evacuation of the Muslim people
from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The dangerous events that have taken place recently in
Sarajevo make it imperative that the international community act
immediately and firmly, on the ground, in order to prevent an
escalation of the conflict.

The Security Council adopted

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
97

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
resolution 836 (1993), which permits the use of air strikes to
ensure the protection of the safe areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It permits this in two events:

first, if there is a new

bombardment or a new violation of the safe areas, not only of
Sarajevo but of all the zones specified by the Security Council;
and secondly, if the Serbs should fail to respect the ultimatum to
remove their heavy weapons from Sarajevo within the prescribed
deadline.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
98

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Today the Security Council must take the following urgent
measures, which are now absolutely vital, to save the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and preserve that country’s rights as a
Member State of the United Nations.
First, the Council should implement previous Security Council
resolutions, such as those concerning a cease-fire and the use of
international force, including air strikes against Serb targets and
the military bases from which Serb offensives against Bosnia and
Herzegovina are launched, in accordance with resolutions 824 (1993)
and 836 (1993).

In this regard, the Egyptian delegation thanks the

Secretary-General for the initiative set forth in the letter he
sent to the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) on 6 February, in preparation for air strikes
against targets and bases from which offensives against the
civilian population of Bosnia and Herzegovina are launched.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is in fact the victim
of aggression, should be exempted from the arms embargo declared
against the former Yugoslavia in resolution 713 (1991), so that the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina can ensure its self-defence
under Article 51 of the Charter.

Continuing the embargo against

the victim, while the aggressor is strengthened in his aggressive
positions, is contrary to the terms of the Charter and the most
elementary rules of justice.
Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure that any settlement is
peaceful and just so that it will be lasting.

This is why the

Security Council must assume the primary responsibility for
bringing about a settlement, after the failure of all other
international efforts.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
99

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
The Security Council must exercise its prerogatives in order
to bring about a peaceful resolution.

This requires, first, its

examination of settlement plans existing within its resolutions, in
order to ensure that these plans are in keeping with the spirit and
letter of the Charter, the norms of international law and its own
resolutions, which set out the framework for any peaceful
settlement.

The territories the aggressor has conquered by force

must not in any case be the basis for a settlement, and the
international community must not depart from the rules of
international legitimacy recognized in today’s world, for that
would mean a return to the law of the jungle and chaos, and we
would be giving the aggressor licence to strike.
Secondly, the Security Council must directly oversee the
negotiations, because it is the body which determines the mandate
of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, who, in turn,
must scrupulously abide by the previous resolutions of the Security
Council.

The Special Representative must in no circumstances

deviate from the mandate given him by the Council.

He must also

return to the Council and report to it on the evolution of the
situation on the ground, and he must not make any amendments to the
settlement plan contrary to the terms of the Council’s resolutions
without its prior authorization.

Now is the time to change the

mandate of the negotiations in Geneva, as well as the team charged
with those negotiations, if we want them to succeed.
Thirdly, the expansion of participation in the negotiations
must be considered, with a view to enabling certain States which
have contributed to the United Nations forces and certain members
of the Islamic Contact Group dealing with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as neighbouring countries, to participate in them.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
100

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Fourthly, we must support the work of the International
Tribunal for the prosecution of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia
and that of the Commission of Experts created by Security Council
resolution 780 (1992), and presided over by Mr. Sherif Bassouni, by
furnishing them with the necessary funds.
The Egyptian delegation would remind the Security Council, and
through it the international community as a whole, that it is
imperative to respect the cultural and historic character of the
city of Sarajevo.

This is a common responsibility of the

international community, for on it depends the credibility of the
contemporary international order.

Otherwise, we would be sounding

the death knell of the system of peace and security in Central
Europe, and the danger could very well spread to other regions of
the world.
Egypt is a contributor to the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), providing military contingents and equipment as well as
police forces.

However, we feel that the existence of

international troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina should not be used
as an excuse to prevent direct international intervention under the
aegis of the United Nations.
The Serbs must understand that the international forces are
not parties to the conflict.

They simply represent international

legitimacy and guarantee international protection to threatened
areas.

The Egyptian delegation therefore believes that the

Security Council must send a message to the Bosnian Serbs in the
form of an unequivocal letter stating specifically that any
aggression against Bosnia and Herzegovina is an act of aggression
against the international community that will have serious
consequences.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
101

(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
The credibility of the Security Council is at stake.

The

Council must act firmly, rapidly and unambiguously to enforce
respect for international legality and guarantee respect for human
rights, with objectivity, without discrimination and without
applying double standards, by seeing to it that its resolutions are
respected by all, great or small.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Egypt for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
102

Mr. FARHADI (Afghanistan):

Let me first of all, Sir,

express my delegation’s felicitations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

We are sure

that your qualities as an experienced diplomat will contribute to
satisfactorily conducting the work of the Council on this and other
important issues.

I should not fail also to convey my delegation’s

gratitude also to His Excellency Ambassador Kovanda, Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, for ably discharging his
responsibilities as President of the Council for the month of
January.
In the earlier stages of the deplorable Bosnian tragedy the
delegation of Afghanistan took part in the debates of the Security
Council and expressed its views in the meetings of 16 November
1992, 19 April 1993 and 26 June 1993 and in the plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on 17 December 1993.
In the General Assembly, the delegation of Afghanistan said:
"The Serbs are now redeploying troops, tanks and other heavy
weaponry to new positions around the city and are preparing
for more aggressive acts." (Official Records of the General
Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings,
83rd meeting, p. 16)
In the same plenary meeting of the General Assembly, the
Afghanistan delegation expressed its view that
"An ultimatum should be issued to the Serbs, before the air
strikes, once and for all to cease their shelling, remove
their heavy weapons from the vicinity and lift the siege."
(Ibid.)
In its resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993), the Security
Council recognized the full authority of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations to authorize air strikes on the Serbian

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
103

(Mr. Farhadi, Afghanistan)
positions around Sarajevo or other Bosnian cities.

No further

approval is therefore to be sought from the Security Council.
Those who have no other argument and means of action but force
recognize only force.

That is why, shortly after the firm

announcement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the
Bosnian Serbs’ attitude underwent a basic change.

This confirms

our assessment that the attitude of indecision, in the eyes of the
aggressors, was a sign not only of indifference but of the very
lack of credibility of NATO.

The new situation also constitutes a

major lesson for the future.

Only a firm and decisive stand by the

Security Council and by NATO can have a real impact on the attitude
of the aggressors.
The delegation of Afghanistan, in the aforementioned
statements before the Security Council, has maintained that
Security Council resolution 713 (1991), which imposed an arms
embargo against the former "Yugoslavia", cannot be applied in the
case of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This view was supported by an

independent legal organization, the International Fellowship of
Reconciliation, based in Geneva, the statements of which are
recorded in a document of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Commission on Human
Rights, of 7 September 1993.
The delegation of Afghanistan is certain that the Security
Council never intended or extended its resolution 713 (1991) to be
validly applicable with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There is

no Security Council resolution or any other legal authority
superseding, or in any way limiting, the membership rights of
Bosnia and Herzegovina under the United Nations Charter, including,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
104

(Mr. Farhadi, Afghanistan)
in particular, those related to individual and collective
self-defence, as set forth in Article 51.
No embargo remains valid in international law in the presence
of evidence that maintaining the embargo in question favours or
contributes to the commission of genocide.
Attention should be paid to the aggressive intentions of the
Bosnian Serb forces in other cities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
recognized as "safe areas", such as Bihac in the northwest and
Gorazde, Zepa, Srebrenica and Tuzla in the east.
The siege of Sarajevo and that of other Bosnian towns are the
most important contributors to human suffering and are the most
significant deterrent to constructive peace talks.

Allowing the

siege is morally and legally reprehensible and strategically fatal.
The strangulation of Bosnian cities continues, and the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, is historically
responsible for this unbearable and perilous situation.
Such a policy of strangulation of the cities, basically
genocidal, has to be resisted, punished and defeated by Europe, by
the United Nations and by all of humanity.
Let me recall the Order of 8 April 1993 of the International
Court of Justice, in which it directed the Government of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to take all measures within its
power to prevent the commission of the crime of genocide, whether
directed against the Muslim population of Bosnia and Herzegovina or
against any other national, ethnic, racial or religious group.
In the case of the genocide practised by the Serbs, we note
that the International Court of Justice, in its Order of
13 September 1993, also observed that

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
105

(Mr. Farhadi, Afghanistan)
"... all parties to the Convention have thus undertaken to
prevent and to punish the crime of genocide" (Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide, Provisional Measures, Order of 13 September 1993,
I.C.J. Reports 1993, p. 348)
whereas the Court declared itself
"... not satisfied that all that might have been done has been
done to prevent commission of the crime of genocide in the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ." (ibid.)
Since the Court’s Order of 8 April 1993, and in accordance
with the opinion of one of the Judges, Security Council resolution
713 (1991), concerning an arms embargo against Yugoslavia cannot be
"valid and binding in its operation against Bosnia and Herzegovina"
least it "make Members of the United Nations accessories to
genocide".
The war criminals, who are well-known figures, must be brought
to justice.

Their prosecution would be a deterrent against further

genocide.
Many delegations are increasingly worried about the future of
the former Yugoslavia, including territories outside Bosnia.
Europe must be deeply alarmed by the continuing systematic abuses
committed by the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro, notably in
Kosovo, Sandjak and Vojvodina, against Catholics, Muslims,
Albanians, Bosnians, Croats, Hungarians and others.

They are all

covered by international minority protection guarantees stipulated
by the Treaty of St. Germain-en-Laye of 10 September 1919, signed
by the former Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, and by
France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Signatories or their successors bear the legal responsibility of

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
106

(Mr. Farhadi, Afghanistan)
implementing the 73-year-old Treaty in order to avert tragedies of
a larger magnitude and scale.
A dreadful danger is threatening the Balkans and Europe.
Fascism is not dead in Europe, and hegemonistic nationalism is
increasingly becoming a perilous disaster for Eastern Europe.
History, in this dawn of 1994, will consider responsible not only
the States signatories of the 1919 Treaty but also all of us.

We

must take all the preventive actions we can.
In conclusion, my delegation is launching the idea of
establishing a United Nations committee on the assessment of the
war destruction in Bosnia.

I hope other delegations will submit a

draft resolution along this line.

Such a committee’s findings and

continuous assessments would remind the Serbian authorities that
Belgrade will have to pay for war reparations.

This will serve as

a major deterrent to further acts of aggression and destruction in
this tragic case and also constitute a major legal precedent.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
107

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Afghanistan

for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. BATU (Turkey):

I congratulate you, Sir, on your

assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February.

We are confident that under your able guidance the

Council will successfully carry out its responsibilities.

I should

also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech
Republic for the remarkable manner in which he conducted the work
of the Council in January.
In the letter (S/1994/135) of 8 February 1994 addressed to the
Council, the members of the Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference called for this
urgent meeting of the Council to consider the extremely grave
situation resulting from the massacre of Bosnian civilians in
Sarajevo by Serb gunners.

It is with this understanding that we

welcome this meeting and hope it will contribute to the emerging
determination of the international community to act against the
aggressors.
On 5 February 1994 we were shocked by horrifying scenes from a
marketplace in Sarajevo and realized once again how brutal and
dastardly the Serbian atrocities could become.

This terrorist

bombardment, which killed and maimed over 200 civilians, reflects
again the blatant defiance of the will of the international
community by the Serbian side.

Despite numerous Security Council

and General Assembly resolutions, the international community has
been able neither to put an end to the ongoing genocide nor to roll
back the aggression in Bosnia.

On the contrary, the inability to

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
108

(Mr. Batu, Turkey)
implement the resolutions that have been adopted has encouraged the
aggressors to proceed further with their genocidal campaign.
Yet we see the last decision of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Council, taken upon the request of the
Secretary-General, belated as it may be, as a step in the right
direction.

We actively participated in the formulation of this

decision.

In fact, the option of air strikes to silence the

Serbian artillery in and around Sarajevo has been favoured by my
Government since the beginning of the tragedy in Bosnia.

In

August 1992 we proposed a plan similar to the latest NATO decision.
Had our plan been implemented at a much earlier stage, it would
have spared the people of Sarajevo the unspeakable horrors they
have been experiencing since then.

The international community,

regrettably, turned a deaf ear to our calls and other, similar
appeals for firm action at that time.

Only after 22 months and the

loss of 200,000 lives have we seen a modestly growing awareness
that appeasement is no policy, but is, rather, partnership in
wrongdoing.
If we cannot stop the aggression now, Bosnia will inevitably
turn into a permanent battleground.

The Bosnian people are totally

disappointed and seem to have lost all their confidence in the
international system.

They feel that they have been betrayed by

the international community.

Therefore, the aggressors should not

this time be allowed to continue with their defiance of
international law.

It is high time our deeds matched our words.

If the Serbs do not comply with the demands of NATO, they should be
aware of the fact that air strikes will be carried out to silence
their artillery positions in and around Sarajevo.

The wrong

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
109

(Mr. Batu, Turkey)
signals sent to the Serbs by our inaction are, at long last, coming
to an end.
Security Council resolution 836 (1993) provides a clear legal
framework for the use of all necessary means, including air strikes
not only against the Serbian positions around Sarajevo but also for
the defence of all other "safe areas".

The Secretary-General has

our total support for the implementation of the concrete set of
measures defined in the NATO decision.
We believe that the peace negotiations can produce a just and
viable settlement only if the legitimate demands of the Government
of Bosnia are met.
justice.

Peace cannot and should not have priority over

History has shown us that a peace based on injustice has

never been a lasting one.
It is in line with this reasoning that we should like to hope
the marketplace massacre in Sarajevo will not be used as a pretext
for putting further pressure on the victims to make them sign a
peace plan that will not meet their legitimate concerns and
demands.

There is no ethical ground on which to ask the victims of

"ethnic cleansing" and aggression - the Bosnians - to accept that
they are the losers.

Such an attempt would further undermine the

credibility and moral authority of the United Nations.
Turkey is strongly in favour of a negotiated settlement.
However, such a settlement should be just and viable.

In addition,

we hold the view that it cannot be negotiated when the aggression
and genocide are going on incessantly.

First, an atmosphere

conducive to credible negotiations should be created.
far from that.

We are still

Unfortunately, there are alarming reports that, as

the attention of the world focuses on Sarajevo, the heavily armed
Serbian side has been conducting a fierce offensive against the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
110

(Mr. Batu, Turkey)
town of Bihac, which is one of the so-called United Nations safe
areas.
The sooner the aggressors lay down their arms all over Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the better the chances for peace talks to proceed.
The good will of the Bosnian Government is reflected by its
voluntary agreement to place its heavy weapons in Sarajevo under
United Nations control, despite the fact that the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council do not require them to do so.
The terrorist shelling of Sarajevo underlines the urgency of
bringing the perpetrators of crimes against humanity before the
International Tribunal set up under Council resolution 827 (1993).
We need a quick prosecution process.

The accountability of the

perpetrators of the war crimes constitutes one of the main pillars
of a credible deterrence against aggression.

Furthermore, the

diplomatic isolation and economic embargo imposed on the aggressor
should, in case of continuing non-compliance, be tightened.
Yet nothing is more important for deterrence than letting the
Bosnians acquire the means to exercise the right to self-defence.
The arms embargo imposed under Security Council resolution
713 (1991) is in clear contradiction of Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter.

We should like the Council to clarify the legal

opinion that its resolution 713 (1991) does not and should not
apply to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A deadline is finally set for Serbian compliance with the
Council resolutions.

The NATO decision would be the first step

towards ending the bloodiest aggression and cruelest crimes against
humanity in Europe in 50 years.

The Serbian side should be wise

enough not to try to test our resolve and patience.

They must stop

their attacks throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina immediately.

They

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
111

(Mr. Batu, Turkey)
should bear in mind that resolution 836 (1993) stipulates the
commitment of the United Nations to defend not only Tuzla,
Srebrenica and Sarajevo, but all six United Nations "safe areas".
We hope that the aggressors and their collaborators will be
listening to this debate very carefully.

We hope that they will

heed the message of indignation and determination coming from the
international community.

We should be determined not to allow the

naked use of force to be rewarded or the crimes committed in Bosnia
to go unpunished.

Turkey will continue actively to support the

valiant people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their struggle for
survival, justice and democracy.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
112

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Turkey for

his kind words addressed to me.
I should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 14 February 1994 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:
"On behalf of the members of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Peyrovi, Ambassador,
Deputy Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, to address the Council under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure in the course of
the Council’s consideration of the item ’The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina’."
That letter will be published as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/1994/170.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His Excellency
Mr. Peyrovi.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker is the representative of Sweden.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement
now.
Mr. OSVALD (Sweden):

Mr. President, allow me to express

my own, and my delegation’s, great satisfaction at seeing you
preside over the Council’s deliberations this month.
We were all shocked and outraged at the massacre in Sarajevo
on Saturday, 5 February.

The heinous terror against civilians must

not be allowed to continue.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
113

(Mr. Osvald, Sweden)
It has become necessary to strengthen further the role of the
United Nations in preventing further carnage in and around Sarajevo
and to promote a settlement of the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
parties.

Such a settlement will require compromise from all

The illusion of temporary military advances will serve

only to prolong the war and delay the peace.
Security Council resolution 836 (1993) mandates the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) to protect the "safe areas"
Sarajevo is such an area.

We fully support the Secretary-General’s

request to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to prepare for
the possible use of air power to bring about the implementation of
resolution 836 (1993), and we welcome the recent decision by the
North Atlantic Council to start preparing for such action if United
Nations demands are not met by 20 February.
It is of special importance that the threat to use air power
be seen as part of an essential political process aimed at a
negotiated solution, and that such power be used only in full
coordination with the UNPROFOR forces on the ground.
The conflict can never be settled from the air:

it has to be

settled essentially by political means, at the negotiating table.
We do not wish to see an escalation of violence; we do not wish to
see air strikes:

they should be used only as a last resort.

The international community must be ready to assist the
parties further in turning away from the horrors of war and in
choosing the road to peace.

Sweden commends the tireless efforts

by Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg to this effect.

We also welcome

the more active involvement by the United States in the peace
process and also the constructive contributions from Russia.
Political pressure must be kept up on all parties.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
114

(Mr. Osvald, Sweden)
On the road to peace, the cease-fire and the withdrawal of all
heavy weaponry from Sarajevo would constitute a first step, and we
urge the parties to abide by this process.

It is our hope that

this first step will be followed by similar arrangements throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to be built upon in a negotiating process
towards reconciliation, rehabilitation and rebuilding.

It is a

process in which we all have to contribute troops or other
resources.

It is a process that is long overdue.

UNPROFOR is now quickly adapting to the new situation.

The

role of the United Nations forces in any demilitarization of
Sarajevo must not be jeopardized.

Therefore, Member States must be

ready to respond to the needs expressed by the Secretary-General
and the Force Commander.

The troops and equipment necessary for a

credible performance by United Nations troops in Sarajevo, and in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole, should be provided without
delay.

As an important troop contributor, Sweden is looking

forward to close consultations on this matter.
It is Sweden’s opinion that the authority of UNPROFOR must be
upheld and respected, and that the United Nations troops should act
more firmly.

The Security Council resolutions constitute a

framework for a more determined United Nations stance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but the safety of United Nations personnel must not be
disregarded.

The Nordic contingent should be fully deployed

without delay.
The work and safety of UNPROFOR and the humanitarian agencies
must be respected.

Threats against aid workers cannot be accepted.

By now, it should be obvious to the parties that a withdrawal of
UNPROFOR and relief personnel would harm only the parties’ own
people.

In this context, Sweden urges the parties to give their

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
115

(Mr. Osvald, Sweden)
consent to the opening of Tuzla airport.

We also urge them to

facilitate all humanitarian deliveries, including the airlifts to
Sarajevo; Sweden is participating in such activities.
It is just and logical that today we should focus on stopping
terror against Sarajevo and on giving that city real United Nations
protection.

But let us keep other aspects of the situation in

former Yugoslavia in mind, and let the momentum achieved also
contribute to the solution of these problems.
The sanctions regime against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) has so far been the most
effective means deployed by the international community.

The

sanctions must be upheld, and must not be lifted before we are
assured that a peace agreement on Bosnia is really being
implemented.

A full normalization of relations with Serbia and

Montenegro cannot begin until we have peace in Krajina and a fair
solution concerning Kosovo.
No lasting peace can be reached if potential conflicts in the
area are allowed to continue and if, as a consequence, hostilities
spread to other parts of the region.
The Members of the United Nations have conferred on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The Council, in its decisions,

acts on behalf of the Member States.

Thus, the Council carries the

ultimate responsibility for the implementation of its decisions
regarding the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.

It is our

conviction that the Council will act with responsibility in its
handling of the present situation.

If it does so, the common

commitment to peace in the area - and to international peace and
security - will be strongly manifested.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
116

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Sweden for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Italy.

I invite him

to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. FULCI (Italy):

I consider it an honour, and indeed a

privilege, Sir, to speak for the first time in the Security Council
under your presidency.
Like other members of the international community, Italy is
appalled by the treacherous bombardment attacks that have taken the
lives of so many innocent victims among the civilian population of
Sarajevo.

The news and pictures of these massacres have aroused

the revulsion of all Italians.

My Government has not limited

itself to words of condemnation and condolence, but has promptly
taken practical steps to alleviate the agony of the Bosnian people
and the consequences of these devastating atrocities.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
117

(Mr. Fulci, Italy)
While awaiting final verification of the responsibility for
the cowardly attack against defenceless civilians on 5 February the bloodiest since the start of the conflict - we must remember
and once again very strongly condemn the continuous shelling of
Sarajevo in recent weeks and months by the cannons of the Bosnian
Serbs.

It is our ardent hope that the perpetrators of this

criminal act will be brought to trial before the International
Tribunal on crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia, which, as we
know, is now beginning to function.
As a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), Italy actively participated in the adoption of the North
Atlantic Council’s decision of 9 February, a decision that we
believe will prove to be a fundamental turning point in the
international community’s attitude to the Bosnian crisis.

The NATO

decision has already acted as a catalyst in the efforts by the
United Nations and NATO to guarantee important new contributions to
the search for a political solution.

This confirms that if the

United Nations and NATO wish to be successful in stopping the
aggressions and to foster a political agreement, they can and must
work in consonance.
We note with satisfaction that a 10-day deadline has been set
for heavy weapons located within a 20-kilometre radius from the
centre of the Bosnian capital to be withdrawn or placed under
control of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
measure is imperative to prevent more killings.

This

Equally important

is the fact that if the parties fail to take these steps, the
deadline will not be extended.

Italy hopes that these new steps

will induce the parties to assume full responsibility for, and to

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
118

(Mr. Fulci, Italy)
honour, the commitments they have made and to break the pattern of
violations that has been repeated all too often in the past.
As is well known, NATO’s decision provides for recourse, in
close coordination with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, to air strikes against artillery or mortar positions that
UNPROFOR has determined to be responsible for attacks on civilians
in Sarajevo, and also against heavy weapons that have not been
withdrawn or placed under UNPROFOR control by the 10-day deadline.
In that regard, I wish to confirm to the Security Council that
Italy has already placed its military bases and airports at the
full disposal of the Atlantic Alliance.
At the same time, my country emphasizes that eventual recourse
to air strikes should not be seen as either an act of retaliation
or a response to the stalling of the negotiating process.

It is a

means of pressuring the parties to return to reason, to induce them
to make every effort to reach an understanding.

Italy, in fact,

firmly believes that the only possible way to achieve a lasting
solution to the Bosnian conflict is through negotiations aimed at
finding a comprehensive, equitable agreement among the three
parties concerned.

As Italy’s Foreign Minister,

Mr. Beniamino Andreatta, has stated in his capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), NATO’s decisions are
"a first essential step - which can hopefully be extended to
Mostar and Central Bosnia - towards a negotiated solution to
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continues to be
the objective of the international community in general, and
the CSCE in particular".

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
119

(Mr. Fulci, Italy)
In this regard, it is important to emphasize that NATO’s
efforts to lift the siege of Sarajevo should be seen in the light
of the European Union Action Plan, which has received the
endorsement of the Atlantic Alliance.

Italy fully supports that

plan drawn up by the European Union - which is aimed at, among
other things, obtaining an immediate end to the siege of Sarajevo and will make every possible contribution to its advancement.
Geographic vicinity as well as historical and cultural relations
have made Italian public opinion very sensitive to the events that
are taking place in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to the need for a
just and lasting peace between the various ethnic and religious
groups.

After all, for centuries they have lived and worked

together in peace in Bosnian territory.
Needless to say, the dynamic of the events in Bosnia confirms
the essential role of UNPROFOR forces both as a means of
interposition between the parties and as an essential instrument
for the delivery of humanitarian aid.

We highly commend their

courage and self-sacrifice under the most severe and trying
circumstances.
From this forum, Italy wishes to launch an appeal to the three
parties in conflict to exercise restraint and to demonstrate the
political will and determination to reach a negotiated solution.
Italy launches an appeal to all those who can do so to exert
influence with renewed vigour on the warring parties.

Italy

launches an appeal to those Member States contributing troops to
UNPROFOR and granting humanitarian aid, to non-governmental
organizations, to international agencies and to all people of good
will not to relent in their efforts.

A peaceful solution for the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
120

(Mr. Fulci, Italy)
war-torn land of Bosnia can indeed be attained, but only if we all
persevere.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Italy for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. KHARRAZI (Islamic Republic of Iran):

At the outset,

Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of February.

I am

confident that with your leadership and diplomatic skills the
Security Council will be guided effectively this month.
I wish also to thank the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic for the able manner in which he presided over the Security
Council during the month of January.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
121

(Mr. Kharrazi, Islamic Republic of Iran)
This is not the first time that the Security Council has
considered the tragic situation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Over

the last two years, many resolutions and statements have been
issued by the Council.

The aggressors have violated all these

decisions time and again, whether when the cessation of hostilities
was called for or when the Security Council designated some cities
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina as "safe areas".

We

should admit that lack of resolve and decisiveness on the part of
the Security Council against the blatant Serbian aggression has
convinced the Serbs that they can continue their aggression and
"ethnic cleansing" with impunity.

The continued acts of

aggression, genocide and "ethnic cleansing" perpetrated by Serbs
against the Bosnian people confirm that the international community
has failed miserably to stop this savagery.

Resolutions calling

for the protection of "safe areas", including Sarajevo, and
demanding the lifting of the siege on this town have remained dead
letters.

Had the Security Council acted properly and expeditiously

when its first resolution was violated by the Serbs, the
defenceless people of Bosnia and Herzegovina would not be subjected
to this continued brutality and genocide.
On Saturday, 5 February, all of us watched with great anguish
and horror as the latest evidence of Serbian aggression was
transmitted on our television screens.

There is no doubt that

these criminal acts are a continuation of the bombardment of
Bosnian towns and villages that has occurred over the last two
years and of an ongoing genocidal campaign by the Serbian
aggressors.

The two massacres, on 4 and 5 February 1994, have left

no doubt that the Serbs are in total defiance of the will of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
122

(Mr. Kharrazi, Islamic Republic of Iran)
international community and that the Security Council has failed to
stop this genocide.

At this juncture, I wish to express the

condolences and sympathy of the people and Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the people and Government of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since the beginning of the crisis, many countries, including
the Islamic Republic of Iran, have called on the Security Council
to take urgent measures for reversing the Serbian aggression and
implementing its resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

However, the Security Council not only has been

unprepared to shoulder its responsibility under Article 42 of the
Charter, but has prevented the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
from exercising its inherent right to self-defence under Article 51
of the United Nations Charter.

At this eleventh hour, the Security

Council should at least allow Bosnians and those who are prepared
to help that besieged Republic take action under Article 51 of the
Charter to engage in individual and collective self-defence.

Under

the present circumstances, the least the international community
can do is take the necessary measures, including using force, to
lift the siege of Sarajevo and other cities, and to lift the unjust
arms embargo against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the recent moves to
lift the siege of Sarajevo fall short of expectations.

However,

every effort should be made to ensure that all provisions of the
recent ultimatum are met by the Serbs.

In the event that the

ultimatum is violated - either by further shelling or by failure to
fully withdraw the Serbian heavy weaponry by the deadline - air
strikes must be automatically initiated.

It is clear that

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
123

(Mr. Kharrazi, Islamic Republic of Iran)
resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) authorize air strikes and
that no further authorization is needed from the Security Council.
Furthermore, the international community should be cognizant of the
fact that the Serbs are poised to attack the other "safe areas".
It is incumbent upon the Security Council to protect all
"safe areas" in Bosnia, including Bihac, and the rest of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is an unfortunate reality that some Powers have been
pressing the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to accept
surrender and an alleged peace, which will only be the beginning of
further tragedy and "ethnic cleansing".

It is unnecessary to

emphasize that any settlement imposed on the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be militarily unenforceable and morally
unacceptable to the international community.

Moreover, efforts are

being made to appease the aggressors with promises of lifting the
sanctions against Serbia.

Any attempt to ease the diplomatic and

economic isolation of Serbia and Montenegro will only encourage the
aggressors to commit further crimes and genocide.

The sanctions

against Belgrade must continue as long as the relevant Security
Council resolutions are not fully implemented.
Finally, I wish to reiterate the importance of bringing all
those responsible for genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
those responsible for the recent terrorist shelling of Sarajevo, to
justice.

The war crimes commission must continue its work and hold

its trials as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words about the peace
negotiations.

Earlier in my statement I warned about the dangerous

trend some Powers are inclined to follow in pressing the Government

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
124

(Mr. Kharrazi, Islamic Republic of Iran)
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to accept a settlement.

There is no need

to emphasize that any negotiation inconsistent with the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions or with the United Nations
Charter is doomed to failure.

Various Security Council and General

Assembly resolutions have provided principles for negotiations.
With this in mind, my Government deems it necessary to relocate
negotiations to New York.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the Islamic

Republic of Iran for his kinds words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Azerbaijan.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. ALIYEV (Azerbaijan) (interpretation from Russian):
Permit me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

Your

knowledge, your vast experience and authority are without a doubt a
sure guarantee of the success of the work of the Council in
strengthening international peace and security.

I would like to

thank particularly the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic, Ambassador Karel Kovanda, for his fruitful work as
President of the Security Council in January.
On so many occasions now over the last few years the situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a subject of
discussion in the Security Council, and the General Assembly and
Security Council have adopted dozens of resolutions and issued
dozens of statements on it.

Unfortunately, however, we still have

no basis for considering that they have had any serious or positive

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
125

(Mr. Aliyev, Azerbaijan)
influence on the ruthless and deliberate slaughter of the Bosnian
Muslims.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
126

(Mr. Aliyev, Azerbaijan)
Furthermore, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
steadily deteriorating, though that word is sorely inadequate to
express the tragedy of the current situation, particularly with
regard to the peaceful population, the toll of civilian lives now
having risen to hundreds of thousands.

The inability of the

international community to prevent the recent acts of barbarism
committed by Serb nationalists in Sarajevo and Dobrnja, which led
to the death and wounding of a large number of civilians, attests
to the urgent need to revise and strengthen the traditional
concepts and machinery for peacemaking activity undertaken with
regard to the Bosnian conflict within the framework of various
international organizations, including the United Nations and its
Security Council.
Indeed, we have witnessed an unprecedented situation in which
the Serb side has been openly disregarding the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, with virtual impunity, while the
Council has been unable to do anything about it.

The impunity of

the armed units of Bosnian Serbs which have flouted the demands
made of them by the Security Council undermines the fundamental
principles of the contemporary system of collective international
security.

The impression has been created that the irresponsible,

extremist and chauvinist political movements which have risen from
the ashes of the totalitarian regimes, and the political leaders of
those movements, seriously believe in the possibility of a
reconfiguration by force of internationally recognized frontiers,
thus undermining the authority of the Security Council and faith in
its ability impartially and adequately to react to acts of
aggression wherever they are committed and under whatever
circumstances.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
127

(Mr. Aliyev, Azerbaijan)
The world entered the last decade of the twentieth century
with the hope that within the system of international relations
democratic and universal values would finally prevail.
Unfortunately, this has not happened, for a number of reasons.

The

first is the inability of international peacemaking institutions to
react in good time and with the necessary determination to the
stepped-up activities of extreme nationalist and chauvinist forces
and movements throughout the world.

It is a long time since we

were forced to witness such open preaching and practice of
territorial expansionism and ethnic cleansing as has been
undertaken by the Bosnian Serbs and the forces behind them with
regard to the Muslim population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In practice, what we have here is not even dismemberment, but,
rather the annihilation of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a country officially recognized by the United Nations and the world
community.

No matter how frightening the barbarous actions of the

Bosnian Serbs towards their age-old neighbours might be, no one
should be deluded with regard to the inevitability of having to pay
for those crimes and misdeeds.

Here, we hope that the

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, set up under
resolution 808 (1993) of 22 February 1993, will finally have an
authoritative word to say on this subject.
It is the profound conviction of the Azerbaijan delegation
that the Security Council, too, must not simply once again note a
further deterioration of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but is duty-bound to give a clear assessment of the actions of the
separatist armed formations and units of the Bosnian Serbs, their

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
128

(Mr. Aliyev, Azerbaijan)
political and military leaders and the forces standing behind them.
Today more than ever before it is important to be firm and
decisive, to show the chauvinists of all stripes that the world
community will not accept changes of frontiers made by force of
arms or the existence of the very idea of expanding territory by
military means.

Only a consistent and firm pursuit of this

fundamental principle of international relations will make it
possible to create a durable system of collective security.
The position of the Azerbaijan Republic has been repeatedly
expressed at various forums in which the tragic situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been discussed.

This

position is based on the fundamental principle of international
relations:

the territorial integrity of States.

On this basis,

Azerbaijan does not intend to recognize any national territorial
entities which might be proclaimed unilaterally or any mechanisms
for settling the conflict which might be imposed upon the
leadership and people of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
violation of its territorial integrity.
The Government of the Azerbaijan Republic strongly condemns
the actions of the Serb separatists who are citizens of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina as being aimed at the
dismemberment of that State, given its understanding that the world
community will never resign itself to the policy of fait accompli,
of the dismemberment of the country, nor to any attempts to change
its internationally recognized borders by force.
In conclusion, the Azerbaijani delegation urgently appeals to
the Security Council to take all necessary measures at the earliest
possible time so that, in accordance with Article 51, Chapter VII,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
129

(Mr. Aliyev, Azerbaijan)
the Charter, the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina can exercise
its inalienable right to self-defence.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Azerbaijan

for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. SOEGARDA (Indonesia):

At the outset, Sir, my

delegation would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
February.

We are confident that under your able guidance, given

your diplomatic skill our deliberations will lead to the initiation
of effective measures.

May I also avail myself of this opportunity

to convey through you, Sir, our appreciation to your predecessor,
His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda of the Czech Republic, for the
able leadership he provided to the Council last month.
Indonesia has followed closely the unfolding tragedy that has
engulfed the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Ever since the

eruption of the conflict there we have witnessed the systematic
extermination of the multi-cultural and multi-religious society of
a Member State of the United Nations through armed aggression,
genocide and the abhorrent policy of "ethnic cleansing".

Hundreds

of thousands of Bosnians have lost their lives or have been
wounded, and more than half a million have been driven into
enclaves.

Cities and towns have been reduced to rubble, while

thousands of children are traumatized by harrowing experiences.
Earlier this month the international community viewed with
horror and revulsion the mortal attack in Sarajevo resulting in the
death of nearly 70 people and the wounding of scores of others.
This malicious and barbaric act is unacceptable by the standards of

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
130

(Mr. Soegarda, Indonesia)
civilized society.

We strongly condemn this brutal terrorist act,

which reflects the aggressors’ defiance of and scorn for the will
of the international community.
does not stand alone.

But this bloody and heinous act

The shelling of cities, the unending

massacres, the mass expulsions and the unconscionable policy of
ethnic cleansing have continued unabated and thus have wide-ranging
ramifications, not only for the future of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also for the entire Balkan region.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
131

(Mr. Soegarda, Indonesia)
Despite the adoption of numerous Security Council resolutions,
this body has failed to reverse aggression and the abhorrent policy
of "ethnic cleansing".

Meanwhile, the denial of the Bosnians’

right to self-defence under the United Nations Charter and the
refusal to lift the arms embargo has led to two thirds of Bosnian
territory coming under Serbian and Croatian occupation.

It is

imperative to lift the arms embargo against Bosnia in order to
rectify the acute imbalance of armaments in the field and motivate
the Serbs to come to the negotiating table.
Under threat of continuation of this unequal war, the Bosnians
are being coerced into accepting an unjust settlement that would
carve up their territory along ethnic lines and reduce their
country to a cluster of small, incontiguous, land-locked and
perpetually vulnerable Muslim enclaves, within a so-called Union of
the Republics of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
happen.

This cannot be allowed to

The legitimate interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in

terms of its basic territorial, economic and security needs, as
well as a secured access to the sea, must be safeguarded.

Any

negotiations carried out under duress, and enforcing peace without
justice, will lead only to continuing violence, human suffering and
insecurity.

The primacy of law should never be surrendered to the

law of force.
One of the immediate concerns which must be addressed is the
imperative need to ensure the safe passage of relief convoys to
prevent the imminent threat of a humanitarian disaster by taking
all necessary measures, including the use of force.

We also call

for the urgent implementation of the mandate of UNPROFOR for
enforcement action and establishment of a unified structure for all
UNPROFOR troops in Bosnia in order to deter attacks against the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
132

(Mr. Soegarda, Indonesia)
"safe areas", to monitor the cease-fire and to facilitate
withdrawal of military units other than those of the Bosnian
Government.
We support the use of air strikes against Serbian forces, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 836 (1993), and the
interdiction of arms supplies to those forces.

In this context, we

have noted the decision taken by the North Atlantic Council
concerning the withdrawal, or regrouping and placing under UNPROFOR
control, of heavy weaponry within 10 days of 10 February 1994.
Otherwise, the parties concerned will be subjected to air strikes.
In the meantime, the economic sanctions imposed on the former
Yugoslavia must be continued, and, in this context, we commend the
Security Council’s refusal to lift them.

Any decision in this

regard can be taken only when a peace plan is signed and
implemented under international guarantees.
President Soeharto, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, has followed the situation closely and has
sent his personal envoys to London, Geneva, Moscow and Washington
to meet with the parties concerned in this conflict, both during
the negotiations and in special meetings.

Indonesia, for its part,

will continue to work within the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference as well as the United
Nations to bring an end to the genocide and carnage in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Indonesia lends its full support to the Government

and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their legitimate struggle
to reach a just and viable settlement.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that a comprehensive solution to
the conflict can be attained only through a negotiated settlement
based on the precepts of justice and mutual tolerance, a settlement

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
133

(Mr. Soegarda, Indonesia)
that would enable the people of Bosnia and its neighbours to
coexist in peace, free from domination and external interference.
We also reiterate the sacrosanct principle that the borders of an
internationally recognized State cannot be altered by force.
Serbia must be stopped and Bosnia’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty restored.

Even at this belated stage, the measures

which the international community will undertake or fail to
undertake will determine the survival of Bosnia and, indeed, the
future peace and stability of the entire Balkan region.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Indonesia

for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. BIEGMAN (Netherlands):

I should like to offer my

sincere congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I should also like to
to thank you for giving me this opportunity to state the position
of the Netherlands on the tragic situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a Member State of the United Nations and a country
which has for almost two years now been devastated by war and
violence.
This Council has on many occasions expressed itself on this
intolerable situation.

Six cities and towns have been declared

"safe areas", but more communities are under siege and threatened.
Mostar, in particular, has been under continuous siege and would
therefore, in the view of my Government, also qualify to be
designated as a "safe area" under resolution 836 (1993).

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
134

(Mr. Biegman, Netherlands)
That resolution, in its paragraph 10, clearly mandates Member
States, acting nationally or through regional organizations or
arrangements, to take all necessary measures, up to and including
the use of air power, to support the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) in its task of protecting the "safe areas", one of
these being the capital city of Sarajevo.

The authorization to

take these measures under the Council’s authority has therefore
clearly been given under this paragraph.
Following the request of the Secretary-General contained in
his letter of 6 February, the Council of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) met to consider the situation that had arisen
after the barbaric mortar attack on innocent civilians in Sarajevo
on 5 February and to address the Secretary-General’s request.
Whatever the outcome of the ongoing inquiry into the carnage
of 5 February - and I am afraid it is bound to be inconclusive - we
have to keep in mind that during the past 22 months thousands upon
thousands of innocent people have been killed, maimed or wounded in
exactly the same way, and we know exactly who is responsible for
the vast majority of these cases:

nobody but the Bosnian Serbs.

Who did it on 5 February is, in relation to the immense suffering
caused so far, almost irrelevant.
The decisions taken by NATO on 9 February open the way for
relieving the siege of Sarajevo.

The threat of the use of force,

embodied in this NATO decision, should be seen first of all as a
political means to convince parties to withdraw their heavy weapons
or place them under United Nations control.

It is a clear signal

to all parties that the escalation of violence against the civilian
population and threats against United Nations personnel will not be
tolerated.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
135

(Mr. Biegman, Netherlands)
The implementation of these decisions will be closely
coordinated with the Secretary-General and with UNPROFOR, as
provided for in resolution 836 (1993).

This is also necessary in

order to safeguard the security of United Nations personnel on the
ground.

In this connection, I should like to recall that the

Netherlands is one of the major troop contributors to UNPROFOR.

We

will soon have almost 3,000 men in the field in and around the
former Yugoslavia.

This is, in absolute terms as well as in

comparison to other troop contributors, a substantial effort.

The

Netherlands welcomes the NATO decisions and fully supports them.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
136

(Mr. Biegman, Netherlands)
The decisions are well balanced and aim at the lifting of the
siege of Sarajevo, which has been called for on several occasions
by the Security Council.

Lifting the siege of Sarajevo could be a

step towards placing the city under United Nations administration,
in conformity with the European Union Action Plan of
22 November 1993, to secure a negotiated settlement.

The same

principles should be applied to other areas in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, such as Mostar - once it has been established as a
"safe area" - and other "safe areas".

Demilitarization of

humanitarian trouble spots, as envisaged for Sarajevo by the United
Nations and NATO, constitutes an important condition for a
negotiated settlement.

Arbitration could then be helpful in

obtaining a lasting political solution.
Should the parties not heed the NATO decision, the credibility
of the United Nations and respect for its decision to institute
"safe areas" would be at stake.

We therefore expect that the

present signal will be understood accordingly and will help to
create the necessary conditions for a stable cease-fire and,
ultimately, for a just overall political settlement.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the

Netherlands for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada.

I invite

her to take a place at the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. FRECHETTE (Canada) (interpretation from French):

I

wish first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February,
and I hope that your work this month will continue to be fruitful.
We welcome this debate in the Security Council on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is being held in the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
137

(Mrs. Frechette, Canada)
wake of the recent tragic events in Sarajevo.

Canadians were

shocked and outraged at the deliberate killing and wounding of
hundreds of innocent civilians in Sarajevo on 5 February.
In the face of this new tragedy, the international community
has felt the urgency of giving concrete form to its commitments to
ensure safer conditions for the populace of Sarajevo.

This was why

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) ressponded in such
short order the request put to it by the Secretary-General.
Canada associates itself fully with the NATO decision, which
requires that the heavy artillery deployed around Sarajevo be
placed under the control of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in order to prevent new attacks on the civilian
population.
We have cooperated closely with our allies to make sure that
the NATO decision will have a positive bearing on the peace talks,
on the delivery of humanitarian aid and on the safety of United
Nations personnel and the personnel of humanitarian organizations.
It was also essential to confirm the Secretary-General’s role in
the launching of air strikes and the joint role of the United
Nations and NATO commanders in the planning and execution of such
possible operations.

We are pleased to note that the NATO decision

is fully compatible with these objectives.
(spoke in English)
The NATO decision seems already to have contributed to the
cease-fire announced by the United Nations, which we welcome and
which calls for the withdrawal or placing under United Nations
control of the heavy weapons positioned in the Sarajevo sector.
We hope that, with this agreement, air strikes will be
unnecessary.

But should conditions in the field make such actions

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
138

(Mrs. Frechette, Canada)
necessary NATO will not hesitate to proceed in accordance with its
decision of 9 February.
The tragedy of Sarajevo must not divert our attention from the
plight of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole or from the numerous
conflicts occurring in different areas of Bosnia.

We earnestly

hope that the NATO decision will have the desired effect on the
peace process and will facilitate unobstructed access to
humanitarian aid for those in need.
Canada continues to believe that only a negotiated settlement
can provide a lasting peace in the region and urges all parties to
do their utmost to achieve a just and equitable solution.

The

parties must resume urgently and in good faith their negotiations
within the framework of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia.
Canada will continue to work with its partners in the United
Nations, NATO and the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia to help settle the remaining issues.

We encourage all

members of the international community to contribute actively to
the achievement by the parties of a negotiated settlement.

We are

pleased to note that the United States is committed to playing a
more active part in the peace negotiations.
The prospect of an agreement between the parties in Sarajevo
is encouraging.

This initial step would give concrete proof of the

parties’ willingness to take the path of compromise and reason and
to end the suffering of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
139

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Canada for

her kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker, who will be the last one for this evening,
is the representative of Japan.

I invite him to take a place at

the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

I wish to extend my congratulations

to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this month.
The Government of Japan expresses its grave concern at the
tragedy that continues to unfold in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Savage

attacks against innocent civilians, such as that which occurred in
the Sarajevo marketplace, are unconscionable and must not be
repeated.
Japan appreciates the decision on air strikes taken at the
NATO meeting and welcomes the recent agreement between the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Serbian forces on a
cease-fire in Sarajevo and the placement of heavy weapons under
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) control.

It is

incumbent upon all the parties concerned to bring a prompt and
peaceful end to this tragic situation.
The Government of Japan supports the efforts of the European
Community and the United Nations, and particularly those of the
Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference, Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg.
Japan calls upon the parties concerned to cooperate with those
efforts by ceasing all military action and reaching a negotiated
settlement.
The Government of Japan, on its part, will focus its efforts
on reducing human suffering and on preventing the outbreak of
conflict in other areas of the former Yugoslavia.
Japan has been actively involved in international humanitarian
efforts in the region, particularly those of the Office of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 1)
140

(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and in
fostering a climate of peace through various forms of assistance.
More specifically, my Government dispatched a survey mission to the
area last month and it intends to strengthen its contributions in
the field of humanitarian and other assistance in accordance with
the recommendations of that mission, including the establishment of
facilities to receive refugees.
In addition, my Government will extend cooperation to The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in an effort to prevent the
expansion of the conflict across its border.
The broad participation in this Security Council meeting today
is testimony to the determination of Member States to bring the
tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina to an end.

Japan hopes that the

parties concerned will heed the wishes of the international
community and commit themselves to resolving their differences
peacefully and without further delay.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Japan for

his kind words addressed to me.
There are a number of names remaining on the list of speakers.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the Council, to suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 6.30 p.m.
