,_’
c, ‘.

United Nationi

SfPV.3436

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3

th Meeting
Friday, 14 October 1994, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir David Hatmay . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . (United Kingdom.of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members :

Argentina ............................
Brazil ....................................
China ....................................
Czech Republic ..............................
..................................
Djibouti
France ...................................
New Zealand ...............................
Nigeria ...................................
Oman ....................................
Pakistan ..................................
Russian Federation
...........................
Rwanda ..................................
Spain ..................................
........................
UnitedStatesofAmerica

: .....

Mr. Cardenas
Mr. Valle
Mr. He Yafei
Mr. Kovanda
Mr, Dorani
Mr. Ladsous
Mr. van Bohemen
Mr. Uhomoibhi
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Marker
Mr. Shkourko
Mr. Bakuramutsa
: . Mr. LaClaustra
Mr. Inderfurth

Agenda
The situation concerning Rwanda
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (S/1994/1 133)

94-86648

(E)

This record contains the original text of speechesdelivered in English and interpretation
of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The fmal text will be printed in the Q@iaf Records ofthi Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the aWe of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
mom C-178.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting was called to order at IO.45 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Rwanda
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(S/1994/1133)
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda, document
S/1994/1133.
I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/1994/1 115, which
contains the text of a letter dated 28 September 1994 from
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Following
consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General’s progress report on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR)
(S/1994/1133).
The Council stresses the importance
it attaches to the role of UNAMIR, whose neutral and
independent presence is crucial to creating conditions
of security.
It welcomes the Secretary-General’s
revised deployment schedule for UNAMIR which is
intended to promote security in all sectors of the
country and create conditions conducive to the return
of refugees. It also welcomes the assistance being
provided by UNAMIR
to the Government of
Rwanda’s efforts to establish a new integrated police
force.
It encourages UNAMIR
to continue that
assistance and asks the Secretary-General to provide
it with detailed information on this programme,
“The Security Council remains extremely
concerned at the plight of the millions of refugees and
displaced persons in Rwanda and the countries of the
region, It reiterates its view that their return to their
homes is essential for the normalization of the

2

3436th meeting
14 October 1994
situation in Rwanda and for the stabilization of the
region.
It deplores the continuing acts of
intimidation and violence within the refugee camps
which are designed to prevent the refngee
population there from returning home. It welcomes
the commitment of the Governments of Zaire,
Tanzania and Burundi to help resolve the problems
facing the refugees, and calls upon them to do all in
their power to ensure the safety both of the refugees
and of the international personnel providing
humanitarian assistance to the refugees.
“The Security Council notes the view
expressed in the report that the most effective way
of ensuring the safety of the refugees and their
freedom to return to Rwanda would be the
separation of political leaders, former RGF soldiers
and militias from the rest of the refugee population,
and looks forward to receiving a further report from
the Secretary-General on this issue, as soon as
possible, based, inter alia, on the findings of the
United Nations team participating in the joint
ZairianDJnited Nations working group, It stresses
once again the responsibilities which fall upon the
neighbouring countries including that of ensuring
that their territories are not used to destabilize the
situation.
“The return of refugees is also crucially
dependent upon the situation within Rwanda itself,
including the existence of a climate of confidence
and the establishment of a more secure environment.
The Security Council notes the important role
human rights monitors and their speedy deployment
will’ have in this context and notes also the
importance of cooperation between them and
UNAMIR.
The Security Council stresses the
importance it attaches to UNAMIR
having an
effective broadcasting service to provide objective
information.
It hopes that the Government of
Rwanda will assist in enabling the proposed United
Nations radio station to come into operation as soon
as possible.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts
being made by the Rwandan Government to
facilitate the return of refugees and to begin the
difficult process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in the country. It notes with concern
reports that some reprisals may have occurred and
affirms the importance It attaches to the avoidance
of reprisals against returnees and to the safeguarding

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
of their property rights. It welcomes the speed with
which the United Nations and the Government of
Rwanda responded to allegations that some RPA
soldiers might have been responsible for systematic
killings. It underlines the importance it attaches to
the thorough and expeditious investigation of these
allegations.
“The Security Council welcomes the assurance
given to Council members by President Bizimungu of
his Government’s commitment to achieving national
reconciliation
and promoting
respect for the
fundamental rights of individuals.
The Security
Council stresses the importance it attaches to the
Government
of Rwanda implementing
this
commitment.
In this context it endorses the
Secretary-General’s call to the Government of
Rwanda to maintain an open dialogue with all political
interest groups in Rwanda in an effort to achieve
genuine reconciliation
between all elements of
Rwandan society, within the frame of reference of the
Arusha Peace Agreement. In particular, the Security
Council encourages the Rwandan Government to
continue its efforts to invite members of the MRND
who were not involved in the massacres to participate
in the Government and to absorb members of the
former RGF into the new army.
“The Security Council reaffm
its view that
those responsible for serious breaches of international
humanitarian law and acts of genocide must be
brought to justice. ‘It stresses that persons involved in
such acts cannot achieve immunity from prosecution
by fleeing the country and notes that the provisions of
the Convention relating to the status of refugees do
not apply to such persons. In this context, the
Council is currently considering the recommendations
of the Commission of Experts in respect of the
establishment of an international tribunal and will act
expeditiously in the matter.

3436th meeting
14 October 1994

“The Security Council commends the assistance
given by the international community, the UN
agencies and non-governmental
organizations in
response to the crisis in Rwanda. It calls on them
to maintain their support during the difficult
transition period and to begin to redirect their
support from relief
to rehabilitation
and
reconstruction. It endorses the Secretary-General’s
views as to the importance of immediate and
coordinated assistance, in particular
to the
restoration of civil administration
and the
reconstruction of the social and economic
infrastructure of the country.
“The Security Council agrees with the
Secretary-General that developments in Rwanda
strengthen the case for a broader approach to the
question of national reconciliation and other key
aspects of the crisis. It encourages him to continue
his consultations on how the United Nations can
assist in the preparation and convening of an
international conference to look into the problems of
the subregion.
“The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter. ”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1994/59.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at IO.55 a.m.

3
