A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/123
10 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 105
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/620)]
53/123. Follow-up to the Regional Conference to Address the Problems of
Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement
and Returnees in the Countries of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and Relevant Neighbouring States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/113 of 20 December 1993, 49/173 of 23 December 1994, 50/151 of 21
December 1995, 51/70 of 12 December 1996 and, in particular, 52/102 of 12 December 1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 and that of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees,2
Recognizing the ongoing acuteness of the migration and displacement problems in the countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the necessity to follow up the Regional Conference to Address the
Problems of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the
Countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States and the subsequent

1

A/53/413.

2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/53/12).
/...

A/RES/53/123
Page 2

conclusions of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees,3
Reaffirming the view of the Conference that the primary responsibility for tackling population
displacement problems lies with the affected countries themselves and that these issues are to be regarded as
national priorities, while at the same time recognizing the need for enhancing international support for the
national efforts of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States aiming at the effective
implementation of such responsibilities within the framework of the Programme of Action of the Conference,4
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Organization for Migration and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in developing strategies and practical tools for more effective capacity-building in countries of origin
and enhancing programmes to address the needs of various categories of concern to the countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States,
Welcoming the contributions of those countries that responded to the 1998 appeal launched by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, and appreciating this tangible encouragement to the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and to further inter-agency cooperation,
Taking note of the positive results emanating from the implementation of the Programme of Action of
the Conference,
Convinced of the necessity of further strengthening practical measures for the achievement of effective
implementation of the Programme of Action,
Recalling that the protection and promotion of human rights and the strengthening of democratic
institutions are essential to prevent mass population displacement,
Mindful that effective implementation of the recommendations contained in the Programme of Action
should be facilitated and can be ensured only through cooperation and coordinated activities undertaken in
this respect by all interested States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other actors,
Noting and reaffirming the importance of the 1951 Convention5 and the 1967 Protocol6 relating to the
Status of Refugees,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General1 and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;2

3

Ibid., Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 12A and corrigendum (A/51/12/Add.1 and Corr.1), sect. III.B; ibid.,
Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/52/12/Add.1), sect. III.B; and ibid., Fifty-third Session,
Supplement No. 12A (A/53/12/Add.1), sect. III.B.
4

A/51/341 and Corr.1, appendix.

5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

6

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
/...

A/RES/53/123
Page 3

2. Calls upon Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to strengthen their
efforts and mutual cooperation relating to the follow-up to the Regional Conference to Address the Problems
of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of
the Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States, and welcomes the positive
results achieved by them in the implementation of the Programme of Action of the Conference;4
3. Invites all countries that have not yet done so to accede to and implement fully the 1951
6
Convention5 and the 1967 Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees, while welcoming the accession of
Turkmenistan to the Convention;
4. Calls upon States and interested international organizations, in a spirit of solidarity and burdensharing, to provide appropriate forms and levels of support for the practical implementation of the
Programme of Action;
5. Invites international financial and other institutions to contribute to the financing of projects and
programmes within the framework of the implementation of the Programme of Action;
6. Invites the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States to intensify bilateral and
subregional cooperation in maintaining the balance of commitments and interests in the process leading up to
the implementation of the Programme of Action;
7. Calls upon the Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States to
continue to strengthen their commitment to the principles underpinning the Programme of Action, in
particular human rights and refugee protection principles, and to lend high-level political support to ensure
progress in its implementation;
8. Invites the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to enhance their mutual relationship with other key international actors, such as
the Council of Europe, the European Commission and human rights, development and financial institutions,
in order better to address the wide-ranging and complex issues in the Programme of Action;
9. Welcomes the progress made in building civil society, in particular through the development of the
non-governmental sector and the development of cooperation between non-governmental organizations and
the Governments of a number of countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, and notes in this
regard the relationship between the progress made in implementing the Programme of Action and the success
in promoting civil society, especially in the field of human rights;
10. Encourages the involvement of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in the
follow-up to the Conference, and invites them to demonstrate stronger support for the process of the
multinational constructive dialogue among a wide range of countries concerned and further action with a view
to the full implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
11. Emphasizes the necessity of fulfilling the recommendations of the Programme of Action relating to
ensuring respect for human rights as an important factor in the management of migration flows, the
consolidation of democracy, the rule of law and stability;

/...

A/RES/53/123
Page 4

12. Recognizes the importance of undertaking measures, on the basis of strict adherence to all of the
principles of international law, including humanitarian law and international human rights standards, to
prevent situations that lead to new flows of refugees, displaced persons and other forms of involuntary
displacement;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the
progress achieved in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
14. Decides to continue examination of the question at its fifty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
